ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI 

C.P No.S-79 of 2018 

Order with signature of Judge(s)  

Hearing of case  

1.  For orders on office objection 
2.  For orders on CMA No.231/2018 
3.  For hearing of main case 

19.02.2024

Syed Ehsan Raza, Advocate for the petitioner 
Mr. Masood Anwar Ausaf, Advocate for Respondent No.1 

------------------------- 

Zulfiqar  Ahmad  Khan,  J:-    After  arguing  the  matter  at  some  length, 

learned counsel for the petitioner stated that he will not press present 

petition provided however rectification is made in the order of the trial 

Court as well as the appellate Court as to the alleged abnormality of the 

petitioner, which fact was introduced in the judgment of the trial Court 

through a judicial note discussed in the last paragraph of the judgment, 

where the Court of VI Family Judge Karachi (South) held that the person 

appeared to me is abnormal, which judicial note was also carried out by 

the appellate Court.  

Learned counsel for the petitioner admitted that the requirement 

of  Section  10  of  the  Divorce  Act,  1869  were  not  complied  with  as 

witnesses  stated  that  the  respondent  (wife)  did  not  commit  adultery, 

thus  the  Court  rightly  dismissed  the  suit  on  that  ground,  however  the 

above  unwarranted  judicial  note  has  caused  serious  prejudice  to  the 

interest  of  the  petitioner  as  the  said  note  was  incorporated  in  the 

judgment without framing an issue and having decided it after allowing 

the parties to adduce their respective evidence.  

Learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.1  stated  that  admittedly  the 

petitioner failed to prove the requisite of Section 10 of the Divorce Act, 

1869  and  both  the  Courts  rightly  dismissed  the  lis  but  stated  that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                -2-                               CP No.S-79 of 2018 

appearance  of  the  petitioner  rightly  showed  that  he  was  “abnormal” 

therefore  such  a  fact  was  introduced  through  a  judicial  note,  which 

should be retained.  

Heard the counsel, reviewed the record.  

The  powers  of  civil  courts  to  take  judicial  notice  are  regulated 

under Articles 111 and 112 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, which 

are reproduced hereunder in toto:- 

“111.  Fact  judicially noticeable  need  not  to be proved.--- No 
fact of which the Court will take judicial notice need be proved. 

112. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice.---(1) The 
Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts--- 

(a) All-Pakistan laws; 

(b) Articles of War for the Armed Forces; 

(c)  The  course  of  proceeding  of  the  Central  Legislature  and 
any  Legislature  establishment  under  any  law  for  the  time 
being in force in Pakistan; 

(d) The seals of all the Courts in Pakistan and of all Courts out 
of  Pakistan  established  by  the  authority  of  the  Federal 
Government  or  the  Government  representative,  the  seals  of 
Courts of Admiralty and Maritime jurisdiction and of Notaries 
Public  and all  seals which any person is authorized  to use  by 
any Act or Regulation having the force of law in Pakistan; 

(e)  The  accession  to  office,  names,  titles,  functions  and 
signatures  of  the  person  filing  for  the  time  being  any  public 
office  in  Pakistan,  if  the  fact  of  their  appointment  to  such 
office is notified in the official Gazette; 

(f)  The  existence,  title  and  national  flag  of  every  State  of 
Sovereign recognized by the Federal Government; 

(g)  The  divisions  of  time,  the  geographical  divisions  of  the 
world,  and  public festivals,  facts and  holidays notified  in the 
official Gazette; 

(h) The territories under the dominion of Pakistan; 

(i)  The  commencement,  continuance  and  termination  of 
hostilities  between  Pakistan  any  other  State  or  body  of 
persons; 

(j) The names of the members and officers of the Court and of 
their deputies and subordinate officers and assistants and also 
of  all  officers  acting  in  execution  of  its  process,  and  of  all 
Advocates  and  other  persons  authorized  by  law  to  appear  or 
act before it; 

(k) The rule of the road on land or at sea. 

(2)  In  all  cases  referred  to  in  clause  (1),  and  also  on  all 
matters  of  public  history,  literature,  science  or  art,  the  Court 
may  resort  for  its  aid  to  appropriate  books  or  documents  of 
reference.  

(3)  If  the  Court  is called  upon  by  any  person  to  take  judicial 
notice  of any  fact,  it may  refuse to do  so unless and until  such 
person  produces  any  such  book  or  document  as  it  may  consider 
necessary to enable it to do so.” 

 
                                                                                            
 
 
 
 
                                                                -3-                               CP No.S-79 of 2018 

As  it  could  be  seen,  judicial  notice  can  only  be  taken  on  the 

circumstances stipulated in the law and not left to the whims of a court. 

Also a note to the concern that the petitioner was having unsound mind 

was not mandated as no prayer was made by the respondent for such a 

declaration,  therefore  I  am  of  the  view  that  such  note  without  having 

the  dispute  made  as  an  issue,  and  thereafter  having  adduced  evidence 

was  unnecessarily  embodied  in  the  judgment  of  the  trial  Court  which 

was wrongly followed by the appellate Court.  

I  therefore  dispose  of  this  petition  by  rectifying  both  the 

judgments to expunge  the paragraphs pertaining to mental state of the 

petitioner  as  these  judgments  being  prejudicial  to  the  welfare  and 

wellbeing  of  the  petitioner.  If  the  respondents  really  intend  to  seek 

declaration  about  the  mental  health  of  the  petitioner,  the  provisions 

embodied under the Mental Health Act, 2013 may be attempted. 

This petition is accordingly disposed of in these terms. 

B-K Soomro  

  JUDGE 

 
                                                                                            
 
 
 
 
