ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI 

C.P No.S-1366 of 2023 

Order with signature of Judge(s)  

Hearing of case (priority)  

1.  For orders on office objection 
2.  For hearing of CMA No.9947/2023 
3.  For hearing of main case 

28.03.2024

Ms. Naheed Akhtar Bhatti, Advocate for the petitioner  
Mr. Wali Muhammad Soomro, Advocate for Respondent No.2 
Mr. Rafiq Ahmed Rajorvi, Additional Advocate General 

------------------- 

Justice Zulfiqar Ahmad Khan:-  The petitioner approached this Court 

with  the  grievance  that  the  trial  court  pronounced  Khulla  vide  order 

dated  28.11.2023 in  Family  Suit  No.1036  of  2023  without  giving  the 

petitioner (husband) a sufficient opportunity of reconciliation in pre-trial 

proceedings.  No  appeal  was  filed  against  that  order  rather  this 

constitutional petition was filed as such.  

When  the  notices  were  issued  in  this  matter,  Respondent  No.2 

was called to appear in person and the order dated 07.02.2024reflects 

that she declined to accompany the petitioner or reconcile her disputes, 

she  flatly  refused  to continue  with  the  marriage.  Whereafter,  both  the 

parties  were  given  opportunity  to  seek  counseling,  where  per  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioner,  while  the  petitioner  went  for  counseling 

however the respondent did not show up for counseling.  

Learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.2  states  that  the  respondent 

has  no  affinity  and  he  states  that  she  went  to  trauma  through  this  13 

years long wedding out of which two children were born.  

I in these circumstances, cannot let this constitutional petition as 

mean to deter the rights of the respondent lady, who has all legal rights 

to seek Khulla in accordance with law, if she does not want to live with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   -2- 

CP No.S-1366 of 2023 

the petitioner.  In the circumstances, what the petitioner desires cannot 

be  achieved  through  this  constitutional  petition  as  the  respondent 

cannot be  chained to the petitioner,  meaning  thereby  I have  no option 

except to dismiss this petition, which is accordingly dismissed. 

B-K Soomro 

        JUDGE 

 
 
 
