ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI 

C.P No.S-630 of 2024 

Order with signature of Judge(s)  

Fresh case  

1.  For orders on CMA No.5310/2024 (Urgent Application) 
2.  For orders on CMA No.5311/2024 (Exemption Application) 
3.  For hearing of main case 

24.05.2024

Khawaja Naveed Ahmed, Advocate for the petitioner  

-------------------- 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Urgency granted. 

Deferred. 

Exemption granted subject to all just exceptions. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  states  that  the  petitioner 

(mother)  is  raising  her  three  years’  old  child  through  the  guardianship 

awarded  to her  by the Court of Family Judge Karachi South,  where the 

visitation rights are fully adhered to. Counsel further states that out of 

petitioner’s  excellence  in  her  profession  she  has  been  offered  post 

graduate studies through scholarship program as per the details available 

at page 89 and she wishes to pursue these studies and in the meanwhile 

she  intends  to  take  the  minor  with  her.  Counsel  states  that  with  this 

background she moved an application to the concerned court where her 

application  was  denied  vide  order  dated  03.05.2024,  against  which  she 

preferred  appeal  however  appeal  was  also  dismissed.  Learned  counsel 

states that this Court in numerous cases permitted the single mother to 

take  the  minor  to  pursue  her  career  as  well  as  keeping  in  mind  the 

welfare  of  the  minor.  The  Court  has  also  been  informed  that  the 

respondent  (father)  is  a  well-to-do  person  who  can  visit  the  minor 

outside  the country,  if  he  wishes  to do  so, as  well  she  would  bring  the 

child in seasonal vacations to Karachi. Counsel further states that above 

Post  Graduate  Education  opportunity  is  only  for  two  years  and  she  has 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       -2-                      C.P No.S-630 of 2024 

provided  a  Bond  with  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  Pakistan  to 

return  to  Pakistan  after  completion  of these  post-graduate  studies,  she 

has also given Government a Bond of the like nature. 

Let  notice  be  issued  to  the  respondent  for  31.05.2024.    In  the 

meanwhile, the petitioner would be at liberty to make all the necessary 

preparations  and  arrangements  for  her  and  her  child’s  travel  program 

and  in  the  meanwhile,  operation  of  the  impugned  orders  to  remain 

suspended.  Mr.  Zeeshan  Nizakat,  Office  Associate  of  this  Court  is 

appointed  to  make  arrangements  for  preparation  of  passport  of  the 

minor at the cost of Rs.5,000/- payable by the petitioner.  

B-K Soomro 

  JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
