ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI 

C.P No.S-903 of 2023 

Order with signature of Judge(s)  

Hearing/priority case  

1.  For orders on office objection and reply of the counsel 
2.  For hearing of MA No.6502/2023 
3.  For hearing of main case 

15.03.2024

None present 
---------------- 

Justice  Zulfiqar  Ahmad  Khan:-  The  present  petition  makes  5th 

attempt  of  the  petitioner  to  deprive  the  respondent  of  her  legal  rights 

and to restrain her from enjoying the fruits of the decree passed by the 

trial  Court  in  the  first  instance.  No  one  is  present  for  the  petitioner.  I 

have  taken  the  liberty  to  examine  the  impugned  judgment  dated 

25.08.2023 passed  by  VIth  Additional  District  Judge,  Karachi  Central, 

where  the  litigation  between  the  parties  started  by  filing  a  suit  for 

dissolution  of  marriage  by  way  of  Khulla  and  return  of  dowry  articles. 

Upon filing of the suit, the defendant husband effected appearance and 

filed  written  statement,  wherein  he  denied  the  allegations  of  the 

plaintiff. He further stated that he had also filed his suit for restitution 

of  conjugal  rights,  which  was  dismissed  in  the  trial  Court  of  the  first 

instance.  Pre-trial  proceedings  took  place,  which  failed,  eventually  the 

marriage between the parties dissolved by way of Khulla. As payment of 

dower  amount  was  disputed  between  the  parties,  the  Court  framed 

certain issues in this regard and the learned trial Court after evaluating 

the evidence decreed the suit in favour of the respondent wife. 

Being  aggrieved,  Respondent  No.1  preferred  FRA,  which  was 

allowed  and  matter  was  remanded  back  to  the  family  court  to  decide 

the  issue  of  dowry  articles.  The  said  family  court  after  re-examining 

Respondent No.1 decreed the suit, to which petitioner filed application 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
                   -2- 

CP No.S-903 of 2023 

under  Section  12(2)  CPC,  which  was  dismissed.  Again,  the  petitioner 

filed the family appeal, which was also dismissed through the impugned 

order by assigning detailed reasons.  

I  in  the  circumstances,  see  that  the  very  purpose  of  filing  this 

petition  is  to  linger  on  litigation  between  the  parties,  which  seemingly 

started  in  the  year  2019  and  till  date  execution  proceedings  have  not 

culminated.  Matter  was  last  taken  up  on  18.10.2023 when  notice  was 

directed to be issued to the respondent, where in fact notice could not 

be  delivered  to  the  respondent  lady  as  address  was  wrongly  given. 

Thereafter, no efforts have been made to have the matter heard. In the 

circumstances, the instant petition is dismissed. 

B-K Soomro 

  JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
