ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 4292 OF 2019. 

MUHAMMD SAEED BUTT. 
VS    
THE ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE (WEST), ISLAMABAD, ETC. 

Petitioners by        

Respondents by   

Date of Hearing 

: 

: 

: 

M/s M. Wajid Hussain Mughal and Qasim 
Sarfraz, Advocates for Petitioner. 

Mr. Sadiq Khan, Advocate. 

20.04.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:-     Through 

the 

instant  writ  petition 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 

1973 (“Constitution”), the Petitioner has assailed the Judgment and Decree 

dated  11.03.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  (West) 

Islamabad (“Trial Court”) and the Judgment and Decree dated 07.11.2019 

passed  by 

the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West)  Islamabad 

(“Appellate  Court”)  to  the  extent  of  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  

and  the  dower  amount  of  the  Respondent  No.3  and  the  maintenance 

allowance of the Respondents No.4 & 5. 

2. 

The  pertinent  facts  as  per  the  Memo  of  the  petition  are  that  the 

Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.3  were  married  to  each  other  and  the 

Respondents No.4 & 5 are their sons. The Respondents No.3 to 5 filed a Suit 

for  Recovery  of  Dower,  Dowry  Articles  and  Maintenance  and  prayed  for 

recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  for  the  Respondent  No.3  at  the  rate  of 

Rs.20,000/- per month from October, 2013 till expiry of period of Iddat; past 

and future  maintenance at the rate of Rs.60,000/- per month for each child 

since  October,  2013;  return  of  dowry  articles  or  in  alternative  payment  of 

Rs.800,000/-;  and  payment  of  dower  amount  as  mentioned  in  the 

Nikahnama.  The  Petitioner  contested  the  said  suit  by  filing  written 

statement.  After  framing  of  issues  and  recording  evidence  the  Trial  Court 

decreed the suit as follows:- 

“1.  Plaintiff No.1 is held entitled to recover maintenance allowance at 
the rate of Rs.10,000/- per month from October 2013 till expiry of 
Iddat period 27.12.2016. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
     
2 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

ii.  Plaintiff No.1 is held entitled to recover the value of dowry articles 

i.e. Rs.100,000/-. 

iii.  Plaintiff No.1 is entitled to recover dower in shape of 4 Tolas gold 

ornaments. 

iv.  Plaintiff  No.2  is  entitled  to  recover  maintenance  from  defendant 
since October 2013 till attaining the age of majority at the rate of 
Rs.20,000/- per month with 10% annual increase.  

v. 

Plaintiff  No.3  is  entitled  to  recover  maintenance  from  defendant 
since October 2013 till attaining the age of majority at the rate of 
Rs.20,000/- per month with 10% annual increase. 

vi.  Maintenance  allowance  already  paid  to  the  plaintiffs  during  the 
pendency of the lis will be adjusted during execution proceedings.” 

3. 

Aggrieved  of  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  11.03.2019 

(“Impugned  Judgment  I”),  the  Petitioner  preferred  an  appeal  before  the 

Appellate Court, which was dismissed vide Impugned Judgment and Decree 

dated 07.11.2019 (“Impugned Judgment II”).  

4. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  contended  that  the  Impugned 

Judgments  and  Decrees  are  perverse  and  against  the  law  and facts  and  the 

result  of  misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence,  which  are  therefore  not 

sustainable in the eyes of the law. The learned counsel pointed out that the 

Petitioner  pronounced  divorce  upon  the  Respondent  No.3  on  28.09.2016, 

whereas  the  suit  for  recovery  was  filed  thereafter,  which  according  to  him 

proves  that  the  Petitioner  was  maintaining  the  Respondents  till  the  date  of 

divorce  and  as  such  the  grant  of  maintenance  from  October,  2013  is 

unjustified.    He  contended  that  the  Respondent  No.3  did  not  enter  the 

witness box despite being present before the Court and that in any event her 

special attorney, who appeared as P.W.1 admitted that the Petitioner and the 

Respondents  No.3  were  married  in  the  year  1998  and  lived  together  for  a 

period of 16 to 17 years, which proves that the alleged date of desertion in 

2013  is  fake.  He  submitted  that  maintenance  should  be  granted  to  the 

Respondents only from the date of divorce as the Respondents were unable 

to  prove  desertion.  With  regard  to  recovery  of  value  of  dowry  articles  he 

contended that both the Courts below failed to appreciate that as per the list 

of  dowry  articles  provided  by  the  Respondent  No.3,  such  articles  were 

ordinary household items, which are subject to wear and  tear and therefore 

were  consumed during the subsistence of the marriage that lasted 16 to 17 

years and therefore the Petitioner was not liable to return the value thereof. 

 
 
3 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

Lastly he argued that dower as per Nikahnama was Rs.20,000/- in the shape 

of gold ornaments weighing 4 Tolas however gold ornaments are no longer 

available for the price of Rs.20,000/- therefore the Petitioner should only be 

liable  for    Rs.20,000/-  as  dower.  With  regard  to  maintenance  of  the 

Respondents No.4 & 5, the learned counsel highlighted that the Respondent 

No.4  reached  the  age  of  majority  two  months  after  institution  of  the  suit, 

whereas the Respondent No.5 will reach the age of majority in August, 2022 

and as such the Impugned Judgments and  Decrees granting maintenance to 

the Respondents No.4 & 5 are erroneous.  

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents  No.3  to  5 

drew the Court’s attention to the admission made by the special attorney of 

the Petitioner during the course of cross-examination, whereby he admitted 

that  the  Petitioner  evicted  the  Respondent  No.3  from  his  house.  While 

controverting the suggestion made by the learned counsel for the Petitioner 

regarding length of marriage, the learned counsel for the Respondents No.3 

to 5 pointed that special attorney of the Respondent No.3 categorically stated 

in his cross-examination that the parties were married till 2013. The learned 

counsel further submitted that the list of dowry articles was produced by the 

Respondent  No.3  as  Ex:  P-7,  therefore,  the  Impugned  Judgements  and 

Decrees  are  based  on  evidence.  Lastly  he  fully  supported  the  reasoning 

given by learned Trial Court for the grant of dower in the form of 4 tolas as 

correct,  which  was  accordingly  upheld  by  learned  Appellate  Court.  He 

further  argued  that  the  Impugned  Judgements  and  Decrees  are  based  on 

correct  appreciation of  the facts and the applicable law and as such do not 

warrant interference by this Court, therefore, he prayed for dismissal of the 

instant writ petition. 

6. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through 

the record. 

7. 

First  and  foremost,  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  a  High  Court  in 

exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction does not act like a Court of appeal. It 

neither reappraises evidence nor does it substitute the concurrent findings of 

fact recorded by the Family Court and upheld by the Appellate Court with its 

own findings solely on the ground that another view is possible on the same 

evidence.  A  party  approaching  the  High  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 

 
4 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

Constitution  has  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  a  gross  misreading  or  non-

reading  of  evidence  or  jurisdictional  error  or  such  legal  infirmity  that  has 

caused miscarriage of justice.  

8. 

Here I would like to recall the scope of jurisdiction of this Court under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  as  explained  in  the  case  of  Pakistan  Sugar 

Mills  Association  (PSMA),  Islamabad VSFederation  of  Pakistan 

through Secretary, Cabinet Division, Islamabad, PLD 2021 Islamabad 55: 

“66. This Court will not issue a writ if equitable considerations do not 
permit  it.  The  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution is extraordinary, discretionary and equitable in nature and 
is to be exercised in the larger interest of justice. While exercising this 
jurisdiction,  the  facts and  circumstances of  the  case  should be  seen  in 
their  entirety  to  find  out  if  there  is  miscarriage  of  justice.  It  can  be 
exercised  ex  debito  justitiae,  i.e.  to  meet  the  ends  of  justice.  While 
exercising writ jurisdiction, the High Court not only acts as a Court of 
law but also as a Court of equity. It is, therefore, the duty of this Court 
to  ensure  that  it  exercises  jurisdiction  to  advance  the  ends  of  justice 
and  uproot  injustice.  In  exercise  of  this  jurisdiction,  this  Court  will 
intervene  where  justice,  equity  and  good  conscience  require  such 
intervention.” [Emphasis added]. 

9.  With such scope in mind, I shall consider the arguments raised in the 

instant matter. 

Maintenance for Respondent No. 3 from the date of the alleged desertion 

10.  The  Petitioner’s 

legal  counsel  argued 

that  maintenance 

for 

Respondent  No.3  should  have  been  granted  from  the  date  of  divorce  i.e. 

28.09.2016 as opposed to the alleged date of desertion because (a) desertion 

was not proved; and (b) even otherwise the date of the alleged desertion  in 

the month of October, 2013 is fake.  

11.  Suffice it to say that DW-1 who was the Petitioner’s Special Attorney 

categorically  admitted  that  the  Respondent  No.3  had  been  thrown  out  of 

house  by  the  Petitioner  six  months  prior  to  divorce.  Although  the  date  of 

ouster/desertion  as  contended  by  the  Special  Attorney  of  the  Petitioner  is 

different  from  the  date  of  desertion/ouster  contended  by  the  Respondent 

No.3,  the  said  statement  of  DW-1  confirms  that  Respondent  No.3  was 

admittedly deserted /ousted by the Petitioner.  

12. 

It was argued by the learned counsel for the Petitioner that the Special 

Attorney of the Respondent No. 3 who appeared as PW-1 admitted that the 

parties  were  married  in  1998  and  remained  married  for  a  period  of 

 
5 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

approximately  16-17  years  which  according  to  him  shows  that  the  date  of 

desertion alleged by the Respondent No. 3 i.e. 2013 is fake.  Such argument 

is not convincing given that PW-1 categorically stated that the Respondent 

No. 3 left the house of the Petitioner at his behest in October, 2013.  In view 

of such statement the approximate period of subsistence of marriage stated 

by PW-1 on cross examination can be attributed to miscalculation.  

13. 

In any event, as far as the date of desertion is concerned the two lower 

courts have given concurrent findings in favour of Respondent No.3. In such 

circumstances  when  no  misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  has  been 

pointed  out  by  the  petitioner  this  Court  cannot  substitute  the  concurrent 

findings  of  the  lower  court  below  with  its  own  in  the  exercise  of 

Constitutional jurisdiction.  

Maintenance  for  Respondents  No.  4  and  5  from  the  date  of  the  alleged 
desertion 

14. 

It  has  been  contended  in  the  memo  of  petition  by  the  Petitioner  that 

the  suit  for  maintenance  was  filed  after  pronouncement  of  divorce  by  the 

Petitioner on 28th September 2016 which according to the Petitioner proves 

that the Respondents No. 3 to 5 were being maintained till then. Such line of 

argument is devoid of  force as it is trite law that a negative fact cannot be 

proved  through  evidence.  Therefore,  the  onus  lay  upon  the  Petitioner  to 

prove  through  evidence  that  he  was  in  fact  providing  maintenance  for 

Respondents No. 3 to 5 for the period he has challenged. However, no such 

evidence  was  identified  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  that  was 

produced but not read or misread by the lower courts.  

15. 

I  also  do  not  find  any  infirmity  in  the  Impugned  Judgments  and 

Decrees in respect of the period for which maintenance has been granted to 

the  Respondents  No.  4  and  5  as  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  specifically 

allowed  them  maintenance  till  the  age  of  majority.    As  such,  if  the 

Respondent  No.  4  attained  the  age  of  majority  within  two  months  after 

institution of the suit as contended by the learned counsel for the Petitioner, 

the Petitioner will only be liable for maintenance for the Respondent No. 4 

from  the  date  of  desertion  till  two  months  after  institution  of  the  suit.  

Similarly,  if  the  Respondent  No.  5  is  turning  18  in  August,  2022  as 

contended,  the  Petitioner  will  not  be  liable  for  maintenance  for  him  after 

 
6 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

such  date.    No  modification  is  required  in  the  Impugned  Judgments  and 

Decrees in this regard. 

Dowry Articles 

16.  With regard to the Respondent no.3’s claim of dowry articles the only 

argument  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the petitioner  before  this  Court 

was that the learned Trial Court as well as learned Appellate Court failed to 

take  into  consideration  that  dowry  articles  were  used  for  16  to  17  years 

during  the  subsistence  of  the  marriage  between  the  Petitioner  and 

Respondent No.3 and as such were consumed during such time being every 

day household items subject to wear and tear.  

17.  On the contrary, however, bare perusal of the Impugned Judgment and 

Decree  passed  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  shows  that  the  effect  of 

depreciation has been taken into consideration by the learned Trial Court and 

the value of the dowry articles to be paid by the Petitioner has been reduced 

to  Rs.  100,000/,  which  has  been  upheld  by  the  learned  Appellate  Court  as 

well.  No  illegality  requiring  modification  in  the  Impugned  Judgments  and 

Decrees has therefore been pointed out in this regard. 

Dower 

18.  The  Petitioner  claims that the  lower  courts have erroneously granted 

dower 

in 

the  shape  of  gold  ornaments  weighing  4 

tola  due 

to 

misinterpretation of the relevant clause of the Nikah Nama. Therefore, it is 

pertinent to reproduce the said clause for consideration:- 

 ںایڑوچ دد

ع راچ رویز یئلاط تروصب( ہیپور
")ہیپور

000020
000

 020 

00۔
- /

  ۔مقر یک ر
 یتیلام ےلوت

ہم۔
4 

"13
 نزو

19.  The said clause roughly translates as follows:- 

“Rupees 20,000/- (in the form of gold ornaments 4 bangles weighing 
4 tola valued at Rs. 20,000/-).”  

20.  The learned Trial Court observed that the marriage was solemnized in 

the year 1998 and was dissolved in the year 2016 and as such concluded that 

with  the  passage  of  time  the  value  of  currency  has  decreased,  hence  the 

Respondent No. 3 was found entitled to recover dower in the shape of gold 

ornaments weighing 4 tolas.  However, decrease in the value of the currency 

cannot  be  the  reason  to  grant  gold  ornaments  weighing  4  tolas  as  dower 

 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

unless  the  intention  of  the  parties  was  to  fix  dower  as  gold  ornaments 

weighing  4  tolas.    The  learned  Appellate  Court,  on  the  other  hand,  simply 

regurgitated the language used  in the Nikhanama to describe the dower and 

then  without  any  analysis  concluded  that  it  cannot  be  held  that  the 

Respondent No. 3 is not entitled to recover dower in the shape of 4 tola gold 

ornaments  comprising  4  bangles.    No  effort  was  made  by  either  Court  to 

ascertain the real intention of the parties. 

21. 

In my view the argument raised by the Petitioner in this regard is not 

without  force.    A  nikahnama  is  essentially  a  civil  contract  between  two 

parties.  It is trite law that while construing a contract, the Courts are obliged 

to find the intention of the contracting parties.  The plain language used in 

clause  No.  13  of  the  Nikahnama  executed  between  the  Petitioner  and  the 

Respondent No. 3 specifying the dower amount is that dower is Rs. 20,000/- 

which  is  followed  with  a  description  within  brackets  of  the  form  in  which 

such  amount  was  to  be  paid.    Therefore,  essentially,  the  parties’  intention 

was to fix the amount of dower at Rs. 20,000/-.  The form in which it was to 

be paid was gold ornaments comprising four gold bangles weighing 4 tolas.   

The conclusion reached by the lower Courts implies the opposite.  I am not 

convinced that the interpretation made by the learned Trial Court and upheld 

by the learned Appellant Court is correct. Such conclusion is not supported 

by  the  entry  in  the  Nikahnama  for  reasons  aforesaid.  Therefore,  the  said 

misinterpretation  is  a  legal  infirmity  which  has  indeed  resulted  in  the 

miscarriage of justice which warrants interference by this Court.  

22.  The appreciation in the monetary value of gold has rendered payment 

of  the  dower  amount  in  the  form  agreed  upon  by  the  parties  virtually 

impossible.    Such  situation  is  covered  by  clause  56  of  the  Contract  Act, 

1872, which is reproduced herein below: 

“56.  Agreement  to  do  impossible  act.  An  agreement  to  do  an  act 
impossible in itself is void. 

 Contract  to  do  act  afterwards  becoming  impossible  or  unlawful. A 
contract  to  do  an  act  which,  after  the  contract  is  made,  becomes 
impossible,  or  by  reason  of  some  event  which  the  promisor  could  not 
prevent,  unlawful  becomes  void  when  the  act  become  impossible  or 
unlawful. 
Compensation  for  loss  through  non-performance  of  an  act  known  to  be 
impossible or  unlawful. Where one person has promised to  do something 
which  he  knew,  or,  with  reasonable  diligence,  might  have  known,  and 
which  the  promisee  did  not  known  to  be  impossible  or  unlawful  such 
promisor  must  make  compensation  to  such  promisee  for  any  loss  which 

 
8 
                                                                                                                            W.P. No.4292/2019 

such  promisee  sustains  through  the  non-performance  of  the  promise.” 
[Emphasis added]. 

23. 

In  my  opinion,  since  the  form  in  which  the  dower  was  agreed  to  be 

paid, is no longer possible such contract has become void in light of clause 

56  of  the  Contract  Act,  1872.  However,  the  amount  of  dower  as  agreed  is 

nevertheless payable.  Having said that I cannot lose sight of the fact that the 

dower  amount  at  issue  is  deferred  dower,  which  is  payable  at  a  specified 

period of time and where no time period is fixed, on dissolution of marriage 

by  death  or  divorce.    In  the  instant  case,  the  Petitioner  divorced  the 

Respondent  No.  3  on  28.09.  2016,  however  he  has  not  paid  the  dower  till 

date.  Therefore, I find that the Petitioner is liable to the Respondent No. 3 in 

the amount of Rs. 20,000/- plus interest at the prevailing rate.   

24. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  partially  allowed,  the 

Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  I  &  II  are  modified  to  the  extent  of 

payment  of  dower  and  the  Petitioner  is  directed  to  pay  an  amount  of  

Rs. 20,000/- as dower to the Respondent No.3 plus interest at the prevailing 

rate from the date of divorce till realization instead of dower in the shape of 

4 tolas gold ornaments as held by both the learned Courts below.  Whereas, 

the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  I  &  II  are  upheld  to  the  extent  of 

maintenance allowance of Respondents No. 3 to 5 and recovery of amount 

equivalent to the value of dowry articles.  

         (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
        JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 13th of June, 2022. 

R.Anjam. 

               JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
