             Form No: HCJD/C-121.     

                              ORDER SHEET 

       IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

    Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017 

Muhammad Sikandar 
VS 
The State 

       DATE OF HEARING:   12-03-2019.   

       APPELLANT BY:      

   Malik Riaz Advocate. 

        RESPONDENT  BY:       Malik Awais Haider Advocate.  

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  CJ.-    This  Jail  Appeal  has 

been  preferred  by  Muhammad  Sikandar  son  of  Muhammad 

Maalik 

(hereinafter 

referred 

to  as 

the 

“Appellant”) 

challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence  handed  down  by  the 

learned trial Court vide judgment, dated 11-05-2017. 

2.   

The facts, in brief, are that on 16-08-2013, at about 

5:00 p.m., an attempt was made by police officials to stop a 

vehicle  from  being  driven  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  road  on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

2 

Jinnah  Avenue,  Islamabad.    The  vehicle  was  driven  by  the 

Appellant  and  the  latter’s  wife,  namely  Ms  Kanwal  Bibi  and 

two  minor  children,  namely  Maalik  Abdul  and  Um-e-Farwa, 

respectively,  were  accompanying  him  as  passengers.  The 

Appellant  ignored  the  police  officials  and  opened  fire  with  a 

fire arm weapon. He stopped the vehicle in the middle of the 

road  and  started  randomly  firing,  which  spread  terror  in  the 

area.  The  police  officials  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

rushed  to  the  crime  scene.  Malik  Abdul  Rehman,  Inspector 

(PW-18)  who  at  that  time  was  posted  as  Incharge  of  Police 

Station  Kohsar,  Islamabad,  reached  the  crime  scene  on 

receiving  information.  The  Appellant,  in  disregard  to  the 

safety  of  his  wife,  two  children  and  members  of  the  general 

public,  used  fire  arm  weapons  at  will  by  keeping  the  Jinnah 

Avenue  closed  till  he  was  ultimately  overpowered.  Senior 

police  officials  tried  to  negotiate  with  the  Appellant  and  the 

latter  made  demands  which  were  essentially  political  in  

nature.  It  appears  from  the  record  that  the  administration 

and  law  enforcing  agencies  were  handling  the  matter  with 

care  keeping  in  view  the  safety  of  the  two  innocent  children 

and  the  apprehension  that  the  Appellant  may  also  be  in 

possession of explosives. However, without the consent of the 

police officials, a private person, risking his life, over powered  

the Appellant and in the process the latter fired from the fire 

arm weapon in his possession which led to causing injuries to 

his wife. In this mayhem, the Appellant also suffered fire arm 

 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

3 

injuries  and,  therefore,  alongwith  his  wife  he  was  rushed  to 

the  Pakistan  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences  (hereinafter 

referred to as the “Hospital”). Both were medically examined 

and  admitted  for  treatment.  The  Investigating  Officer  (PW-

18)  drafted  a  written  complaint  (Exh.PA)  which  was  sent  to 

the  Police  Station  and  pursuant  thereto  FIR  No.  398,  dated 

16-08-2013  (Exh.PA/1)  was  registered  on  16-08-2013.  The 

Investigating  Officer  prepared  a  rough  site  plan  (Exh.PW-

18/1). He took two fire arm weapons i.e. rifles into possession 

vide  recovery  memo  (Exh.PW-18/2).  Fourteen  shell  casings 

were  also  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo 

(Exh.PW-18/3).  The  vehicle,  bearing 

registration  No. 

RLD/1705,  which  was  in  the  use  of  the  Appellant,  was  also 

taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo  (Exh.PW-18/4). 

The  Investigating  Officer  also  took  into  possession  sixty  nine 

unused/live  bullets.  The  Investigating  Officer  then  proceeded 

to  room  no.  230  of  Global  Hotel,  Islamabad  where  the 

Appellant and his family had stayed the night before and had 

not checked out.  The Investigating Officer collected and took 

into  possession,  vide  respective  recovery  memos,  various 

items  belonging  to  the  Appellant  and  the  other  family 

members.  Ms  Kanwal  Bibi,  wife  of  the  Appellant,  was 

discharged from the Hospital on 17-08-2013 and was arrested 

in  the  instant  case.  The  Appellant,  during  the  course  of 

investigations,  had  disclosed  that  he  had  purchased  the  fire 

arm  weapons  from  one  Akhtar  Ali  who  was  arrested  on  20-

 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

4 

08-2013.  The  Appellant  was  discharged  from  the  Hospital  on 

29-10-2013.  The 

Investigating  Officer 

submitted  an 

incomplete report under section 173 of the Cr.P.C  on 31-08-

2013,  followed  by  a  supplementary  report  on  01-11-2013. 

The recovered fire arm weapons and the empties were sent to 

the  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  (hereinafter  referred  to 

as  the”Agency”).  The  latter  submitted  its  report,  dated  27-

09-2016  (Exh.PZ)  which  was  positive,  by  observing  that  the 

fire  arm  weapons  had  matched  with  the  empties.  A  charge 

was framed against the Appellant, Ms Kanwal Bibi and Akhtar 

Ali  vide  order,  dated  18-01-2014.  They  did  not  plead  guilty 

and  thus  a  trial  ensued.  The  prosecution  produced  nineteen   

witnesses.  The  Appellant  and  the  other  co-accused  preferred 

not  to  be  examined  under  oath  and,  therefore,  their 

respective statements were recorded under section 342 of the 

Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the “Cr.P.C.”).  After recording of evidence and affording the 

parties  an  opportunity  of  hearing,  the  learned  Judge,  Special 

Court Anti Terrorism, Islamabad, vide judgment dated 11-05-

2017, acquitted Ms Kanwal Bibi and Akhtar Ali of the charge, 

whereas  the  Appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced  in  the 

terms  mentioned  in  paragraph  34  thereof.  It  is  noted  that  a 

lesser sentence was handed down.      

3.   

The learned Counsel for the Appellant has contended 

that;  the  Appellant  is  innocent  and  that  he  was  falsely 

 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

5 

implicated in this case; the prosecution had failed to prove its 

case  beyond  reasonable  doubt;  the  Appellant  had  not 

intended  to  harm  any  person  and  that  he  was  provoked  by 

the harsh treatment by the police officials; the Appellant was 

abused and humiliated in the presence of his family members, 

which was the cause of the provocation; the fire arm weapons 

were  not  recovered  from  the  Appellant;  in  the  facts  and 

circumstances of the case the sentence handed down is harsh 

and not warranted.  

4.   

The  learned  State  Counsel,  on  the  other  hand,  has 

argued  that;  the  Appellant  through  his  violent  acts  had 

attempted  to  create  a  sense  of  insecurity  amongst  the 

general  public;  the  prosecution  had  established  its  case 

beyond  reasonable  doubt;  the  occurrence  was  telecast  by 

national  as  well  as  international  media;  for  more  than  three 

hours the main Avenue of the Federal Capital Territory had to 

be closed because of the violent actions of the Appellant; the 

demands  made  by  the  Appellant  during  the  course  of 

negotiations  with  the  senior  police  officials  had  established 

beyond  doubt  that  he  had  come  to  the  crime  scene  with  the 

intention to create fear amongst the general public.  

5.   

The  learned  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  and  the 

learned  State  Counsel  have  been  heard  and  the  record 

perused with their able assistance.  

 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

6 

6.   

The  admitted  facts  are  that  the  Appellant  was 

present  on  the  fateful  day  with  his  wife  and  two  children  at 

the  crime  scene.  He  was  in  possession  of  fire  arm  weapons 

and  live  bullets  in  large  quantities.  The  prosecution  had 

proved  beyond  reasonable  doubt  the  recovery  of  fire  arm 

weapons, live bullets and empties from the crime scene. The 

main  boulevard  of  the  Federal  Capital  i.e.  Jinnah  Avenue 

remained closed for hours because of the wanton and violent 

acts of the  Appellant. The latter, besides threatening officials 

of the law enforcing agencies and the general public, had also 

put  the  lives  of  his  wife  and  two  children  at  risk  by  virtually 

using  them  as  shields  for  perpetrating  the  crime.  He  had 

entered  into  negotiations  with  senior  officers  of  the  law 

enforcing  agencies  for  a  long  time  and  had  made  demands 

which  were  political  in  nature.  This  melodrama  continued  for 

hours and had generated pronounced interest of the national 

as  well  as  international  media.  The  time,  place  and  situation 

created  by  the  Appellant,  particularly  when  the  country  was 

vulnerable to terrorist attacks, definitely had an impact on the 

general  public.  There  is  nothing  on  record  that  appeals  to  a 

prudent  mind  that  his  reckless  and  violent  actions  had  been 

provoked  because  he  was  treated  harshly  by  police  officials. 

The  context  and  evidence  brought  on  record  unambiguously 

shows  that  the  Appellant  had  virtually  brought  the  capital  of 

Pakistan  to  a  standstill  and  consequently  created  fear 

 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

7 

amongst  the  general  public  as  the  result  of  a  well  thought 

plan.                

7.   

There  is  no  force  in  the  argument  raised  by  the 

learned Counsel for the Appellant that the latter had come to 

the Federal Capital on a family excursion and that the events 

that  took  place  on  16-08-2013  on  Jinnah  Avenue  were  not 

intended  by  him.  No  prudent  or  reasonable  person  would 

travel to the capital for a family excursion while in possession 

of  more  than  one  unlicensed  fire  arm  weapon  and  large 

quantities of ammunition. Assuming for the sake of argument 

that  the  Appellant  had  been  provoked  by  the  officials  of  the 

traffic  police,  there  can  be  no  explanation  for  blocking  the 

main  boulevard  of  Federal  Capital  for  hours  or  entering  into 

negotiations  and  making  demands  which  were  political  in 

nature. There seemed to be no hope of an end to the reckless 

and  violent  actions  of  the  Appellant  had  he  not  been 

overpowered  by  a  private  person.  There  is  also  no  plausible 

explanation  for  risking  the  lives  of  two  innocent  children  by 

virtually using them as human shields. The testimonies of all 

the  witnesses  who  had  entered  the  witness  box  were 

consistent  and  the  prosecution  successfully  established  the 

guilt of the Appellant by bringing unimpeachable evidence.  

8.   

The  learned  trial  Court  has  handed  down  a  lesser 

sentence but has not recorded reasons for doing so, nor has it 

 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

8 

referred  to  any  mitigating  circumstances.  The  acts  of  the 

Appellant did not deserve a lenient sentence. The prosecution 

has also not sought enhancement of sentence. While deciding 

the  appeal  we  cannot  on  our  own  enhance  the  sentence 

handed  down  by  the  learned  trial  Court.  The  prosecution 

appears to have taken this matter lightly and this indifference 

is deprecated.  

9.   

The  learned  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  has  argued 

that  the  ingredients  of  terrorism  under  the  Terrorism  Act, 

1997  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Act  of  1997”)  are  not 

fulfilled in this case and, therefore, conviction could not have 

been  handed  down  there  under.  In  order  to  answer  the 

question raised by  the learned Counsel it would  be beneficial 

to  survey  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Act  of  1997  and  the 

law enunciated relating thereto.  

9.   

The  Act  of  1997  was  promulgated  through  Act  No. 

XXVII  of  1997.  It  is  a  self  contained  and  comprehensive 

special statute and it was promulgated with the object and for 

the  purpose  of  providing  for  the  prevention  of  terrorism  and 

sectarian violence and the speedy trial of heinous offences for 

matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. Section 2 

defines  various  expressions.  Clause  (x)  of  section  2  defines 

“terrorism”  or  “act  of  terrorism”  as  the  meaning  as  assigned 

to  it  in  section  6.  Clause  (t)  of  section  2  defines  “scheduled 

 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

9 

offence” as meaning an offence set out in the Third Schedule. 

“Terrorist” is defined in clause (y) as the meaning assigned to 

it  under  sub  section  (5)  of  section  6.  Section  6  defines  and 

describes  the  acts  that  would  constitute  the  definition  of 

terrorism  while  section  7  provides  for  punishment  for  such 

acts.  Likewise,  section  8  prohibits  acts  intended  or  likely  to 

give  rise  to  sectarian  hatred,  which  have  been  described  in 

clauses (a) to (d) thereof.  

10. 

The  august  Supreme  Court, 

in  the 

judgment 

rendered by five Hon’ble Judges in the case titled “Mehram Ali 

and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others”  [PLD  1998 

S.C. 1445], while considering the vires of the Act of 1997 has 

observed,  inter  alia  and  held  that  the  offences  mentioned  in 

the  schedule  must  have  nexus  with  the  object  of  the  statute 

and the offences covered under sections 6, 7 and 8 thereof. It 

was  further  observed  that  if  an  offence  included  in  the 

Schedule  of  the  Act  of  1997  has  no  nexus  with  sections  6,7 

and  8    then  in  such  an  eventuality  a  notification  including 

such an offence to that extent would be ultra vires.   

11. 

In the case titled “Ch. Bashir Ahmad v. Naveed Iqbal 

and  7  others”  [PLD  2001  S.C.  521]  the  apex  Court  has 

observed and held that a person would commit a terrorist act 

if  the  effect  of  his  actions  will  be  to  strike  terror  or  create  a 

sense  of  fear  and  insecurity  in  the  people  or  any  section  of 

 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

10 

the  people.    It  was  further  held  that  perusal  of  the  Schedule 

of the Act indicates that  the element of striking terror or  the 

creation of a sense of fear and insecurity in the people or any 

section  of  the  people  by  doing  an  act  or  thing  by  using 

bombs,  dynamite  or  other  explosive  or 

inflammable 

substances  etc  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  the  attraction  of  the 

provisions of section 6 of the Schedule to the Act of 1997. It 

was further held that the provisions of the Act of 1997 would 

not  be  attracted  solely  because  of  the  nature  of  offences 

being heinous unless the offences in  the  Schedule has  nexus 

with the object of the promulgation of the Act of 1997 and the 

offences covered under sections 6 to 8.    

12. 

In the case titled “Mst. Raheela Nasreen v. The State 

and  another”  [2002  SCMR  908]  the  august  Supreme  court 

has held and observed as follows:  

”From  a  bare  reading  of  section  6(b)  of 

the Act, it is manifest that it is not necessary that 

the  offence  as  alleged  had  in  fact,  caused  terror 

as  the  requirement  of  the  said  provision  of  law 

could  be  adequately  satisfied  if  the  same  was 

likely  to  strike  terror  or  sense  of  fear  and 

insecurity in the people.” 

13. 

In 

the  case 

titled 

“Muhammad  Mushtaq  v. 

Muhammad  Ashiq  and  others”  [PLD  2002  S.C.  841]  the 

 
 
 
  
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

11 

august  Supreme  Court  has  enunciated  the  principles  as 

follows:  

“It would thus appear that ordinary crimes 

are not to be dealt with under the Act. A physical 

harm  to  the  victim  is  not  the  sole  criterion  to 

determine  the  question  of  terrorism.  What  is  to 

be  seen  is  the  psychological  effect  produced  by 

the  violent  action  or  with  the  potential  of 

producing  such  an  effect  on  the  society  as  a 

whole or a section thereof. There may be a death 

or  injury  caused  in  the  process.  Thus  where  a 

criminal act is designed to create a sense of fear 

or  insecurity  in  the  minds  of  the  general  public 

disturbing  even  tempo  of  life  and  tranquility  of 

the  society,  the  same  may  be  treated  to  be  a 

terrorist  act.  There  may  be  just  a  few  killings, 

random  or  targeted,  resorted  to  with  single 

mindedness  of  purpose.  But  nevertheless  the 

impact  of  the  same  may  be  to  terrorise 

thousands of people by creating a panic or fear in 

their minds.” 

14. 

In  the  case  titled  “State  through  Advocate-General, 

N.-W.F.P.,  Peshawar  v.  Muhammad  Shafiq“  [PLD  2003  S.C. 

224]  the  august  Supreme  Court  has  held  and  observed  as  

 
 
  
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

12 

follows:  

“A  reading  of  the  above  provision  of  the 

Act demonstrates that it  is not necessary that the 

commission  of  murder  must  have  created  panic 

and  terror  among  the  people.  The  Courts  have 

only  to  see  whether  the  terrorist  act  was  such 

which would have the tendency to create sense of 

fear,  or  insecurity  in  the  minds  of  the  people  or 

any  section  of  the  society.  We  have  to  see  the 

psychological  impact  created  upon  the  minds  of 

the  people.  It  is  also  not  necessary  that  the  said 

act  must  have  taken  place  within  the  view  of 

general  public  so  as  to  bring  it  within  the 

encompass  of  the  Act.  Even  an  act  having  taken 

place in a barbaric and gruesome manner, if it had 

created  fear  and  insecurity,  would  certainly  come 

within the purview of the Act.” 

The  august  Supreme  Court  reiterated  the  above  principles 

and  law  in  the  case  titled  “Naeem  Akhtar  and  others  v.  The 

State  and  others”  [PLD  2003  S.C.  396]  and  has  held  and 

observed  that  in  general  terms  a  fright,  dread  or  an 

apprehension  in  the  mind  of  a  person  induced  by  a  horrible 

act  of  a  person  or  causing  fear  and  terror  to  the  people  is 

terrorism and if an act done by a person which is a source of 

 
 
 
   
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

13 

terror  amongst  any  section  of  people,  it  would  be  a  terrorist 

act and thus an offence under the Act of 1997.  

15. 

In  the  case  titled  “Sh.  Muhammad  Amjad  v.  The 

State”  [PLD  2003  S.C.  704]  the  august  Supreme  Court  has 

held as follows:  

“Condition precedent for applicability of ATA 

is  that  the  offences  mentioned  in  the  Schedule 

should  have  nexus  with  the  objects  mentioned  in 

sections  6,  7  and  8  of  the  ATA.  If  sense  of  fear, 

insecurity in the people at large or any section of 

the  people  or  disturbance  of  harmony  amongst 

different  sections  of  the  people  is  created,  above 

quoted subsection will be attracted. Even if by act 

of  terrorism  actual  terror  is  not  caused,  yet, 

above quoted subsection (b) will be applicable if it 

was  likely  to  do  any  harm  contemplated  in  said 

subsection.  It  is  the  cumulative  effect  of  all  the 

attending  circumstances  which  provide  tangible 

guidelines 

to  determine 

the  applicability  or 

otherwise of said subsection.” 

16. 

In the case titled “Muhammad Farooq v. Ibrar and 5 

others”  [PLD  2004  S.C.  917]  the  august  Supreme  Court  has 

eloquently held as follows:  

 
 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

14 

“The  very  object  to  promulgate  Anti-

Terrorism  Act,  1997  was  to  control  the  acts  of 

terrorism,  sectarian  violence  and  other  heinous 

offences  as  defined  in  section  6  of  the  Act  and 

their speedy trials. To bring an offence within the 

ambit  of  the  Act,  it  is  essential  to  examine  that 

the  said  offence  should  have  nexus  with  the 

object  of  the  Act  and  the  offences  covered  by  its 

sections  6,  7  and  8.  On  bare  perusal  of  sub-

clauses  (b),  (d),  (h)  and  (i)  of  subsection  (1)  of 

section 6 of the Act, it is abundantly clear that the 

offence which creates a sense of fear or insecurity 

in  society,  causes  death  or  endangers  a  person's 

life,  involves  firing  on  religious  congregations, 

mosques,  imambargahs,  churches,  temples  and 

all  other  places  of  worship,  or  random  firing  to 

spread panic, or involves any forcible takeover of 

mosques  or  other  places  of  worships,  falls  within 

its ambit.” 

17. 

The above principles and law were reaffirmed in  the 

cases  tiled  “Mohabbat  Ali  and  another  v.  The  State  and 

another”  [2007  SCMR  142],  “Bashir  Ahmed  v.  Muhammad 

Siddique and others” [PLD 2009 S.C. 11], and “Nazeer Ahmed 

and others v. Nooruddin and another” [2012 SCMR 517]. 

 
 
 
  
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

15 

18. 

In  the  case  titled  “Shahbaz  Khan  alias  Tippu  and 

others  v.  Special  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court  No.  3,  Lahore 

and others” [PLD 2016 S.C. 1] the august Supreme Court has 

held as follows:   

“It  is  clear  from  a  textual  reading  of 

Section  6  of  ATA  that  an  action  categorized  in 

subsection  (2)  thereof  constitutes  the  offence  of 

terrorism  when  according  to  Section  6(1)(b)  ibid 

it  is  "designed"  to,  inter  alia,  intimidate  or 

overawe the public or to create a sense of fear or 

insecurity 

in  society.  Therefore, 

the 

three 

ingredients  of  the  offence  of  terrorism  under 

Section 6(1)(a) and (b) of ATA are firstly, taking 

of  action  specified  in  Section  6(2)  of  ATA; 

secondly,  that  action  is  committed  with  design, 

intention  and  mens  rea;  and  thirdly,  it  has  the 

impact  of  causing  intimidation,  awe,  fear  and 

insecurity in the public or society.” 

The august Supreme Court succinctly  highlighted and further 

clarified  the  principles  and  law  in  the  case  titled  “Malik 

Muhammad  Mumtaz  Qadri  v.  The  State  and  others”  [PLD 

2016  S.C.  17]  and  the  relevant  portion  is  reproduced  as 

follows:  

“A  plain  reading  of  section  6  of  the  Anti-

Terrorism  Act,  1997  shows  that  while  defining 

 
 
 
 
   
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

16 

'terrorism' the said section bifurcates the same into 

two  parts,  the  mens  rea  for  the  offence  falling  in 

section  6(1)(b)  or  (c)  and  the  actus  reus  of  the 

offence  falling  in  section  6(2)  of  the  Act  and  in 

order  to  attract  the  definition  of  terrorism  in  a 

given  case  the  requisite  mens  rea  and  actus  reus 

must coincide and coexist. The provisions of section 

6(5), (6) and (7) of the Act also indicate that there 

may be some other actions of a person which may 

also be declared or recognized as acts of terrorism 

by some other provisions of the same Act.”  

The apex Court further held and observed as under: 

  “The  provisions  of  section  6(1)(b)  of  the  Anti-

Terrorism  Act,  1997  quite  clearly  contemplate 

creation  of  a  sense  of  fear  or  insecurity  in  the 

society  as  a  design  behind  the  action  and  it  is 

immaterial  whether  that  design  was  actually 

fulfilled  or  not  and  any  sense  of  fear  or  insecurity 

was in fact created in the society as a result of the 

action or not. It is the specified action accompanied 

by the requisite intention, design or purpose which 

constitutes the offence of terrorism under section 6 

of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997  and  the  actual 

fallout  of  the  action  has  nothing  to  do  with 

determination of the nature of offence.”  

 
 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

17 

19. 

In  the  case  titled  “Khuda-e-Noor  v.  The  State”  [PLD 

2016 S.C. 195] it was held as follows:  

“The  provisions  of  section  6  of  the  Anti-

Terrorism  Act,  1997  which  define  "terrorism" 

clearly  show  that  the  said  section  is  divided 

into  two  main  parts, 

i.e.  the 

first  part 

contained in section 6(1)(b) and (c) of the said 

Act  dealing  with  the  mens  rea  mentioning  the 

"design" or the "purpose" behind an action and 

the  second  part  falling  in  section  6(2)  of  the 

said  Act  specifying  the  actions  which, 

if 

coupled  with  the  mens  rea  mentioned  above, 

would constitute the offence of "terrorism".”  

20. 

In the judgment reported as “Kashif Ali v. The Judge, 

Anti-Terrorism,  Court  No.  II,  Lahore  and  others”  [PLD  2016 

S.C. 951] rendered by five Hon’ble  Judges of the apex Court 

it has been held and observed as follows: 

“The term "design" now used in Section 6 

of the Act has widened the scope of the Act and 

the  terms  "intention"  and  "motive"  previously 

used have been substituted with the sole object 

that  if  the  act  is  designed  to  create  a  sense  of 

fear  or  insecurity  in  society,  then  the  Anti- 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

18 

Terrorism Court will have the jurisdiction. From 

the  above  definition  of  the  term  "design"  it  is 

clear that it means a plan or scheme conceived 

in mind and intended for subsequent execution. 

In  order  to  determine  whether  an  offence  falls 

within  the  ambit  of  Section  6  of  the  Act,  it 

would  be  essential  to  have  a  glance  over  the 

allegations  levelled  in  the  F.I.R,  the  material 

collected  by  the  investigating  agency  and  the 

surrounding 

circumstances,  depicting 

the 

commission of offence. Whether a particular act 

is  an  act  of  terrorism  or  not,  the  motivation, 

object,  design  or  purpose  behind  the  said  Act 

has  to  be  seen.  The  term  "design",  which  has 

given  a  wider  scope  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the 

Anti-terrorism  Courts  excludes  the  intent  or 

motive  of  the  accused.  In  other  words,  the 

motive and intent have lost their relevance in a 

case  under  Section  6(2)  of  the  Act.  What  is 

essential  to  attract  the  mischief  of  this  Section 

is the object for which the act is designed.” 

21. 

Finally, reference is made to “Waris Ali and 5 others 

v.  The  State”  [2017  SCMR  1572]  wherein  the  august 

Supreme  Court  interpreted  the  expression  terrorism  in  the 

context of the Act of 1997 as follows: 

 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

19 

“In  cases  of  this  nature,  "mens  rea"  is 

essentially with an object to accomplish the act 

of terrorism and carrying out terrorist activities 

to  overawe  the  State,  the  State  Institutions, 

the  public  at  large,  destruction  of  public  and 

private  properties,  make  assault  on  the  law 

enforcing  agencies  and  even  at  the  public  at 

large. The ultimate object and purpose of such 

acts  is  to  terrorize  the  society  or  to  put  it 

under  constant  fear  while  in  ordinary  crimes 

committed  due  to  personal  vengeance/blood 

feud  or  enmity,  the  element  to  create  fear  or 

sense  of  insecurity  in  the  society,  public  by 

means of terrorism is always missing.” 

22. 

It  is,  therefore,  obvious  from  the  survey  of  the 

provisions  of  the  statute  and  the  precedent  law  that  no 

matter  how  gruesome,  violent  or  heinous  an  act  or  the 

commission of an offence may  be, it would not constitute  an 

act  of  terrorism  within  its  meaning  contemplated  under  the 

Act  of  1997  unless  the  mens  rea  and  actus  reus  explicitly 

mentioned  therein  coincides  and  co  exists.  The  most 

gruesome  murder  in  a  crowded  public  place  with  lethal 

firearm weapons due to personal enmity or at the spur of the 

moment would definitely create a sense of fear and insecurity 

 
 
  
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

20 

amongst  the  general  public,  society  or  part  thereof  but  may 

not  necessarily  amount  to  terrorism  within  the  meaning 

contemplated under the Act of 1997. The essential ingredients 

relating  to  mens  rea  and  actus  reus  explicitly  mentioned  in 

section  6(1)(b)  or  (c)  and  section  6(2)  respectively  must 

coexist and coincide. The pre condition is existence of design 

to  intimidate,  overawe  and  create  scare  and  insecurity 

amongst the general public, society or a section thereof. The 

action must be one contemplated in section 6(2) of the Act of 

1997.  The  offence  of  terrorism  would  be  constituted  if  the 

design  was  to  create  the  physiological  impact  of  creating  a 

sense  of  fear  and  insecurity  relatable  to  the  general  public, 

society  or  a  section  thereof.  The  offences  mentioned  in  the 

schedule must have nexus with the object of the statute and 

contemplated  under  sections  6  to  8.  For  the  offence  of 

terrorism to be constituted it is not necessary that victims are 

actually  harmed  or  that  terror  was  caused.  It  would  be 

sufficient if the design of the intended act was likely to create 

terror,  a  sense  of  fear  and  insecurity  amongst  the  general 

public,  society  or  a  section  thereof.  In  the  facts  and 

circumstances  of  the  case  in  hand,  the  mens  rea  and  actus 

reas contemplated in the Act of 1997 coexists.                

24. 

For  the  above  reasons  we  hold  that  the  prosecution 

had  proved  the  charge  against  the  Appellant  beyond 

reasonable  doubt  and  that  there  were  no  mitigating 

 
 
 
 
  Jail Appeal No. 77 of 2017. 

21 

circumstances 

for  handing  down  a 

lesser  sentence. 

Nonetheless,  the  sentence  has  not  been  challenged  by  the 

State.  The  appeal  preferred  by  the  appellant  has  been  found 

to be without merit and is, therefore, accordingly dismissed.  

   (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

   (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB)                         

   JUDGE   

Announced, in open Court, on 11-06-2019. 

JUDGE 

CHIEF JUSTICE 

Approved for reporting.  

Tanveer Ahmed. 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
