JUDGMENT  SHEET. 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P  No.191/2019. 

Sajida  Begum 

VS 

Federation  of Pakistan  etc. 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Muhammad Ramzan Khan, 
Advocate. 

Respondent No. l  & 2 by: 

Raja Muhammad Aftab Ahmed, AAG. 
Mehmood Khan Lakho, S.O  (Lit-V) 
Establishment Division. 

Respondent No.3 by: 

Mr. Muhammad Azam Hussain, 
Advocate. 

Date  of Decision: 

11.06.2019. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAY ANI,  J :-  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

. 

petitioner  has  prayed  for  issuance  of  direction  to  the  respondents  for  grant  of 

gratuity,  pension  and  other  financial  benefits  under  Prime  Minister  Assistance 

Package. 

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that son of the petitioner  Imran 

Latif (late), ex-Head  Constable had  died during  service on  10.02.2017  and he was 

unmarried;  that  the  petitioner  being  mother  applied  for  the  benefits  of  Prime 

Minister  Assistance  Package  as  well  as  financial  benefits,  whereby  she  has  been 

granted financial  assistance  amounting to Rs.9,00,000/- on 20.06.2017 but pension 

and gratuity have not  been released by the respondent/department  and the gratuity, 

which was prepared to be released to the petitioner has been revoked; that deceased 

son of the petitioner  was four years old at the time of death of her husband and the 

petitioner  married  to  Muhammad  Hanif,  who  assisted  the  petitioner  and  other 

family members; that under O.M dated 23.10.1983 issued by Finance Division, the 

petitioner  being  mother  is  entitled  for  pensionary  benefits  of her  son,  who  was 

unmarried at the time of his death, while he was in civil service. 

3. 

Conversely, 

learned  Attorney  General  contends 

that 

in  O.M  dated 

23.10.1983,  no pensionary  benefits  are permissible  to the  surviving mother  unless 

W.P No.191/2019. 

2 

she submits reasonable  proof  that  she was  dependent  on the  deceased  government 

servant. 

4. 

5. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal  of the  record reveals  that  Imran  Latif  (late)  ex-Head  Constable,  IB 

Headquarters  had  died  on  10.02.2017 leaving  behind  his  real  mother  (petitioner) 

being the only surviving family member as the deceased was unmarried at the time 

of his death. Under the Prime Minister Assistance Package, the petitioner  has been 

granted  financial  assistance  amounting  to  Rs.9,00,000/-,  however,  pensionary 

benefits have not been released. 

6. 

Keeping  in  view  above  background,  I  have  gone  through  the  relevant 

provisions  of  O.M  dated  23.10.1983  referred  by  learned  counsel  for  the  parties, 

which are reproduced as under:- 

2. 

(1) 

The  'family'  for  the  purpose  of payment  of  death  
cum-retirement  gratuity  will  include  the  following 
relatives of the Government servant:- 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

wife  or  wives,  in  case  of a  male  Government 
servant. 

husband,  in the  case of a female  Government 
servant. 

children of the Government Servant. 

widow  or widows  and  children  of a  deceased 
son of the Government servant. 

3.  When  the  amount  of  gratuity  has  become  payable  to  the 
family  it shall be the duty of the Accounts  Officer to make payment 
to the family according to the following procedure:- 

(1)  When the Government servant leaves a family; 

(a) 

(b) 

the  amount  of gratuity  or  any  part  thereof to 
which  the  nomination  relates  shall  become 
payable  to  his/her nominee  or  nominees  in  the 
proportion  specified in the nomination. 

if  no  nomination  in  favour  of  a  member  or 
members of a family subsists, or if a nomination 
relates  only  to  apart  of  the  amount  of  the 
gratuity, the whole amount of the gratuity or the 
part  thereof to  which  the  nomination  does  not 
relate, shall  become payable  to the members  of 
his/her family in equal shares; 

Provided that no share shall be payable  to--- 

(i) 

(ii) 

sons who have attained the age of 18 years. 

sons  of a deceased son  who  have attained  the age  of 
18 years; 

(iii)  married daughters whose husbands are alive; 

W.P  No.191/2019. 

3 

(iv)  married daughters of a deceased son whose husbands 

are alive; 

if there  is any  member  of the family  other  than  those  specified  in 
clause (i),  (ii),  (iii) and (iv) above. 

Provided  further 
that  the  widow  or  widows  and  the  child  or 
children  of a  deceased  son  shall  receive  between  them  in  equal 
parts  only the share which  that son  would have received  if he had 
survived that Government servant and had been exempted from  the 
operation of the first proviso. 

(2)  When the  Government servant  leaves  no family,  the  amount 
of  gratuity  shall  be  payable  to  the  following  surviving 
relatives, if any, of the Government servant in equal shaes:--- 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

brothers below the age of 18 years; 

unmarried and widow sisters; 

father;  and 

mother. 

(4) 

No  gratuity  will  be payable  by  Government  after  the 
death of a Government servant if he/she does not leave a family  as 
defined  in para  (2)  of above  to  an  eligible  dependent  relative  or 
relatives specified in sub-para of paragraph  above. 

5. 

(1)  Family for the purpose  of payment  of pension  will be as 

defined  in  para  2(1)  above.  It  will  also  include  the 
Government  servant's  relatives  mentioned  in  sub-para 
(2) of paragraph  3 above. 

(2) 

(a) A pension  sanctioned under the Section will be allowed--- 
(i)  to  the  widow  of the  deceased,  if the deceased  is  a  male 
Government servant  or  the husband,  if the deceased  is a 
female  Government  servant.  If the  Government  servant 
had more than one wife, and the number of his surviving 
widows  and  children  do  not  exceed four,  the  pension 
shall  be divided equally among the surviving widows and 
children. If the number of surviving widows and children 
together is more than four,  the pension  shall be divided in 
the following  manner, viz, each surviving widow shall get 
14th  of  the  pension  and  the  balance  (if any)  shall  be 
divided  equally  among  the  surviving  children,  For  the 
purpose  of this clause, the term  "children"  excludes sons 
above the age of 18 years  and married daughters. 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

(vii) 

(viii) 

.. 

.. 

. 

.. 

.. 

. 

.. 

In  the  event  of no pension  being payable  under  rule  (a) the 

(b) 
pension 

(i)  to the father; 

(ii) failing  the father,  to the mother; 

.. 

W.P No.191/2019. 

4 

(iii)failing  the father  and  the mother,  to  the  eldest  surviving 

brother below the age of 18; 

(iv )failing  (i) to (iii), to the eldest surviving, unmarried sister; 
if the eldest sister marries of dies, then the next eldest; 

(v) failing (i) to (iv), to the eldest surviving widow sister. 

(3)  No pension  will be payable  under this Section--- 

(a)  to a person  mentioned in clause (b) of sub-para (2) of this para 
without  production  of a  reasonable proof  that  such person  was 
dependent on the deceased Government servant for support. 

(b)  .......... 
(c)  .......... 
(d)  .......... 
(e)  .......... 
.......... 

(4) 

,, 

7. 

Keeping  in view  above  background  and the  factual  side  argued  by  learned 

AAG,  there  is  no  denial  that  the  petitioner  is  mother  of  deceased  servant,  who 

married to Muhammad Hanif after death of her husband and on this score alone, the 

respondents/department  is heavily relying upon 3(a) of section 2 Family Pension of 

O.M dated  23.10.1983.  In such situation, the onus is upon the petitioner/mother  of 

the deceased employee to submit reasonable proof that she was dependent upon the 

deceased  government  servant  at  the  time  of his  death.  This  aspect  is  based  upon 

disputed  facts  and  cannot  be resolved  in constitutional jurisdiction,  which requires 

recording of evidence. As such it requires declaration from competent Court of law, 

therefore,  without  touching  merits  of the  case,  instant  writ  petition  is  disposed of 

with direction to the petitioner to approach competent Court of law for redressal of 

her grievance, if so, advised. 

R.Anjam 

(MOHSIN  AKHTARK,(YANI) 
JUDGE 

