ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.3612/2019 
Raja Mazhar Abbas 
VS
Federation of Pakistan through M/o Defence, Rawalpindi & 03 others  

Petitioner by: 

Syed Ali Abbas Kazmi, Advocate. 

Respondents by: 

Barrister Muhammad Mumtaz Ali, AAG 
along with Omar, Flying Officer, PAF.  

Date of Decision: 

24.02.2021. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  writ  petition, 

the  petitioner  has  assailed  his  termination  order  from  Pakistan  Air  Force 

and  prayed  for  issuance  of  direction  to  respondents  to  reinstate  the 

petitioner  in  service  with  all  back  benefits  or  to  disburse  the  pensionary 

benefits and gratuity.  

2. 

Succinctly, the petitioner joined the Pakistan Air Force on 13.02.2004 

as  Airman  and  had  lastly  served  as  CPL  Technician  at  PAF  Base  Mushaf 

Sargodha, when he has been dismissed from service along with imposition 

of sentence of six (06) months rigorous imprisonment on the allegation of 

desertion  under  Section  38(1)  of  the  Pakistan  Air  Force  Act,  1953  by 

Presiding  Officer,  District  Court  Martial  (Respondent  No.3),  per  se,  the 

said  sentence  has  been  confirmed  by  Air  Commodore,  Officer 

Commanding  Pakistan  Air  Force  Base  Mushaf,  Sargodha.  Hence,  instant 

writ petition.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  petitioner  has  been 

dismissed  from  service  without  providing  certificate  of  termination  from 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3612 of 2019  

        Page 2 

service as per Section 22 of the Act, 1953 nor any order/judgment has been 

provided to the petitioner till date with respect to sentence passed against 

the  petitioner,  as  such,  pre-requisites  of  a  fair  trial  as  envisaged  in 

Chapter-XI  of  the  Act,  1953    have  not  been  complied  with;  that  the 

petitioner  was  on  leave  at  home  situated  in  Khushab  city  when  he  learnt 

about  registration  of  a  criminal  case  against  him,  per  se,  the  petitioner 

being only male member of his family to support and earn their bread and 

butter constrained to hide himself due to apprehension of getting arrested, 

nevertheless, the petitioner was acquitted of the charges in terms of Section 

265-k Cr.P.C. and soon thereafter the petitioner approached his unit at PAF 

Base  Mushaf  Sargodha  and  surrendered  himself;  that  the  absence  of  the 

petitioner  from  his  duties  was  neither  willful  nor  deliberate  but  due  to 

irrepressible circumstances, but the respondent authorities have dismissed 

the  petitioner  along  with  further  imposition  of  sentence  of  06  months 

rigorous imprisonment.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  AAG  contends  that  the  petitioner  having  been 

posted  at  PAF  Base,  Mushaf,  Sargodha  absented  himself  without  leave 

from  his  unit  on  28.04.2018,  whereas  on  eighth  day  of  his  absence,  PAF 

Form-124 was forwarded to different agencies, including his home address 

as well as to concerned police station of his district, but to no avail; that in 

June,  2018,  a  Board  of  Inquiry  was  constituted  regarding  his  absence 

without leave, whereby the Board declared that the petitioner has illegally 

absented himself  without leave from his  unit  w.e.f. 28.04.2018, per se, the 

petitioner reported back after passing of more than 09 months, whereafter 

the trial of petitioner was held at PAF Base Mushaf Sargodha on the charge 

of  desertion  under  Section  38(1)  of  the  PAF  Act,  1953,  in  which  the 

 
 
W.P. No.3612 of 2019  

        Page 3 

petitioner pleaded guilty and accordingly, he was awarded sentence of 06 

months rigorous imprisonment along with dismissal from service; that the 

petitioner has been dismissed from service pursuant to proper conduct of 

trial  in  accordance  with  law;  that  in  terms  of  Article  199(3)  of  the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  this  Court  lacks 

jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the matter.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  Raja  Mazhar  Abbas  /  petitioner, 

Ex-Corporal Technician, was appointed on 13.02.2004 in Pakistan Air Force 

as Airman, and was lastly posted at PAF Base Mushaf, Sargodha when he 

remained on leave w.e.f. 28.04.2018. It is pertinent to mention here that the 

petitioner  was  nominated  in  a  criminal  case  i.e.  FIR  No.120,  dated 

22.04.2018, under Sections 302, 324, 34/337-F(iii) PPC, Police Station Khatta 

Saghral,  Khushab  (Punjab),  whereafter  he  remained  absconder,  however 

the  respondent  authorities  had  initiated  an  inquiry  with  respect  to 

petitioner’s  absentee,  even  the  respondent  authorities  informed  the  local 

police  of  the  petitioner’s  district.  In  June,  2018,  Board  of  Inquiry  was 

constituted regarding the petitioner’s  absence without leave, whereby the 

petitioner  was  declared  on  illegal  leave  w.e.f.  28.04.2018,  as  such,  the 

petitioner  reported  back  on  01.02.2019  after  desertion  for  more  than  nine 

months, though he had taken the stance that he was involved in a criminal 

case without any justified reason, per se, as soon as he has been acquitted 

of  the  criminal  case  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Khushab, 

vide  order  dated  04.01.2019,  he  reported  back  to  his  unit.  However,  the 

Commanding    Officer  of  the  petitioner  passed  the  order  to  record 

summary    of      evidence    against    the    petitioner    as    per    Pakistan    Air  

 
 
W.P. No.3612 of 2019  

        Page 4 

Force Act, 1953. During the summary of evidence, it was decided to try the 

petitioner  by  convening  a  Court  Martial  under  the  Air  Force  Laws, 

whereafter  the  trial  was  conducted  on  Pakistan  Air  Force  Base  Mushaf, 

Sargodha on charges of desertion under Section 38(1) of Pakistan Air Force 

Act, 1953. During the course of proceedings, the petitioner pleaded guilty 

to  the  charge,  whereby  he  was  awarded  sentence  of  six  (06)  months 

rigorous  imprisonment  along  with  dismissal  order  from  service.  The 

proceedings of District Court Martial were confirmed on 11.04.2019 under 

the  law,  however  the  petitioner  after  completion  of  reduced  sentence  of 

three (03) months has been released from District Jail, Shahpur.  

7.  While  considering  this  background,  the  petitioner  has  been 

confronted  as  to  whether  he  had  informed  the  Commanding  Officer 

regarding  his  involvement  in  a  criminal  case,  whereby  it  was  conceded 

that  no  such  information  was  transmitted  to  the  respondent  authority, 

hence  the  petitioner  apparently  admitted  the  charge  of  willful  desertion, 

even  the  same  was  acknowledged  by  him  during  the  Court  Martial 

proceedings,  as  a  result  whereof  he  was  convicted  and  dismissed  from 

service, per se, the Pakistan Air Force authorities have conducted the entire 

proceedings in accordance with law and no illegality has been pointed out 

during  the  course  arguments,  even  sufficient  opportunity  was  granted  to 

the petitioner to justify his position, but the conduct demonstrated by the 

petitioner requires no condemnation, especially when he had not informed 

the Pakistan Air Force  authorities qua his  involvement in a criminal case, 

rather remained on willful absence from his lawful duties.  

8.  While  considering all  these  aspects,  it has  been  settled  by  now that 

judicial  review,  though  available  in  such  type  of  cases  but,  with  an 

 
 
W.P. No.3612 of 2019  

        Page 5 

exception that if the order passed by the respondent authorities is patently 

illegal  and  based  upon  malafide  or  without  any  lawful  authority,  failing 

which  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  in  terms  of  Article  199(3)  of  the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  could  not  be 

exercised. 

9. 

Contrarily,  the  petitioner  has  relied  upon  2012  SCMR  1229 

(Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary  Ministry  of  Defence  VS  Abdul 

Basit) and PLD 2015 Islamabad 180 (Muhammad Shariq VS Federation of 

Pakistan), but the facts and circumstances referred in supra judgments are 

not applicable to the case in hand, even it is settled proposition of law that 

in case of dismissal from service, pensionary benefits could not be granted 

in favour of the sacked employee. 

10. 

In  view  of  above  position,  the  instant  writ petition  is  misconceived 

and the same is hereby DISMISSED. 

Khalid Z. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
                         JUDGE 

 
 
            
 
                 
 
 
 
