ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P No.48812019.

Mst.  Khadija

VS

Allah Dad etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedings

Date of order/
Proceedings

Order with signature of Judge  and  that of parties or counsel
where necessary.

28.05.2019

Petitioner in person.
Rozi Khan,  respondent  No.2 in person.
Muhammad Sabir, ASI, P.S  Shamas Colony, Islamabad.

Through the instant writ petition, the petitioner  has prayed

for issuance  of direction  to respondents  No.3 & 4 to provide due

protection to the petitioner  and respondent No.5 may also be

directed to adopt preventive  measures against  respondents No.l

& 2 in order to protect  the liberty of the petitioner  and her family

members and to prevent  forced  labour.

2.  The petitioner in person contends  that she and her family

worked for one  year in brick  kiln of respondents No.l & 2 and

they completed  their all work and after their shiftingrrespondents

No.l & 2 areharassing  them in connivance  with local police.

3.  Conversely,  Rozi  Khan/respondent  NoL who is real

brother  of respondent  No.1, in person contends that the petitioner

and her family members  are under debt of Rs.8,50,000/-, which

has not yet been cleared  and  they have shiftefto- their brick

kiln.

4.  Arguments  heard,  record perused.

5.  Perusal of the record reveals  that the petitioner  and her

family  members  are being harassed  by respondents No.l & 2 in

connivance with local police to settle the dispute with

respondents  No.l & 2.

2
W.P  No.488/2019.

6.  Keeping in view above background,  respondent  No.2  has

been confronted  as to whether  he ever filed an application  or

civil suit against  the petitioner and her family  members  for

recovery of outstanding  amount  against them, which was paid to

them, whereupon  he has replied  that they have not yet

approached  any Court of law for recovery of the outstanding

amount.

7.  The petitioner  has vehemently denied  stance  of respondent

No.2  that she and her family members have to pay some

outstanding  amount.

8.  Under  The Bonded  Labour System  (Abolition) AcL,  1992,

no one is allowed to claim  amount in lieu of services, which fall

within  bonded labour  system.

9.  The above referred  scenario  convinces this Court that  the

petitioner  and her family  members  worked with respondents

No.l & 2 for one year in their  brick kiln under bonded labour

system, which is illegal. In reported judgment  of Supreme Court

reported as PLD  2009 SC 507 (Human  Riehts Commission  of

Pakistan  VS Government of Pahistanl, it was  held that all such

agreements,  which have  not yet been concluded  could  not be

enforced  and even  the police  shall  not act as tool for recovery  of

amount, therefore, I have  no hesitation in my mind to hold  that

any agreement  executed  with the petitioner and her family

members  is against  the law as well as public policy, therefore,

the same  cannot  be considered  valid  for recovery of the amount,

therefore, any action  on part ofthe  respondents  for recovery of

the amount is illegal and the respondents shall restrain from

causing any harassment  to the petitioner and her family

members.

10. Respondent  No.2  in person before  this Court has confirmed

that he has not yet filed any proceedings against the petitioner

3
W.P No.488/2019.

and her family  members  for recovery of amount,  therefore,  claim

of respondents  No.l & 2 can only be adjudicated upon  by the

Court of competent  jurisdiction, however,  the case in hand

governs under Bounded  Labour System.

I 1. In view of above discussion,  the instant  writ petition stands

disoosed  of with direction to respondent  No.4/SHO, P.S Golra

Sharif,  Islamabad  to provide  due protection  to the petitioner  and

her family members  and any action on part of respondents No.l

& 2 wtll be considered  as void except the legal  course  for

recevery  of the amount if any.

R.Aojro

JUDGE

