ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P  No.  1495  of 2020 

Dr.  Muhammad  Abaid  Ullah 
VS
Federation  of  Pakistan  & others. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr.  Sanaullah  Khan Advocate 

Respondent  No.1  by: 

Ch.  Abdul  Jabbar,  AAG. 

Respondents  No.2  & 3  by:  Mr.  Abid  Hassan, Advocate 

Date  of Hearing: 

07.09.2020 

**************************w**************** 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J:  Through  this  petition  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973, 

the  petitioner  has  invoked 

the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court,  with  the 

following  prayer:- 

"in  view'f the  above,  it  is  most  respectfully  prayed 
that  after  summoning  the  record of  the  case,  the 
impugned  order dated  24.02.2020 may kindly be set 
aside  and  the  respondents  may  be  directed  to pay 
the outstanding  salary of the petitioner  without  any 
further  delay  and  since  the  impugned  order  is 
against  their own  rules, therefore,  the  respondents 
may  be  directed  to  extend  the  contract  of  the 
petitioner  till the completion of whole the contract." 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  as  stated  by  the  petitioner  are  that  he 

completed  his  Ph.D  degree 

in  Bio  Sciences 

from  COMSATS 

University, 

Islamabad  since  2015  and 

in 

the  year  2018, 

the 

respondents 

invited 

applications 

through 

advertisement 

for 

Postdoctoral  Fellow  under  the  Agriculture  Linkages  Program  (ALP)  

PARC, 

Islamabad 

titled  "Use  of  Rhizobium  spp  to  enhance 

the 

nutritive  value  and  yield  of  lentil  genetic  resources"  at  Department  of 

Bio-Sciences  C.U.I.  The  petitioner  applied  for  that  fellowship  and 

after  evaluation  of  petitioner's  credentials,  he  was  shortlisted  for  the 

2 

"W.P No.1495 of 2020" 

interview  and  finally  the  Interview  Committee  recruited  him  for  the 

said  position  w.e.f  01.07.2018  vide 

letter  dated  10.07.2018. 

According  to  performance  of  the  petitioner  and  submission  of  first 

annual  report,  the  PARC  released the  2nd  year  funds  to  C.U.I. The 

original  Principal  Investigator  of  the  project  strongly  recommended 

the  extension  of  the  contract  of  the  petitioner  vide  letter  dated 

24.06.2019.  The  initial contract expired on 30.06.2019,  however the 

petitioner  continued  un-interrupted  work  on  the  assurance  of  his 

immediate  boss that formal  letter  of extension will  be  issued  in  due 

course of time and the petitioner was assured that letter of extension 

in  his contract  shall  be issued  soon  and  since the  formal  extension 

letter for extension in  his contract had not been issued, therefore, his 

pay would  be  released  at  the  time  of  issuance  of  formal  extension 

letter.  Further stated that the petitioner worked according to his best 

abilities to the whole  eight months along-with his colleagues as well 

as  the  principal  with  the  profound expectation  that  his  contract  has 

been  extended  and 

formal  extension 

letter  shall  be 

issued 

accordingly  and the  petitioner shall be paid whole  salary and due to 

such expectations the petitioner borrowed considerable amount from 

his  friends  and  family  members,  whereas  on  receiving  impugned 

letter dated  24.02.2020  the  petitioner was  shocked that  his contract 

has  not  been  extended;  that  the  petitioner  submitted  departmental 

appeal  on  03.03.2020  before  the  respondent,  but  despite  lapse  of 

considerable time,  no reply has so far  been received; that the act of 

the  respondent  is 

illegal,  without 

lawful  authority,  against  the 

fundamental rights of the petitioner and is  liable to be set aside. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that he kept 

on  working  with 

the  respondents  for  eight  months,  but  the 

respondents  did  not  pay  any  salary  for  the  said  period;  that  the 

impugned  letter  clearly  depicts  that  the  petitioner  was  directed  to 

obtain  clearance  and  proceed as  per C.U.I  Rules, meaning thereby 

that  the  respondents  were  aware  that  the  petitioner  has  been 

performing  duties  without  pay; that  the  respondents  have  extended 

the contract of  his colleagues but denied such right to the petitioner, 

3 

"W.P No. 1495 of 2020" 

which  is  against  the  spirit  of  Article  25  of  the  Constitution;  that  the 

departmental authorities are bound to use discretion in  a fair and just 

manner while dealing with such like cases. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  has 

opposed  the  contention  raised  by  learned counsel  for  the  petitioner 

contending  that  the  petitioner  was  a  contractual  employee;  that  it 

was  a  one  year  fixed  project, which  expired  on  30.06.2019  and  no 

further  extension  thereof  was  granted,  therefore,  the  petitioner  has 

no right for claiming any extension thereof; that there  is no evidence 

that the petitioner has served for eight months with the  respondents; 

that factual  controversies are involved in  the matter; that  COMSATS 

Institute  of  Information  Technology  is  a  statutory  body  corporate 

established under a  statute i.e. The COMSAT  Institute of Information 

Technology  Ordinance, 2000 and it  has been granted the status of a 

Degree  Awarding  Institute;  that  the  petitioner  was  purely  a  project 

based  contractual  employee  of  the  University  as  per  terms  of  his 

employment  contract,  therefore,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  not 

maintainable. 

5. 

I  have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the parties 

and have perused the material available on record. 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  respondents  invited 

applications through advertisement for Postdoctoral Fellow under the 

Agriculture  Linkages Program (ALP)-PARC, Islamabad titled "Use of 

Rhizobium  spp,  to  enhance  the  nutritive  value  and  yield  of  lentil 

genetic  resources"  at  Department  of  Bio-Sciences  C.U.I.  The 

petitioner  applied  for  the  same  and  the 

Interview  Committee 

recruited him for the  said position w.e.f  01.07.2018 vide  letter dated 

10.07.2018. The original Principal Investigator of the  project strongly 

recommended  extension  of  the  contract  of  the  petitioner  vide  letter 

dated  24.06.2019,  whereas 

the 

initial  contract  expired  on 

30.06.2019,  but  as  per  the  petitioner  he  continued  un-interrupted 

work  on  the  assurance  of  his  immediate  boss  that  formal  letter  of 

extension will  be issued in  due course of time and the  petitioner was 

4 

"W.P No. 1495 of 2020" 

assured that  letter of  extension of  his contract  shall  be  issued soon 

and  his  pay  shall  be  released  at  the  time  of  issuance  of  formal 

extension  letter,  whereas  he  received  the  impugned  letter  dated 

24.02.2020,  whereby  contract of the  petitioner was  not extended by 

virtue of termination of his contract. 

7. 

The  pros  and  cons 

lead  this  Court  to  a  well-founded 

conclusion .that  the  regularization  in  service  cannot  be  claimed  as 

vested  right.  In  this case, the  petitioner had accepted the terms and 

conditions  of  his  engagement  through  letter  dated  10.07.2018 and 

now  has  approached  this  Court  and  as  per  clause  2  of  the  said 

letter, it  is  clearly  written that  "His services can  be terminated by 

giving  one  month  prior  notice  on  either  side".  So  far  as  the 

discriminatory  treatment  is  concerned,  nothing  has  been  placed on 

record to show any discriminatory treatment. 

8. 

It  is  an  established  principle  that  where  employment  is  on 

contract,  there  is  a  relationship  of  master  and  servant  and  in  such 

like  cases  the  Constitutional  petition  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  is  not  maintainable.  In  case  titled  "Lt.  Col.  Rtd.  Aamir 

Rauf v.  Federation of Pakistan through Secretarv Mio Defence and 3 

others"  (2011  PLC  (CS)  654),  this  Court  had  held  that  if  an 

employee working  on contract  basis,  is  aggrieved  of  his termination 

the  only  remedy  available  was  an  action  for  damages  and  no 

direction could  be issued to force the unwilling employer to keep the 

petitioner  in  service.  Similar  principle was  laid down  by the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  titled  "Nadeem  Ahmed  v. 

Pakistan  State Oil Company Limited and another'' (2005  PLC  (C.S.) 

1447). 

9. 

Record  also  reveals  that  in 

the  letter  dated  24.02.2020 

whereby  the  contract  of  the  petitioner  has  not  been  extended,  it  is 

clearly  mentioned  that  he  is  advised  to  obtain  clearance  and 

proceed  as  per  C.U.I  Rules on the  matter.  In  view  of  the  same,  as 

the representation of the petitioner dated 03.03.2020, is  still pending, 

the  respondents  are  directed  to  consider  the  case  of  the  petitioner 

5 

"W.P No.1495 of 2020" 

sympathetically  and  decide  his  representation  on  humanitarian 

grounds.  Petitioner is  directed to  appear before respondent  No.3 on 

21.09.2020,  alongwith  a  certified  copy  of  this  judgment,  who  is 

directed  to  decide  the  representation  of  the  petitioner,  strictly  in 

accordance with  law, preferably within the  period of one  month after 

receipt of copy of this judgment,  under intimation to the office of this 

Court for perusal in  Chamber. 

In  view  of  the  above  direction,  this  petition  stands  disposed 

10. 

of. 

"\ih'Ulam  Azam Qam~ 
j 

Judge 

Announced  in  Open Court, on this  11th  day of September, 2020. 

"'- 

~dge 

S.Akhtar 

