JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

W.P. No. 2918 of 2016 

Maham Shabbir and another 

VS
Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad and others 

Petitioners By 

:  M/s  Muhammad  Munir  Paracha  and 

Nauman Munir Paracha, Advocates 

Respondents By 

: 

Sardar  Muhammad  Latif  Khan  Khosa, 
Sardar  Shahbaz  Ali  Khan  Khosa,  Malik 
Javed  Iqbal  Wains  and  Naz  Gul  Shah, 
Advocates 

Date of hearing 

: 

19.09.2017.   

AAMER FAROOQ, J. - 

Through the instant petition, under Article 

199 of the Constitution of Pakistan 1973, the petitioners seek setting-aside of the 

judgment dated 14.06.2016, passed by respondent No.1. 

 2. 

The  facts  leading  to  filing  of  the  instant  petition  are  that  petitioner 

No.1  contracted  marriage  with  respondent  No.3  on  01.05.2001.  Out  of  the 

wedlock,  two  children  were  born  i.e.  Riyana  Suleman  who  was  born  on 

09.04.2005  and  Ibrahim  Sulaman  born  on  12.01.2009.  Petitioner  No.  1  filed  a 

suit for dissolution of marriage and an ex-parte decree was passed in her favour 

on  19.05.2011.  Respondent  No.3  filed  a  petition  under  section  25  of  the 

Guardian  and  Wards  Acts,  1890  for  the  custody  of  minor  children.  Petitioner 

No.2,  who  is  maternal  grandmother  of  the  children,  was  not  impleaded  as  a 

party in the referred application. Petitioner No.1 filed reply to the application and 

contested  the  same.  Out  of  pleadings  of  the  parties,  following  issues  were 

framed:- 

1.  Whether the petitioner has cause of action? OPA 

2  What is the financial and social status of parties? OPA/OPR 

3.  With whom the welfare of the minors lies? OPA/ OPR 

4.  Relief. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2918 of 2016   

2 

The parties led their evidence in which respondent No. 3 filed his affidavit as Ex. 

A-1. On behalf of respondent No.3 Fasahat Jabeen also appeared  as a witness. 

Petitioner No.1 was the sole witness in support of her defence. The learned trial 

Court  dismissed  the  application  filed  by  respondent  No.3  vide  order  dated 

25.05.2015. Respondent No.3 filed an appeal before respondent No.1 which was 

allowed vide judgment dated 14.06.2016. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  inter  alia,  contended  that 

petitioner  No.2  was  a  proper  and  necessary  party  however,  she  was  not 

impleaded as such hence, has interest in the matter and can assail the impugned 

judgment.  Reliance  was  placed  on  case  reported  as  “Saleema  Bibi  VS  Sharif 

Hussain” (1979 Law Notes (Lahore) 344). It was further contended that the 

learned trial Court i.e. respondent No.2 has rightly dismissed the application filed 

by  respondent  No.  3  while  placing  reliance  on  case  reported  as  “Mst.  Farah 

Mehzan and others VS Safeer Hussain Jaffar and others” (2013 CLC 235). 

4. 

Learned counsel for respondent No.3, inter alia, contended that there 

is no misreading or non-reading of evidence and the impugned judgment is not 

perverse in any way, hence, there is no reason to interfere with the same. It was 

further contended that the judgment passed by respondent No.1 is based on the 

facts and circumstances of the case and does not suffer from any illegality; that 

the prime consideration, in passing of order for custody, is the welfare of minors, 

which respondent No.1 while passing the impugned judgment, has kept in view. 

In  support  of  his  contentions,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.  3  placed 

reliance  on  cases  reported  as  “Mrs.  Seema  Chaudhry  and  another  VS  Ahsan 

Ashraf Sheikh and others” (PLD 2003 SC 877),  “Shabana Naz VS Muhammad 

Saleem”  (2014  SCMR  343),    “Riasat  Mehmood  VS  Mst.  Nadia  Parveen  and 

another”  (2014  MLD  374),  “Mst.  Ammara  Waseem  VS  Syed  Khawar  Hussain 

and  another”  (2011  SCMR  148),  “Mst.  Ayisha  Bibi  VS  Safdar  Ali  Shah  and 

another”  (2005  CLC  894)  and  “Dr.  Ruqia  Shaukat  VS  Addl.  District  and 

Sessions Judge and others (2003 CLC 1310). 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2918 of 2016   

3 

5. 

The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  instant  petition  have  been 

mentioned  in  detail  hereinabove,  therefore,  need  not  be  reproduced.  The 

petitioners  are  aggrieved  of  awarding  custody  of  the  minor  children  Riyana 

Suleman  and  Ibrahim  Suleman  to  respondent  No.  3  by  respondent  No.1.    The 

thrust  of  the  arguments  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  was  that  in 

case,  the  mother  loses  her  right  of  Hizanat  on  second  marriage,  the  maternal 

grandmother  i.e.  Petitioner  No.2  is  the  appropriate  person  to  grant  custody  of 

the minor children. It was also contended that welfare of the minor is of prime 

consideration.  There  is  no  cavil  with  the  proposition  that  while  considering  the 

question  as  to  whom  the  custody  of  minor  children  of  the  estranged  and/  or 

divorced parents be given, the welfare of the minors is of prime consideration. In 

this  regard,  case  law  relied  by  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3  is 

instructive.  In  case  reported  as  “Mrs.  Seema  Chaudhry  and  another  VS  Ahsan 

Ashraf Sheikh and others” (PLD 2003 SC 877), where the divorced mother had 

contracted  second  marriage  and  had  given  birth  to  a  child  from  the  second 

marriage while the father had not married again, it was observed that welfare of 

the minors from the broken wedlock is of prime consideration. The august apex 

Court observed as follows:- 

“Notwithstanding the right of the mother or father for the custody 

of  male  or  female  child  under  the  personal  law,  the  predominant 

consideration in determining the question of custody of minor is always 

the welfare of the minor. High Court in the present case had given cogent 

reasons for not giving the custody of minor to the mother who having 

contracted second marriage had also given birth to a child from her second 

husband. The mere consideration of love and affection of the mother with 

the child would be conducive to the welfare of the minor to give him in the 

custody of stepfather in the presence of real father who admittedly had 

not gone for second marriage. The father having sufficient sources of 

income was well off. He was living in a posh area and was capable of 

maintaining  the  minor  in  better  manner  and  providing  him  proper 

education and thus he being real father of his minor and the natural 

guardian could not be deprived of the custody of his minor son of the age 

of more than 8 years on any other ground except the welfare of minor. The 

scanning of the facts pleaded by the parties would bring to the irresistible 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2918 of 2016   

4 

conclusion that it would not be in the interest and welfare of the minor to 

allow to the mother to keep the child in her custody in the house of his 

stepfather. 

Special feature of the case and the law on the subject would not 

suggest that welfare of minor would be in giving his custody to the mother 

and not to the father. Certainly the general rule that mother on contracting 

second marriage forfeits her rights of custody of child was not absolute 

and if the interest of child required that custody should be retained by the 

mother, the Court may, in the interest of the welfare of minor, allow the 

mother to retain the custody of minor but to determine the question of 

interest of minor, weight must be given to the circumstances to be 

considered for holding whether the welfare of minor would be in living 

with the mother or with the father. There was nothing on record to 

suggest  that  the  minor  in  the  present  case was  attached with  the 

stepfather or that it was in the welfare of minor to live with stepfather in 

preference to the real father. It is always the duty of the Court to search 

out the welfare of the minor by considering the essential factors relating 

to his welfare and should not confine only to the consideration that the 

mother or father has more love and affection for the minor or that the 

minor  is  more  associated  with  the  mother  or  father.  The  primary 

consideration  for  determining  the  question  of  custody  is  always the 

welfare of the minor and there could not be an absolute rule and fixed 

criteria to determine the question of welfare in the same manner in each 

case rather it being a mixed question of law and fact is decided in the facts 

of each case and consequently the factors having only social importance or 

the desirability of the father or mother to retain the custody of minor, 

would not overwrite the consideration of welfare in determining the 

question of custody. The economic and social status of the father would 

suggest that it was in the welfare of the child that he should be brought up 

in the house of his father and welfare of the minor would demand to give 

him in the custody of father and consequently no exception could be taken 

to the view of the High Court that the welfare of the minor would not 

permit to allow the mother to retain his custody. The High Court had not 

committed any illegality in determining the question of welfare of minor 

and the impugned judgment being not suffering from any legal infirmity 

would not call for interference of Supreme Court. However, while keeping 

in view the fact that minor constantly remained in the custody of mother 

since the separation of his parents and was studying in a school in the 

different area Supreme Court directed that during summer and winter 

vacations in the school, the minor shall spend the Sunday holiday once a 

fortnight, his birthday and Eid-ul-Fitr with his mother. In addition to the 

above arrangement the minor may visit to the home of his mother and also 

spend the casual holidays with her with the consent of father. The mother 

and father may with mutual understanding and consent make a proper 

arrangement of the meeting of the child with the mother at her residence. 

 
 
W.P. No. 2918 of 2016   

5 

The father shall not disturb the studies of the minor or shift him from the 

school without taking the mother into confidence.”   

Similarly,  in  “Shabana  Naz  VS  Muhammad  Saleem”  (2014  SCMR  343),  in  the 

circumstances similar to the instant case, it was observed as follow:-  

“It may be noted that in terms of section 7 of the Guardians and 

Wards Act, 1890 (the Act), the paramount consideration for the Court in 

making the order of appointment of guardian of minor is that it should be 

satisfied that it is for the welfare of minor. Although it is an established law 

that father is a natural guardian of his minor child/ children but indeed the 

Court has to be satisfied while appointing the father as a guardian that the 

welfare of minor lies in the fact that he be appointed as guardian and the 

custody of minor be delivered accordingly. There are many factors, which 

may not entitle the father to the custody of minor and some of the factors 

could be, where the father is habitually involved in crimes or is a drug or 

alcohol addict, maltreats his child/children, does not have a capacity or 

means to maintain and provide for the healthy bringing up of his child/ 

children or where the father deliberately omits and fails in meeting his 

obligation to maintain his child/children. The factors noted above are not 

exhaustive and they may also not be considered as conclusive for that each 

case has to be decided on its own merit in keeping with the only and only 

paramount consideration of welfare of minor…. 

Thus, it is apparent from reading of the two paras of the 

Muhammdan  Law  that  though  the mother  is  entitled  to  the  custody 

(Hizanat) of her minor child but such right discontinues when she takes 

second husband, who is not related to the child within the prohibited 

degree and is a stranger in which case the custody of minor child belongs to 

the father. It has been construed by the Courts in Pakistan that this may 

not  be  an  absolute  rule  but  it  may  be  departed  from,  if  there  are 

exceptional circumstances to justify such departure and in making of such 

departure the only fact, which the Court has to see where the welfare of 

minor lies and there may be a situation where despite second marriage of 

the mother, the welfare of minor may still lie in her custody.   

In  “Mst.  Ammara  Waseem  VS  Syed  Khawar  Hussain  and  another”  (2011  SCMR 

148),  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  followed  the  earlier  judgment  reported  as  PLD 

2003  SC  877  supra.  In  “Mst.  Nazir  VS  Hafiz  Ghulam  Mustafa,  etc”  (1981  SCMR 

200), the august apex Court observed that the custody of minor daughter cannot be 

given to the mother who has contracted second marriage after divorce as it amounts 

to placing the minors in custody of mother’s new husband. The Hon’ble Lahore High 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2918 of 2016   

6 

Court  in  cases  reported  as  (2014  MLD  374),  (2005  CLC  894)  and  (2003  CLC 

1310) followed the above mentioned view of the apex Court. 

6. 

In the instant case, petitioner No.1 has contracted second marriage and 

the minor daughter i.e. Riyana Suleman is almost reaching the age of puberty hence, 

under the circumstances and in view of the above pronouncements of the august apex 

Court, she loses her right of Hizanat. Even otherwise, respondent No.1, while allowing 

appeal of respondent No.3, has discussed the evidence led by the parties in detail and 

has rightly come to the conclusion that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the 

welfare  of  children  is  that  they  should  live  with  their  father  i.e.  respondent  No.3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  was  unable  to  point  out  any  misreading  or  non-

reading  of  evidence  on  part  of  the  appellate  Court.  Even  otherwise,  there  is  no 

illegality or jurisdictional error in the impugned judgment. Contentions on behalf of the 

learned counsel for the petitioners that Petitioner No. 2 is proper and necessary party 

where the mother i.e. Petitioner No.1 loses her right of Hizanat, is without substance 

inasmuch as where the father is capable of looking after the minors being their natural 

guardian, there is no justification or basis for handing over the custody of children to 

the maternal mother i.e. Petitioner No.2.  

7. 

For the foregoing reasons, the instant petition is devoid of merits and is 

accordingly dismissed.   

Announced in Open Court on____/10/2017. 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 

         JUDGE  

JUDGE 

M.Shah/. 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
