JUDGMENT  SHEET. 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P  No.1194/2012. 

Dr.  ljaz Hussain  Khawaja 

VS 

Federal  Government  Employees 
Housing  Foundation  etc. 

Petitioner by: 

Syed Wustal Hassan Shah, Advocate. 

Respondents No.1 & 2 by: 

Mr. Muhammad Nazir Jawad, Advocate. 

Respondents No.3 & 4: 

Ex-Parte. 

Date  of Decision: 

30.06.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI.  J:-Through  this writ petition, the petitioner 

has assailed the letter dated  15.03.2012 and prayed for issuance of directions 

to the respondents  to restore  allotment of Plot No.42,  Street No.152,  Sector 

G-13/4, Islamabad. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  the  petitioner  was 

civil servant, who retired  from service in the year 2001 in BPS-21, whereas 

his wife is lady doctor, who also retired from BPS-20; that the petitioner was 

allotted Plot  No.42,  Street No152,  Sector G-13/4, Islamabad  vide  allotment 

letter dated 21.03 .2002 by respondents No.1 & 2  after complete scrutiny and 

found  him  eligible  for· the  said  allotment  but  the  same  was  canceled  vide 

impugned  letter  dated  15.03.2012  in  violation  of  certain  criteria;  that  the 

petitioner  did not  conceal any fact nor given false affidavit qua allotment of 

previous plot  to  any of his  family member  as Plot No. 7,  Park Road,  Sector 

F-8/1,  Islamabad  was  purchased  by  his  wife  Razia  Ijaz  in joint  share  with 

Tariq  Mehmood,  which  was  transferred  in joint  names  vide  transfer  letter 

dated 07.08.1983 much prior to the scheme launched by respondents Nol  & 

2;  that  action  of the  respondents  authority  is  in  violation  of settled  law  as 

wife of the petitioner  is not allottee of the said plot in the said letter rather it 

W.P.  No.1194/2012. 

2 

was purchased  having  50% share, which has nothing to  do with the  scheme 

of respondents No.1 & 2. 

3. 

Learned counsel for respondents No.1 & 2  contends that the petitioner 

concealed  important  information  in  his  affidavit  while  applying  in  the 

scheme and  has  given  false  affidavit  of the  fact, whereby  he  has  answered 

particular  query  with  word  "No"  despite  the  knowledge  that  her  wife  is 

allottee  of  Plot  No.7,  Park  Road,  Sector  F-8/1,  Islamabad;  that  housing 

authority  (erstwhile  housing  foundation) is  competent  to  cancel  any plot  at 

any  stage  when  concealment  of  facts  comes  to  limelight;  that  the 

respondents  authority has rightly  exercised powers  in terms  of clause  10  of 

the provisional  offer letter and no legal justification  has been brought on the 

record by the petitioner as to why he concealed such material information. 

4. 

5. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal of the record reveals that the petitioner is ex-civil servant who 

retired from his  service in 2001 in BPS 21, whereas wife of the petitioner is 

also  retired  doctor  in  BPS-21.The  petitioner  applied  in  the  scheme  of 

respondents  No. l  &  2 in the year  1984 and in pursuance  of his application, 

he  was  allotted  Plot  No.42,  Street  No.152,  Sector  G-13/4,  Islamabad  vide 

allotment  letter  dated  21.03.2002, however,  during the  course  of scrutiny it 

was  found  that  wife  of the  petitioner  Razia  Ijaz  is  also  allottee  of  50% of 

share  in  Plot  No.7,  Park  Road,  Sector  F-8/1,  Islamabad  since  07.08.1983. 

The  allotment  of  the  petitioner  has  been  cancelled  through  impugned 

notification dated  15.03.2012. The reasons of cancellation/withdrawal  of the 

said allotment referred in the impugned letter are as under:- 

"You  being  an  employee  of  Pakistan  Computer  Bureau, 
applied  for  allotment  of  a  Category-I  plot  in  Phase-III 
Housing Scheme  under Serving quota  (77%). On the basis 
of  agewise  seniority  your  case  matured  for  allotment 

W.P. No.1194/2012. 

3 

therefore,  you  were  issued  provisional  offer  letter  on 
27.08.1999.and  subsequently on clearance of cost of land, 
final allotment letter was issued to him against Plot No.42, 
Street No.152, Sector G-1314,  Islamabad on 21.03.2002. 

2.  One  Mr.  Abid  Ali  submitted  a  complaint  against  you 
that you  by submitting  bogus and fake affidavit  concealed 
ownership  of Housing  No. 7-A,  Park  Road,  Sector  F-811, 
Islamabad.  In  order  to  ascertain  the factual  position,  a 
letter  was  referred  to  the  CDA for  verification.  The  CDA 
vide  its  letter  No.  CDA-EM-l-S-8(PR) 716613968  dated 
16.02.2012  duly  signed  by  Mr.  lnayatullah  Khan,  Estate 
Management  Officer-IL  (CDA) confirmed  that Plot  No. 7, 
Park  Road,  Sector  F-811, Islamabad  transferred  to  the 
joint  names  of Mr.  Tariq  Mehmood  S/O  Mr.  Sadiq  Ali 
and  Mrs.  Razla  Ejaz  WIO Ejaz  Hussain  Khawaja  vide 
authority  letter dated 07.08.1983. 

3.  It is pertinent  to mention here that you  while submitting 
application form for  allotment of plot  did not  mention any 
allotment  in your  or in your  spouse name. In support, you 
submitted  an  affidavit  duly  attested  by  Magistrate  I" 
class(copy  attached).  Through  it,  it  transpires  that  you 
deliberately  and  knowingly  submitted  wrong  information 
and submitted  bogus affidavit.  This is concealment  of fact. 
Whereas;  in  para-JO  of  Provisional  offer  letter,  it  was 
clearly  stipulated  that  if at  any  stage,  the  contents  of the 
documents submitted with application form  are found to be 
fictitious  or false  or any material facts found to have  been 
concealed/mis-stated  or  suppressed  deliberately  and 
knowingly,  the allotment shall be liable to cancellation. Jn 
addition,  the  amount  deposited  by you  shall  be forfeited 
and such  legal action as deemed appropriate shall also be 
taken. 

4.  In  view  of the  above,  the  concealment  of facts  stands 
established  upon  you  therefore,  the  Provisional  Offer 
Letter  of even  number  and  Final  Allotment  letter  of even 
number  against  Plot  No.42,  Street  No.152,  Sector  G-1314 
dated  27.08.1999  and  21.03.2002  respectively  may  be 
treated as cancelled/withdrawn. " 

6.  The  petitioner  has  taken  specific  stance  in  reply  to  the  above 

said cancellation/withdrawal  that his wife was never  applicant nor 

she was allotted the plot by CDA, DHA or Housing Foundation in 

any  manner  and  the  plot  purchased  by  his  wife  falls  within 

category  of allotment,  whereas  the  respondents  side has produced 

original  record  in  compliance  of order  of this  court,  whereby  the 

W.P.  No.1194/2012. 

4 

application  submitted  by  the  petitioner  has  been  confronted.  The 

application was submitted by the petitioner in the year  1984, which 

contains two questions and the same are reproduced as under:- 

"18(a)  Do  you  or  any  member  of  your 

family 
(wife/husband,  dependent  children  own(s)  any 
house/residential  plot  allotted  by  CDA,  Federal 
Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation, 
Defence Housing Authorities in Islamabad? 

-No- 

19(a)  Was  a  house/residential  plot  in  Islamabad  ever 
allotted  to  you  or  any  member  of  your  family 
(wife/husband, dependent  children)  by the  Capital 
Development  Authority, 
federal  Government 
Employees  Housing Foundation, Defence Housing 
Authorities. 

-ivo- 
AT 

" 

7. 

Similarly,  the  affidavit  submitted  by  the  petitioner  to  the  Housing 

Authority  also  contains  his  contention,  which  has  its  own  consequences  in 

case of concealment  of any fact or false information. In order to resolve the 

controversy,  I  have  gone  through  the  broacher,  which  contains  specific 

criteria for allotment in such type of matter, which is reproduced as under:- 

"First priority  shall  be given  to  those  applicants  who  or 
whose  spouse(s)  or  any  other  member  of  their families 
neither  own plot/house  in Islamabad  on  1.4.1996, nor any 
.  plot/house  was ever allotted  to them by the  CDA, Federal 
Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation,  Defence 
Housing  Authorities.  Each  applicant  shall  have  to submit 
an  affidavit  to  this  effect  duly  countersigned  by  a  First 
Class Magistrate. If at any stage,  contents  of the Affidavit 
are found  to  be fictitious  or false  or  any  material facts 
.  found  to  have  been  concealed/mis-stated  or  suppressed 
deliberately  and  knowingly, 
the  allotment  will  be 
cancelled.  Jn  addition,  the  amount  deposited  will  be 
forfeited  and such legal action as deemed appropriate  will 
also be taken. " 

8.  While  considering  the  above  background,  it  has  not  been  denied  by 

the  petitioner  that  her  wife  is not  allottee  of half  of Plot  No. 7,  Park  Road, 

W.P. No.1194/2012. 

5 

Sector F-8/1, Islamabad vide allotment letter dated 07.10.1983 and same has 

been found correct  by the CDA vide letter dated  16.02.2012. 

9. 

In  view  of  above  background,  this  Court  believes  that  eligibility 

criteria  for  allotment  clearly  spells  out  that  first  priority  shall  be  given  to 

those  applicants  who  or  whose  spouse(s)  or  any  other  member  of  their 

families  neither  own  plot/house  in  Islamabad  on  01.04.1996  nor  any 

plot/house  was  ever  allotted  to  them  by  the  CDA,  Federal  Government 

Employees  Housing  Foundation  as  such  the  petitioner  has  failed to justify 

his  contention  nor  able  to  demonstrate  from  the  record  that  his  case  falls 

within exception when his wife is allotee of Plot No.7, Park Road, Sector F- 

8/1,  Islamabad.  The  plea  taken  by  the  petitioner  that  the  said  plot  was 

purchased  by his  wife  does not mean that purchased  plot is exempted  from 

the eligibility criteria. In order to reach at just  conclusion, guidance has been 

sought  from  unreported 

judgment  of  Apex  Court  passed 

in  C.P 

No.159212012, titled  Ghulam  Mujtaba  Bhatti  VS  FGEHF  and  others,  in 

which it has been held that:- 

"In  our  view  the  key  question  in  the  matter  as  has  been 
dealt  with  and  highlighted  by  the  learned  High  Court  is 
·  whether the petitioner  has procured  the second plot  on the 
basis  of  concealment  of facts?  When  questioned  in  this 
behalf, learned counsel for the petitioner  has not been able 
to controvert that at the relevant point  the petitioner  would 
have  given  a  false  affidavit  by  concealing  the  earlier 
allotment. And  had he disclosed the fact of such allotment, 
the petitioner  was disentitled to the allotment of the plot  in 
question.  Undoubtedly, on  the  basis of above  glaring fact 
contemplating  misrepresentation  and fraud  on part  of the 
petitioner, 
the  High  Court  has  rightly  held  that  the 
cannot  be 
discretionary 
exercised  in  his favour,  enabling  him  to  retain  ill-gotten 
gain.  In  our  view  this  is  the  correct  exposition  of  law 
because  it  shall  be  like  awarding  a  premium  for  one's 
fraud;  and this is strictly impermissible under the law. 

constitutional 

jurisdiction 

4.  In  the  light  of above,  we  do  not find  any  merit  in  this 
petition,  which is accordingly dismissed. Leave refused. " 

W.P.  No.1194/2012. 

6 

10.  While  considering  the  above  legal  and  factual  aspects,  the  affidavit 

given  by  the  petitioner  as  well  as  answers  given  to  questions  No18-A  and 

19-A have  wrongly  been  answered  as  there  is  no  denial  that  wife  of  the 

petitioner  is  owner  of  Plot  No.7,  Park  Road,  Sector  F-8/1,  Islamabad, 

whether  she  purchased  the  same  or  otherwise,  it  is  in  her  name  when  the 

petitioner applied in the scheme as such he was not otherwise eligible to that 

plot if he answers the questions that her wife is already allotted with the plot. 

Even  otherwise  when  concealment  of fact  is  apparent  from the  record,  the 

Apex Court has taken  specific view, which cannot be changed by this Court 

and  it  has  binding  effect  in  terms  of  Article  189  of  the  Constitution  of 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  1973.  The  discretionary  relief  cannot  be 

achieved on the basis of concealment and even Apex Court has declared that 

ill-gotten gain cannot be given protection. 

11. 

In  view  of  above  discussion,  the  instant  writ  petitioner  bears  no 

merits, therefore, the same is hereby dismissed. 

R.Anjam 

(MOHSIN  ATffiT AR KAY Mil) 
JUDGE 

