ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl. Misc. No.161-B/2020 

CH.  MUHAMMAD  NAJEEB. 

VS

THE STATE  AND  ANOTHER. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr. Tauqeer  Hafeez Abbasi,  Advocate. 

Complainant  by: 

Ms. Huma  Jamil  Bahar,  Advocate. 

State  by: 

Mr. M. Shahbaz  Akhtar,  ASL 

Date  of Hearing: 

19.03.2020. 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ,  J: 

C.M. No. 86/2020. 

This 

is  an  application 

seeking  permission 

to  place  additional 

documents  on  record.  The  application 

is  allowed  subject  to  all just  and  legal 

exceptions. 

C.M. No. 87 /2020. 

Exemption 

sought 

for  is  allowed  subject 

to  all  just 

and 

legal 

exceptions. 

MAIN  CASE: 

Through 

instant  petition,  Petitioner  Ch.  Muhammad  Najeeb  s/ o 

Muhammad  Sharif,  seeks  post  arrest  bail  in  case  FIR  No.236/2019,  dated 

30.05.2019, 

for  offence  under 

section  489-F  PPC,  registered 

at  Police 

Station,  Koral, Islamabad. 

2. 

Prosecution's  case  against  the  Petitioner  is  that  FIR was  lodged  by the 

Complainant 

against 

the  accused/petitioner 

alleging 

therein 

that 

the 

accused/petitioner,  who  is  close  relative  of complainant  and  his  father  and 

has  business  affiliation  with  his  father  obtained  amount  of Rs.  10,000,000/  

(0ne  Crore) 

and  Rs.  14,500,000/- 

(One  Crore  Forty  Five  Lacs)  from 

Complainant 

and 

his 

father 

respectively, 

for 

investment  m 

the 

accused/petitioner's 

business.  On  28.03.2019,  accused/petitioner, 

in  lieu  of 

return  of  said  amount, 

issued  cheque  amounting 

to  Rs.  1000000/- 

(One 

2 

Crl.Miac.Ro.1ff...11/2020 

Crore) bearing  No. 072702840  to  the  Complainant  which  on  pre

was dishonored  due  to lack of funds  in accused/petitioner's  account.  Hence, 

criminal case  u/s  489-F was registered  against  the  accused/petitioner. 

3. 

The accused  /  petitioner  applied  for bail  after  arrest  before Judicial 

Magistrate  Sec. 30 (East), Islamabad  which was  dismissed,  vide order  dated 

27.01.2020,  whereas,  his  similar  request  was  also  declined  by the  learned 

Additional  Sessions 

Judge-III 

(East),  Islamabad,  vide  order  dated 

11.02.2020,  hence,  this  petition for bail after arrest. 

4. 

Learned  Counsel  for Petitioner,  inter-alia, argued  that  Complainant  in 

connivance  with  local police, in  pursuit  of malafide  intentions  and  ulterior 

motives got registered  the  instant  FIR which  is  false,  frivolous and  based 

upon  concocted  story. Learned  Counsel  contented  that  the  dispute  between 

the  parties  is of civil nature.  Learned Counsel  further  contended  that  case  of 

the  Petitioner  does  not  fall within  the  prohibitory  clause  of  Section  497 

Cr.P.C. He submitted  that  Petitioner is previously non-convict  and  belongs to 

a  respected  family, who is behind  the  bars  since  his  arrest.  Learned  counsel 

argued  that  the  investigation  in  the  case  is  complete  and  petitioner  is  no 

more  required  for further  investigation.  Learned  Counsel  lastly  contented 

that  Petitioner  is ready  to furnish  sufficient  surety  to the  satisfaction  of the 

Court and  will also join  the  investigation as  and  when required  by the  Police. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  Complainant, 

inter  alia,  contended 

that 

the 

accused  is  a  habitual  offender having  previous  history  of  involvement  in 

offences of similar  nature.  It  was  further  contended  that  challan  has  already 

been  submitted  and  the  trial  has  also been  commenced  which  is likely to be 

concluded  in  near  future,  therefore,  petitioner  is  not  entitled  to  bail  at  this 

stage.  Learned counsel  lastly contended  that  since,  the  accused  is a habitual 

offender and  trial  has  already  been  commenced,  therefore,  he  is not  entitled 

for concession  of bail. 

6. 

I  have heard  the  learned  Counsel for the  parties  and  have also perused 

the police record with their  able assistance. 

7. 

Record reveals  that  the  accused  is  behind  bars  since  his  arrest  on 

23.09.2019  and  the  Challan  has  already  been  submitted  before the  Court. 

As  regards  criminal  history  as  alleged  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Complainant  is concerned,  she was not  able to produce  any  material  relating 

to conviction of the  accused  petitioner  in any  case.  So far  as  registration  of 

other  cases  of similar  nature  against  an  accused  is concerned,  it  would not 

be  out  of place  to  observe  that  mere  registration  of other  criminal  cases 

against  accused,  without  conviction,  does  not  disentitle  him  from  the 

3 

Crl.Misc.No. l,l-B/2020 

concession  of  bail.  Moreover,  maximum  punishment 

provided  for  offence 

u/s  489-F 

is  up  to  03  years,  which  obviously  does  not  fall  within 

the 

prohibitory  clause  of  Section  497  Cr.· P.C:  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan 

through  different  authoritative  pronouncements, 

time  and  again 

held,  that  when  an  offence  does  not  fall  within  the  prohibitory  clause  of 

Section  497  Cr.P.C,  bail  is  a  rule  and  refusal  an  exception.  In  this  regard, 

guidance  has  been  sought  from  the  case  law  reported  as  Riaz  Jaffar  Natiq 

VS Muhammad  Nadeem  Dar  and  others  £2011  SCMR, Page  17081, 

Sikandar  Zaman  VS The State  etc.  (2011  SCMR, page  8701 and  Zafar 

Iqbal  VS Muhammad  Anwar  and  others  (2009  SCMR, page  14881.  In 

addition  to  above,  it  is  also  evident  from the  record  that  investigation  against 

the  accused/petitioner 

stands  concluded  and  he  is  not  required  for  further 

investigation,  whereas,  no  useful  purpose  would  be  served 

from  his 

incarceration. 

8. 

So  far  as  contention  of the  learned  Counsel  that  trial  has  commenced 

which  will  be  finalized  soon,  therefore,  bail  may  not  be  granted 

to  the 

Petitioner 

is  concerned, 

it  would  be  suffice  to  say  that 

it  is  settled 

law 

through  different  pronouncements  of the  superior  Courts  of the  country  that 

mere  commencement  of  trial  is  no  ground  to  refuse  bail  to  an  accused 

if 

otherwise  he  is  entitled 

to  this  concession.  Reference  in  this  regard  may 

usefully  be  made  to  the  case  law  reported  as  Muhammad  Umar  VS The 

State  and  another  (PLD 2004  SC 4771 and  Zumarad  Khan  VS The State 

and  another  (2017  YLR Note 1001. 

9. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  petition 

is  accepted  and 

Petitioner  is admitted  to post  arrest  bail,  subject  to  his  furnishing  bail  bonds 

in  the  sum  of Rs. 3,00,000/-  (Rupees Three Lac) with  one  surety  in  the  like 

amount  to the  satisfaction  oflearned  Trial  Court. 

10.  All  the  observations  made  hereinabove  are  tentative 

in  nature  and 

shall  have  no  bearing  on  the  final  determination  of guilt  or  innocence  of the 

petitioner  by the  trial  Court. 

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

