ORDER SHEET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

       IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 

               JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

CRL.MISC. NO.817 /2019 

Muhammad Shoaib Malik   VS    The State etc 

Serial No. of 
order/ 
proceeding. 

Date of order/ 
proceedings 

      03 

13.01.2020 

Order with signatures of judge, and that of parties or 
counsel, where necessary. 

Mr. Waqar Hanif Abbasi, Advocate for petitioner. 
Nemo for the complainant. 
Malik  Mazhar  Javed,,  State  counsel  with  Muhammad 
Farooq  SI  P.S  Shahzad  Town  &  Mehdi  Khan  ASI,  P.S 
Industrial Area, Islamabad. 

GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI, J 

The  petitioner  [Muhammad  Shoaib  Malik]  seeks  post 

arrest bail in case FIR No. 01/2019, dated 02.1.2019, under 

section 365-B/34 PPC, registered at Police Station Shahzad 

Town, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  complainant 

[Syed  Afzaal  Hussain  Shah]  lodged  a  complainant  against 

the petitioner and his mother stating therein that they have 

abducted  the  sister  of  the  complainant  namely  Sumaira 

Batool. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the 

petitioner is innocent and has been falsely implicated in the 

instant  case;  that  the  petitioner  has  no  concern  with  the 

commission  of  the  alleged  offence;  that  FIR  is  based  on 

malafide and has been involved in the case on the basis of 

personal  grudge  and  that  the  case  of  petitioner  is  one  of 

further inquiry and probe. 

4. 

On the other hand, learned state counsel vehemently 

opposed  the  grant  of  bail  to  the  petitioner  by  contending 

that sufficient material is available on the record to connect 

the petitioner with the commission of the alleged offence. 

5. 

Complainant  put  appearance  on  the  last  date  of 

hearing i.e 07.1.2020 and sought time to engage services of 

a  counsel.  Today  neither  complainant  nor  his  counsel  nor 

any intimation has been received on his behalf. Therefore,  

this  Court    is  left  with  no  other  option,  but  to  decide  the 

case after hearing learned counsel for the petitioner, learned 

State counsel and by perusing the record.   

 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2 

CR.MISC. NO.817 /2019 

6. 

7. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Briefly, the instant case has been registered against 

the  petitioner,  his  mother  and  two  un-known  persons 

stating  therein  that  on  30.12.2018  at  about  10.00  AM,  his 

sister was abducted by the petitioner and his mother namely 

Fozia  Shahid  and  they  also  took  away  10-tolas  gold 

ornaments and an amount of Rs 1,00,000/- cash. 

8. 

Tentative  assessment  of  the  record  shows  that 

petitioner 

is  behind 

the  bar  since  13.2.2019, 

the 

investigation  of  the  case  is  complete,  report  under  section 

173  Cr.P.C  has  been  submitted  in  the  Trial  Court.  No 

useful  purpose  would  be  served  to  keep  the  petitioner 

behind  the  bar  for  an  indefinite  period.  It  is  common 

practice  in  our  society  that  parents  of  the  girl  involve  the 

boy and his family members in the abduction case of their 

daughter  due  to  grudge  that  their  daughter  had  contracted 

love marriage without their consent.  

9. 

On 13.2.2019, the couple was arrested by the police 

and  on  the  very  day  she  got  recorded  her  statement  under 

section 161 Cr.P.C wherein she clearly stated that she had 

contracted  marriage  with  Muhammad  Shoaib  Malik  at  her 

own and that she had not been abducted. She further stated 

that no one abducted her and her brother had lodged a false, 

baseless  and  a  concocted  case  against  the  petitioner  and 

others.  Thereafter,  the  police  of  Police  Station  Charsadda 

produced 

the  alleged  abductee  before 

the  Judicial 

Magistrate,  Charsadda  wherein  she  also  got  recorded  her 

statement, which is placed on record, that she had not been 

abducted  which  makes  the  case  of  the  petitioner  one  of 

further inquiry.  

10. 

In  the  backdrop  of  the  above  narrated  facts  and 

circumstances,  it  seems  that  a  matrimonial  issue  is  being 

transformed  into  a  criminal  case  by  the  complainant  to 

satisfy  his  vengeance.  The  question  whether 

the 

abductee/victim  has  actually  been  abducted  by 

the 

petitioner  or  she  has  herself  left  the  house  of  her  parents 

and  contracted  marriage  with  the  petitioner,  shall  be 

determined  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  after  recording  of 

evidence.  

 
 
3 

CR.MISC. NO.817 /2019 

11. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  case  of 

petitioner  prima  facie,  becomes  that  of  further  inquiry 

covered  by  subsection  (2)  of  section  497  Cr.P.C.  This 

petition is allowed  and petitioner is admitted to post arrest 

bail  subject  to  furnishing  bail  bonds  in  the  sum  of             

Rs 2,00,000/- (Two lac) with one surety in the like amount 

to the satisfaction of learned Trial Court. 

12. 

The observations made above are tentative in nature 

and are strictly confined to the decision of this bail petition 

only. 

S.Akhtar 

(GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI) 

      JUDGE 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
