ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

C.R.No.455/D/2010 
Hafiz Muhammad Saeed 

VS         

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 

Mst. Gulzar Begum and another 
04.03.2019 & 09.05.2019 
Syed Asghar Hussain Sabzwari and  
Sheikh Khizar-ur-Rasheed, Advocates 
Ch. Imran Hassan Ali, Advocate 

Respondents by: 
________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB, J:- Through this judgment, 

I propose to decide civil revision petitions No.455-D/2010 and 456-

D/2010, since they entail common questions of law and fact. 

2. 

 During the pendency of the said petitions, Mst. Gulzar Begum 

who  was  respondent  No.1  in  the  said  petitions,  passed  away.  An 

application for impleadment of her legal heirs as respondents was 

filed on 27.10.2014. Notices were issued to her legal heirs through 

publication  in  the  newspapers  "Daily  Dawn"  and  "Daily  Jang"  of 

05.05.2016 whereafter, vide order dated 17.05.2016, her legal heirs 

other than her son Mansif Majeed were proceeded against ex-parte. 

In this judgment, Mst. Gulzar Begum (deceased) shall be referred to 

as "respondent No.1".   

3. 

Hafiz Muhammad  Saeed,  the  petitioner  in  the said  petitions, 

impugns the consolidated judgment and decree dated 11.03.2010, 

passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 

Islamabad, whereby (i) civil appeal No.139/2009 filed by respondent 

No.1  (Mst.  Gulzar  Begum)  and  respondent  No.2  (Munsif  Majeed) 

against  the  consolidated  judgment  and  decree  dated  05.07.2001, 

passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad,  was 

allowed and the suit for declaration and permanent injunction filed 

by respondent No.1, was decreed, and the suit for possession and 

mesne profits filed by the petitioner against respondents No.1 and 

2, was dismissed, and (ii) cross objections No.138/2009 filed by the 

petitioner  against  the  said  consolidated  judgment  and  decree 

passed by the learned Civil Court, were dismissed. 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

4. 

Vide  the  said  consolidated  judgment  and  decree  dated 

05.07.2001,  the  learned  Civil  Court  had  dismissed  respondent 

No.1’s suit for declaration and permanent injunction, and decreed 

the petitioner’s suit for possession and recovery of mesne profits. 

The petitioner and respondent No.1 were married.  

5. 

The facts essential for the disposal of these petitions are that 

on  07.09.1995,  respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  against  the  petitioner 

praying  for  a  declaration  to  the  effect  that  she  is  the  owner-in-

possession  of  House  No.1049,  Street  No.109,  Sector  G-9/4, 

Islamabad  (“the  suit  house”),  having  purchased  the  same  for 

valuable  consideration  from  one  Shaukat  Iqbal  through  his 

attorney,  Muhammad  Imtiaz.  Respondent  No.1  had  asserted  that 

the suit house had been transferred in her favour in the records of 

the  Capital  Development  Authority  (“C.D.A.”)  vide  transfer  letter 

No.CDA/EM/G-9/4/1049/71  dated  May,  1985,  and 

that 

its 

subsequent transfer to the petitioner was illegal, void ab-initio and 

ineffective upon her proprietary and possessory rights over the suit 

house. Furthermore, respondent No.1 had also sought the relief of 

permanent injunction restraining the petitioner from interfering in 

respondent No.1’s possession over the suit house. 

6. 

Respondent No.1’s case, in her civil suit, was that she was the 

owner-in-possession  of  the  suit  house;  that  in  the  year  1986,  the 

petitioner  advised  respondent  No.1  to  submit  an  application  for 

exemption  from  payment  of  property  tax  with  respect  to  the  suit 

house on the ground that the same was in self-occupation; that for 

the said purpose, the petitioner made respondent No.1 sign a few 

papers;  that  respondent  No.1  being  a pardanashin  illiterate  lady 

and  having  blind  faith  in  the  petitioner,  signed  the  papers;  that 

disputes  and  differences  arose  between  the  petitioner  and 

respondent No.1, because the former wanted to contract a second 

marriage  and  for  this  purpose,  he  wanted  respondent  No.1’s 

permission;  that  on  respondent  No.1’s  refusal  to  grant  the 

petitioner  permission  for  a  second  marriage,  he  threatened  to 

divorce her and oust her from the suit house; that the petitioner had 

also disclosed that the suit house had been transferred in his name; 

 
 
 
 
 
3 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

and that since the petitioner refused to transfer the suit house back 

in respondent No.1’s name, she filed the said suit against him.  

7. 

On 22.12.1996, the petitioner filed a suit for possession and 

recovery  of mesne profits against respondents No.1 and 2. In the 

said suit, the position taken by the petitioner was that the suit house 

had  been  purchased  by  the  petitioner  with  his  own  funds;  that 

respondent No.1 was merely an ostensible owner of the suit house; 

that in recognition of the fact that the petitioner was the real owner 

of the suit house, respondent No.1, on 07.09.1986, transferred the 

suit  house  to  the  petitioner;  that  since  respondent  No.1  was  the 

mother  of  the  petitioner’s  children,  she  was  allowed  to  live  in  the 

suit house; that respondents No.1 and 2 were merely in permissive 

occupation of the suit house; that after respondent No.1 instituted 

a  suit  against  the  petitioner,  he  revoked  the  permission  given  to 

respondents No.1 and 2 to live in the suit house; that respondents 

No.1  and  2  were  liable  to  vacate  the  suit  house  and  handover  its 

vacant possession to the petitioner; and that the petitioner was also 

entitled to be compensated for being denied possession of the suit 

house. 

8. 

The  above-mentioned  suits  were  consolidated.  The  learned 

Civil Court, on 03.06.1997, framed the following issues:- 

“1.  Whether  the  plaintiff  Mst.  Gulzar  Begum  is  owner  in 

possession of suit house? OPP 

2.  Whether the transfer in favour of defendant is without 

consideration, forged, illegal and ineffective? OPP 

3.  Whether the suit is not maintainable in its present form? OPD 
4.  Whether the plaintiff has not come to the court with clean 

hands? OPD 

5.  Whether the suit is time barred? OPD 
6.  Whether the plaintiff is estopped by her words and conduct 

to file the present suit? OPD 

7.  Whether the suit is false, frivolous and vexatious, if so, its 

effect? OPD 

8.  Whether the plaintiff Mst. Gulzar Begum was benami owner 

of the suit property? OPD 

9.  Whether Hafiz Muhammad Saeed is entitled to recover 
mesne profit at the rate of Rs.5,000/- p.m., if so, for what 
period? OPD 

9-A.  Whether the plaintiff Hafiz Muhammad Saeed is entitled to 

the possession of the suit property?  

9-B.  Whether suit titled Muhammad Saeed has been correctly 
valued for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction? 
9-C.  Whether the suit titled Saeed VSGulzar Begum is false, 
frivolous and vexatious and the defendant is entitled to 
special costs u/s 35-A CPC? OPD 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

10.  Relief.” 

9. 

Respondent  No.1  gave  evidence  as  PW-1  whereas  Abdul 

Majeed  gave  evidence  as  PW-2.  The  petitioner  gave  evidence  as 

DW-4;  the  Assistant  Management  Officer  of  C.D.A.  as  DW-1;  Haji 

Abdul  Rauf  as  DW-2;  and  Muhammad  Imtiaz  as  DW-3.  After  the 

recording  of  evidence,  the  learned  Civil  Court,  vide  consolidated 

judgment and decree dated 05.07.2001 decreed the suit instituted 

by  the  petitioner  and  dismissed  the  one  instituted  by  respondent 

No.1.  However,  the  petitioner’s  prayer  for  the  recovery  of mesne 

profits was turned down.  

10.  Against  the  said  judgment  and  decree,  respondent  No.1 

preferred an appeal, whereas the petitioner filed cross objections. 

Vide  consolidated  judgment  and  decree  dated  11.03.2010,  the 

learned  Appellate  Court  allowed  respondent  No.1’s  appeal  and 

consequently  decreed  her  suit  for  declaration  and  permanent 

injunction.  Furthermore,  the  petitioner’s  suit  was  dismissed.  The 

said judgment and decree has been assailed by the petitioner in the 

civil revision petitions under disposal. 

11.  Syed  Asghar  Hussain  Sabzwari  and  Sheikh  Khizar-ur- 

Rasheed,  Advocates,  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  after 

narrating the facts leading to the filing of the instant petitions, made 

submissions in reiteration of the pleadings in  the petitioner’s  civil 

suit.  Furthermore,  it  was  submitted  that  the  suit  house  was 

purchased by the petitioner but since the petitioner had to proceed 

abroad, 

it  was  transferred 

in  respondent  No.1’s  name  on 

13.05.1985;  that subsequently, on 07.09.1986, the suit house was 

transferred  on  respondent  No.1’s  insistence  in  favour  of  the 

petitioner;  that  after  the  relations  between  the  petitioner  and 

respondent  No.1  turned  sour,  the  former  divorced  the  latter  on 

08.12.1994; that the version put forth by respondent No.1 that she 

was not divorced by the petitioner or that the petitioner wanted to 

marry again was not correct; that the petitioner was the real owner 

of  the  suit  house,  whereas  respondent  No.1  was  simply  a 

benamidar prior to the transfer of the suit house to the petitioner; 

that respondent No.1 did not have the means to purchase the suit 

house;  that  on  07.09.1986,  the  suit  house  was  transferred  by 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

respondent No.1 on her own accord in the petitioner’s name;  and 

that the learned Appellate Court violated the requirements of Order 

LXI, Rule 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“C.P.C.”) by not 

setting out points of determination in giving a decision thereon. 

12.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  further  submitted  that 

payment for the suit house was made from the joint account held by 

the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.1;  that  the  learned  Appellate 

Court erred by not appreciating that respondent No.1 had deposed, 

in her cross-examination, that she had not deposited any amount in 

the  said  joint  account;  that  respondent  No.1  did  not  bring  any 

evidence on the record to show that she had an independent source 

of  income;  that  the  petitioner  had  been  working  abroad  and  had 

sufficient  resources  for  the  purchase  of  the  suit  house;  that  the 

mere fact that respondent No.1 had a joint bank account with the 

petitioner does not mean that respondent No.1 had contributed in 

the  payment  of  sale  consideration  for  the  suit  house;  that  the 

petitioner had not been cross-examined about the cash payment of 

Rs.1,30,000/- and Rs.20,000/- made by him for the purchase of the 

suit house;  that  respondent No.1 was unable  to establish that the 

transfer  of  the  suit  house  by  respondent  No.1  in  favour  of  the 

petitioner on 07.09.1986 was fraudulent; and that the judgment and 

decree  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  is  well  reasoned  and 

therefore  liable  to  be restored  whereas  the  judgment  and  decree 

passed  by  the  learned  Appellate  Court  is  liable  to  be  set-aside. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  prayed  for  the  civil  revision 

petitions to be allowed and for the impugned judgment and decree 

passed  by  the  learned  Appellate Court  to  be set-aside.  In  making 

their  submissions,  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  placed 

reliance  on  the  judgments  in  the  cases  of  Muhammad  Zaman  VS 

Sheikh  Abdul  Hamid  (2002  CLC  1209),  Muhammad  Bakhsh  and  4 

others  VS  Province  of  Punjab  through  District  Collector,  Multan 

(now  Lodhran)  and  2  others  (1994  SCMR  1836),  Brig.  (R)  Sher 

Afghan VS Mst. Sheeren Tahira and 6 others (2010 SCMR 786) and 

Mst. Naziran Begum through Legal Heirs VS Mst. Khurshid Begum 

through Legal Heirs (1999 SCMR 1171). 

 
 
 
 
 
6 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

13.  On  the  other  hand,  Ch.  Imran  Hassan,  Advocate,  learned 

counsel for respondent No.2, also made submissions in reiteration 

of the pleadings in respondent No.1’s civil suit. He further submitted 

that  the  petitioner  had  not  been  able  to  satisfy  the  essential 

ingredients for showing that the transaction for the purchase of the 

suit  house  in  respondent  No.1's  name  was  a benami  transaction; 

that  at  all  material  times,  respondent  No.1  has  remained  in 

possession of the suit house; that had respondent No.1 not been in 

possession of the suit house, the petitioner would not have filed a 

suit for possession against respondent No.1; that the petitioner did 

not discharge the onus that the entire sale consideration for the suit 

house was paid by him; that respondent No.1 had deposed that the 

suit house was purchased with the remittances sent by her son, Asif 

Hameed;  that in the sale agreement dated 13.05.1985 (Exh.P/2), it 

is  clearly  mentioned  that  the  sale  consideration  was  paid  by 

respondent  No.1;  that  Articles  102  and  103  of  the  Qanun-e-

Shahadat Order, 1984  provide that no oral evidence is admissible 

to  contradict  a  disposition  of  property  reduced  to  the  form  of 

writing; and that the original transfer letter issued by the C.D.A. is 

in possession of respondent No.1.  

14.  Furthermore,  learned  counsel  submitted  that  respondent 

No.1 was a pardanashin illiterate lady; that the application (Exh.D/1) 

for  the  transfer  of  the  suit  house  in  the  petitioner’s  favour  was  in 

English; that the petitioner, being the beneficiary of the transaction, 

had not discharged the onus of proving that respondent No.1 had 

understood  the  nature  of  the  transaction;  that  there  were 

discrepancies  as  to  dates  on  the  transfer  application;  that  the 

certificate of identification does not show the name of any witness 

who  had  identified  respondent  No.1;  that  although  the  transfer 

application  shows  that  respondent  No.1  had  received  the  entire 

amount from the petitioner, it is not the petitioner’s case that he had 

purchased  the  suit  house  from  respondent  No.1;  that  the  alleged 

transaction between the petitioner and respondent No.1 was not a 

sale  since  no  sale  consideration  was  paid  by  the  petitioner  to 

respondent  No.1;  that  the alleged  transaction was  not  even  a gift 

since there was no declaration of a gift and transfer of possession 

 
 
 
 
 
7 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

in  the  petitioner’s  favour;  that  possession  of  the  suit  house 

remained with respondent No.1 until her death and after her death 

with  her  son  Munsif  Majeed;  that  even  if  it  is  assumed  that 

respondent  No.1  got  knowledge  of  the  suit  house  having  been 

transferred in the petitioner’s favour four to five years earlier, the 

suit filed by respondent No.1 on 07.09.1995 was within the limitation 

period provided by law;  that  respondent No.1’s deposition, which 

she was trapped into giving, cannot be used against her;  that  the 

mere fact that the learned Appellate Court used flowery language 

in the judgment does not mean that it is not in accordance with the 

law  and  facts  of  the  case.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2 

prayed  for  the  revision  petitions  to  be  dismissed.  In  making  his 

submissions,  learned  counsel  placed  reliance  on  the  cases  of 

Yaqoob  etc  VS  Nazir  Ahmed  Khan  etc  (PLD  2008  Lahore  233), 

Sarbaland etc VS Ghulam Fatima etc (1996 MLD 948), Mst. Izzat VS 

Allah Ditta (1981 PLD 165 SC), Khushi Muhammad VS Mst. Zainab 

Bibi (1981 SCMR 814), Mst. Fazal Begum VS Municipal Corporation 

Lahore  (1983  CLC  1643),  Umar  Din  VS  Muhammad  Anwar  (2003 

YLR  67),  Ghulam  Murtaza  VS  Mst.  Asia  Bibi  (PLD  2010  SC  569), 

Muhammad  Nawaz  Minhas  VS  Mst.  Surriya  Sabir  Minhas  (2009 

SCMR 124), Ch. Ghulam Rasool VS Mst. Nusrat Rasool (PLD 2008 

SC 146), Muhammad Arif VS Haji Waheed ul Haq (2017 YLR 224), 

Muhammad  Afzal  VS  Muhammad  Zaman  (PLD  2012  Lahore  125), 

Shehnaz Bibi VS Muhammad Ikhlaq Khan (PLJ 1996 Lahore 1472), 

Abdur Rehman VS Mst. Majeedan Bibi (2017 SCMR 1110), Phul Peer 

Shah VS Hafeez Fatima (2016 SCMR 1225), Ghulam Farid VS Sher 

Rehman (2016 SCMR 862), Muhammad Nazir VS Khurshid Begum 

(2005 SCMR 941) and  Khanas Khan VS Sabir Hussain Shah (2004 

SCMR 1259).  

15. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties,  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. 

16.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petitions  have 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs No.5 to 10 above, and 

need not be recapitulated. 

 
 
 
 
 
8 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

17.  The suit house was originally owned by one Shaukat Iqbal.  On 

13.05.1985, an agreement to sell/iqrarnama (Exh.P/2) was executed 

between  Shaukat  Iqbal’s  attorney,  Muhammad  Imtiaz  (DW-3)  and 

respondent No.1, whereby the former agreed to sell the suit house 

to the latter for a total sale consideration of Rs.4,58,000/. In the said 

agreement,  the  receipt  of  the  entire  sale  consideration  from 

respondent No.1 has been acknowledged. 

18.  On  21.08.1986,  an  application  for  the  transfer  of  the  suit 

house in favour of the petitioner is said to have been submitted by 

respondent No.1 to the C.D.A. Although the transfer letter is not on 

the  record,  it  is  an  admitted  position  that  the  suit  house  was 

transferred  in  the  petitioner’s  favour  in  the  C.D.A.’s  records  on 

07.09.1986.  There 

is  a  deposition  to  this  effect 

in  DW-3's 

examination-in-chief. It is also an admitted position that ever since 

the  purchase  of  the  suit  house  on  13.05.1985,  it  has  remained  in 

respondent  No.1’s  possession.  After  respondent  No.1’s  demise, 

her son, Munsif Majeed/respondent No.2, has been in possession of 

the suit house.  

19.  The question whether the transaction for the purchase of the 

suit  house  by  respondent  No.1  from  Shaukat  Iqbal,  through  his 

attorney Muhammad Imtiaz, was a benami transaction, in my view, 

would gain significance only in the event this Court holds that the 

transfer of the suit house in favour of the petitioner was unlawful.  

20.  The  foundation  set  up  by  respondent  No.1,  in  her  suit  for 

declaration etc., for challenging the transfer of the suit house in the 

petitioner’s favour, was as follows:- 

“2.    That the defendant in the year 1986 very cleverly advised 
plaintiff to submit an application for exemption from payment of 
property tax being self occupation and in continuation of that 
pretext required to sign few papers from the plaintiff which the 
plaintiff being an un-educated and illiterate Asian woman having 
blind faith on her husband innocently signed the same because 
such an artifice deception based on foolish mischief and forgery 
had never been expected on the part of the defendant at that time, 
which had occasioned with the plaintiff as such the alleged transfer 
of the suit house in the name of the defendant which remained 
concealed till disclosed recently, is illegal and based on artifice 
deception and forgery, hence void, abinitio, and ineffective on the 
rights and interests of the plaintiff and is liable to be annulled under 
the prevailing circumstances.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

21.  Respondent No.1 appeared as PW-1, and in her examination-

in-chief,  she  deposed  inter-alia  that  she  had  neither  appeared 

before any department nor had she affixed her thumb impression or 

put her signature on any document and that the suit house had been 

fraudulently transferred from respondent No.1’s name in favour of 

the petitioner.  

22.  Sarfraz  Ali,  the  Assistant  Management  Officer,  C.D.A., 

appeared as DW-1 and admitted that the application form (Exh.D/1) 

had been submitted for the transfer of the suit house in favour of the 

petitioner.  The  said  application  form  bears  respondent  No.1’s 

signatures at two places. DW-1 also admitted that Exh.D/2 bears six 

specimen  signatures  of  respondent  No.1,  which  was  a  part  of 

C.D.A.'s  record.  These  signatures  were  attested  by  one  Javed 

Qadeer  Qureshi,  Assistant  Director,  National  Training  Bureau, 

Manpower  Division,  Government  of  Pakistan.  No  objection  was 

taken on behalf of respondent No.1 when the said documents were 

exhibited.  Respondent  No.1’s  plea  that  she  had  not  appeared 

before  any  department  and  had  not  signed  any  document  is  not 

plausible in view of the fact that at no material stage, did she file an 

application  for  her  signatures  on  Exh.D/1  and  Exh.D/2,  to  be 

forensically examined by a handwriting expert. 

23.  Respondent  No.1  had  challenged  the  transfer  of  the  suit 

house in the petitioner’s favour primarily by taking the plea in her 

suit  that  she  was  a  pardanashin  illiterate  lady  and  did  not 

appreciate the nature of the transaction which she had been made 

to  execute  through  fraud  and  deception  at  the  hands  of  her 

husband, i.e., the petitioner. Although respondent No.1, in her suit 

for  declaration  etc.,  pleaded  that  she  was  an  “uneducated and 

illiterate Asian woman” but while giving evidence as DW-1, she did 

not depose that she was a pardanashin illiterate lady. Respondent 

No.1’s bare pleading to the said effect unsupported by any ocular 

testimony  cannot  form  the  basis  for  shifting  the  burden  on  the 

petitioner  to  prove  the  transaction  as  to  the  transfer  of  the  suit 

house in his favour was not fraudulent. Since respondent No.1 had 

not  deposed  that  she  was  a  pardanashin  illiterate  lady,  the 

 
 
 
 
 
10 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

petitioner  did  not feel  the  need  to  put  her  any  question regarding 

this matter in the cross-examination.  

24.  The learned Appellate Court in paragraph 14 of the impugned 

judgment  has  erred  by  holding  that “being a Muslim, [respondent 

No.1] is supposed to be a pardanashin lady and the onus would be 

on [the petitioner] to give strongest and most satisfactory proof that 

she  understood  the  transaction”.  This 

finding 

is  a  clear 

consequence of misreading and non-reading of evidence. Had the 

learned  Appellate  Court  gone 

through  respondent  No.1’s 

testimony,  it  would  have  been  noticed  that  she  had  not  even 

deposed that she was an illiterate pardanashin lady. Even if every 

Muslim lady is presumed to be a pardanashin lady, in the absence 

of evidence to the effect that respondent No.1 was an illiterate lady 

not capable of understanding the transaction that she had entered 

into for  the transfer of the suit property in the petitioner’s favour, 

the  principles  governing  the  transactions  entered 

into  by 

pardanashin  illiterate ladies  will  hardly  be  attracted  in  the  instant 

case. In the case of Mst. Sadia Andaleeb VS Mst. Farzana Zia etc 

(PLJ 2019 Islamabad 22),  I had the occasion to hold as follows:- 

“27. … In Pakistan, pardanashin illiterate ladies are given special 
protection due to the social conditions. They are presumed to have 
an imperfect knowledge of the world, as on account of their parda 
they  are  practically  excluded  from  social  intercourse  and 
communion with the outside world. Where a transaction is entered 
into with an illiterate pardanashin lady, the burden of proof always 
rests upon the person who seeks to sustain the transaction to 
establish that the document in question was executed by her after 
clearly understanding the nature of the transaction. This burden 
can be discharged not only by proving that the document was read 
over and explained to her and that she understood it but also by 
proving that she was given independent advice as to the nature of 
the transaction. 

28.  It is also well settled that the protection given by the rule 
relating to pardanashin ladies cannot be the exclusive privilege of 
the class commonly known as pardanashin. The real reason behind 
the rule is lack of understanding and appreciation that an illiterate 
woman without independent advice has when entering into a 
transaction. Where ignorance, capability and illiteracy of a woman 
are not proved, protection under the rule will not be available, 
whether or not the lady is pardanashin.” 
(Emphasis added)  

In holding so, reliance was placed on the following case law:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

(i) 

In the case of Irshad Hussain VS Ijaz Hussain (PLD 1994 SC 

326), it has been held as follows:- 

 “Whether a lady is a pardanashin is a question of fact. The 
burden of proof that any document purported to have been 
executed by a pardanashin lady affecting her right in an 
immovable property was substantially understood by the 
lady and was her voluntary, intelligent, free and conscious 
act, is upon the person chiming any right under such deed. 
This rule has been extended to illiterate ignorant lady 
whether she is pardanashin or not. This rule of wisdom and 
caution  thrown  round  the  pardanashin,  illiterate  and 
ignorant women is to protect them from exploitation, duress, 
fraud and misrepresentation. From all the judgments cited 
and discussed in the referred judgments it is clear that the 
cases involved pardanashin or illiterate and ignorant ladies. 
But  where  the  lady  involved  is  an  educated  lady  not 
observing parda capable of understanding transactions and 
has executed the deed on full and proper understanding of 
its  implications,  the  principle  governing  pardanashin, 
ignorant and illiterate women will hardly be attracted.” 
(Emphasis added)  

(ii) 

In the case of Muhammad Tufail VS Muhammad Aslam Khan 

(1999  YLR  934),  the  petitioners/plaintiffs  had  challenged  a 

part  of  a  sale  transaction  on  the  ground  that  they  were 

pardanashin ladies  to  whom  the  contents  of  the  registered 

sale  deed  had  not  been  read  over  and  explained. 

Furthermore,  it  was  asserted  that  additional  land  had  been 

included  in  the  sale  deed  on  the  basis  of  fraud.  In  the  said 

case, the petitioners/plaintiffs had admitted the execution of 

the  sale  deed.  The  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  upheld  the 

concurrent  judgments  of  the  Courts  below,  whereby  the 

petitioners/plaintiffs  had  been  non-suited.  It  was  held  that 

“fraud is not only to be alleged specifically in the pleadings 

but also to be proved by convincing evidence beyond any 

shadow of doubt.”  Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  “the mere 

allegation that the petitioners/plaintiffs did not read the 

contents of the documents before signing does not mean that 

fraud had been practiced upon them.”    Additionally,  it  was 

held  that  since  it  was  not  proved  on  the  record  that  the 

petitioners/plaintiffs  were 

illiterate  and  simpletons,  the 

presumption would be that they were aware of the contents of 

the  sale  deed  and  had  put  their  signatures  being  well 

conversant with the same.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  National  Bank  of  Pakistan  VS  Mst.  Hajra  Bai 

(PLD 1985 Karachi 431), it was held as follows:- 

“In fact the protective cloak is available to pardanashin lady 
more because of lack of understanding and appreciation on 
her part than for merely observing parda. It is quite possible 
that a woman belonging to a pardanashin class may possess 
sufficient intelligence to understand the contents of the 
document to which she is party despite the restraints of 
parda. Conversely there can be an illiterate woman totally 
devoid of understanding but not observing parda. Therefore 
the criterion cannot be the social status in the parda class 
but the ability to comprehend the contents of the document 
in question. The emphasis is on factual understanding of the 
document with reference to the individual concerned and 
not upon presumptive disability incidental to mere status.” 

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Aisha  Bai  VS  Usman  Muhammad  (PLD  1967 

Karachi 733), it has been held that a literate woman entering 

into  a  contract  having  full  business  aptitude  as  well  as 

capable of looking after her own interest was not entitled to 

any special consideration.  

25. 

In  her  suit  for  declaration  etc.,  respondent  No.1  had 

attributed  “artifice  deception”,  “mischief  and  forgery”  and 

“concealment”  to  the  petitioner.  The  particulars  of  the  alleged 

deception,  etc.,  on  the  part  of  the  petitioner  as  per  respondent 

No.1’s  pleadings  in  the  suit  were  that  the  petitioner  had  advised 

respondent  No.1  to  submit  an  application  for  exemption  from 

payment  of  property  tax  due  to  the  suit  house  being  in  self 

occupation and in continuation of that pretext required her to sign 

a few papers which she innocently did on account of having blind 

faith  in  her  husband.  Respondent  No.1  in  her  evidence  made  no 

such  deposition.  Respondent  No.1, 

in  her  entire  evidence 

(examination-in-chief as well as in cross-examination), did not give 

any  particulars  of  the  fraud  or  deception  committed  by  the 

petitioner. There is just one simple statement as to fraud in the tail 

end  of  respondent  No.1’s  examination-in-chief  that  the suit  house 

was  transferred  thorough  fraud  (یہد  ہکوہد)  by  the  petitioner.  This 

testimony  of  respondent  No.1  was  not  sufficient  for  the  learned 

Appellate  Court  to  have  held  that  she  had  been  deceived  into 

signing  the  transfer  application  form  for  the  transfer  of  the  suit 

house to the petitioner.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

26. 

It is well settled that  the burden of proving fraud lies on the 

party  alleging  it.  Fraud  and  forgery  must  be proved  by  producing 

unimpeachable, impartial and confidence-inspiring evidence. Mere 

allegations  in  the  pleadings  cannot  partake  proof  required  under 

the  law.  Courts  have  to  be  very  careful  in  coming  to  a  finding  of 

fraud  and  should  satisfy  themselves  that  the  finding  is  based  on 

reliable  evidence.  Reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the 

judgments  in  the cases of Ahsan Ali  VS District Judge  (PLD  1969 

SC 167), Shamir VS Faiz Elahi (1993 SCMR 145) and Nasira Khatoon 

VS Mst. Aisha Bai (2003 SCMR 1050). In the case of Noor Jehan VS 

Bostan  (1976  SCMR  486),  it  has  been  held  that  fraud  has  to  be 

asserted with clarity and has to be proved as a fact. In the case of 

Punjab National Bank Limited VS Dr. A.B. Arora (AIR 1933 Lahore 

1024), it has been held that if a person charges another with fraud 

or misrepresentation, it is incumbent upon him to substantiate his 

allegations by making a statement on oath and by giving the other 

party an opportunity to cross-examine him.  

27.  Although respondent No.1 had given some particulars of the 

fraud  allegedly  committed  by  the  petitioner  in  her  pleadings  (i.e., 

para 2 of the suit), it is well settled that pleadings of the parties are 

not  evidence,  and  facts  alleged  in  the  pleadings  must  be  proved 

through  evidence  adduced  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  party  who  had 

claimed the existence of such facts. Mere averments and pleadings 

are of no value and cannot not be relied upon unless proved through 

cogent evidence. The principle conveyed by the maxim secundum 

allegata et probata is that the plaintiff could succeed only by what 

he  had  alleged  and  proved.  Article  117  of  the Qanun-e-Shahadat 

Order,  1984  provides  that  whoever  desires  any  Court  to  give 

judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent on the existence 

of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist.  

28. 

Issue No.2 framed by the learned Civil Court was “whether the 

transfer in favour of the defendant is without consideration, forged, 

illegal and ineffective”. The onus of proving this issue was placed 

on respondent No.1. All that respondent No.1 in her examination-in-

chief  said  about  the  fraud  having  been  played  on  her  was  to  the 

following effect:-  

 
 
 
 
 
14 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

ےہ ایلاورک مان ےنپا ےن سا ناکم

ہک لاچ ہتپ دعب ےک یداش یک ہیلعاعدمےھجم

 ہن روا یوہ شیپ ںیم ہمکحم یسک ںیم ۔ےہ ایک اسیا ےس یہد ہکوھدےن ہیلعاعدم    

۔اھت ایاگل ہناھٹوگنا ناشن ای طختسد ےن ںیم یہ

29.  After  having  gone  through  the  evidence  produced  by 

respondent No.1, in particular the above referred deposition, I have 

formed the view that she was not able to discharge the burden of 

proving that the petitioner had committed fraud or forgery or  had 

deceived her by having the suit house transferred in his favour.  

30.  Although  respondent  No.1,  in  her  suit  for  declaration,  etc., 

pleaded  that  she  had  signed  papers  at  the  petitioner’s  instance, 

however,  while  giving  evidence  as  DW-1,  respondent  No.1  had 

deposed  that  she  had  not  signed  any  document.  In  this  way, 

respondent  No.1  took  a  contradictory  and  mutually  exclusive 

stance.  

31.  Exh.D/1  is  respondent  No.1’s  application  for  the  transfer  of 

the  suit  house  to  the  petitioner  and  Exh.D/2  bears  respondent 

No.1’s  six  specimen  signatures.  These  documents  were  a  part  of 

C.D.A.'s  record.  In  her  cross-examination,  respondent  No.1 

specifically  denied  the  making  of  her  specimen  signatures  and 

making any signature in the C.D.A.’s offices. If respondent No.1’s 

stance  in  her  cross-examination  that  she  had  not  signed  any 

document is to be believed, it does not appeal to reason as to why 

she  did  not  apply  to  the  learned  Trial  Court  to  have  her  alleged 

signatures  on  Exh.D/1  and  Exh.D/2  forensically  examined  by  a 

handwriting  expert.  There  is  no  denying  the  fact  that  it  is 

respondent No.1 who had made the allegation of forgery against the 

petitioner.  In  the  case  of  “Mst.  Kausar  Haseen  VS  Mst  Anees 

Begum” (1988 MLD 522), it has been held inter-alia that the burden 

to prove that the signature of a person on a document was forged 

would be upon the person who asserts such forgery. Additionally, 

in  the  case  of  “Bashir  Ahmad  VS  Muhammad  Bakhsh”  (PLD  2016 

Lahore 130), it has held as follows:- 

“Be that as it may, whenever the evidence legally required to be 
provided to prove execution of a document has been produced, it 
is for the other party denying the execution of a document to 
produce handwriting expert in proof of his denial of execution. 
Failure to ask the court to refer the matter to the handwriting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
         
    
   
      
                                                  
 
 
15 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

expert would raise inference against the party (see Meraj Din and 
another v. Kh. Mahboob Elahi and 4 others 1992 CLC 2457)”. 

32.  Respondent  No.1,  in  her  suit,  had  sought  the  relief  of 

declaration  which 

is  undoubtedly  an  equitable  remedy. 

In 

paragraph  5  of  her  suit,  respondent  No.1  had  pleaded  that  the 

cause of action had accrued to her since “the impugned transfer” 

and  a  week  before  the  petitioner’s  refusal  to  annul  the  transfer 

letter  in  his  favour.  Respondent  No.1,  in  her  cross-examination, 

deposed that thirteen to fourteen years prior to giving her evidence, 

she came to know that the suit house had been transferred to the 

petitioner.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submitted  that 

respondent  No.1  was  trapped  into  making  this  statement.  Even  if 

respondent No.1’s said deposition is ignored, she at another stage 

of  her  cross-examination  had  deposed  that  she  had  received 

knowledge of the transfer in the petitioner’s favour four to five years 

after  the  transfer.  Since  the  suit  house  was  transferred  on 

07.09.1986. the period of four to five years after the transfer would 

come  to  1990-91.  Although  the  suit  for  declaration  filed  by 

respondent  No.1,  on  07.09.1995,  was  not  barred  by  limitation,  no 

explanation  was  provided  for  respondent  No.1  to  have  remained 

silent for a period of almost four years after gaining knowledge as 

to the transfer of the suit house to the petitioner. In this period, she 

had made no  effort to file an  application before the C.D.A. for the 

transfer of the suit house in her favour or a complaint to the effect 

that  there  had  been  a  fraudulent  transfer  of  the  suit  house  in  the 

petitioner’s  favour.  Respondent  No.1’s  testimony  is  also  silent  on 

the question whether she had asked the petitioner to re-transfer the 

suit  house  in  her  favour.  All  this  make  the  equities  tilt  against 

respondent No.1. The learned Appellate Court ought to have taken 

into account respondent No.1’s said conduct before decreeing her 

suit for declaration.  

33.  Although the learned Trial Court had decided issue No.2 in the 

petitioner’s favour, the judgment of the learned Appellate Court is 

silent on the question whether the findings of the learned Civil Court 

on  the  said  issue  were  erroneous  or  not.  The  learned  Appellate 

Court appears to have delved more into the question whether or not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
16 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

the  transaction  of  sale  by  Shaukat  Iqbal  in  favour  of  respondent 

No.1  was  a  benami  transaction.  I  have  proceeded  to  decide  the 

dispute regarding the validity of the transfer of the suit house from 

respondent No.1 to the petitioner by assuming that prior to the said 

transfer, respondent No.1 was the lawful owner of the suit house. 

Perusal  of  the  judgment  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  shows 

that the sole ground on which the sale transaction between Shaukat 

Iqbal and respondent No.1 was declared to be benami in nature was 

that respondent No.1 had not been able to prove that she had paid 

the  entire  sale  consideration  for  the  suit  house.  This  finding  is  in 

clear derogation of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court 

in  the  case  of  “Ghulam  Murtaza  VS  Mst.  Asia  Bibi”  (PLD  2010  SC 

569), wherein it has been held as follows:- 

“7. At this juncture, we may clarify that the motive part in the 
benami transactions is the most important one. A transaction 
cannot  be  dubbed  as  benami  simply  because  one  person 
happened to make payment for or on behalf of the other. We come 
across  innumerable  transactions  where  a  father  purchases 
property with his own sources for his minor son or daughter 
keeping in mind that the property shall vest in the minor. Such 
transaction subsequently  cannot be challenged by father as 
benami simply because the amount was paid by him. There are 
people who, with positive application of mind, purchase properties 
in the name of others with intention that the title shall vest in that 
other. 

8. As said earlier, there are certain transactions in peculiar 
circumstances of those peculiar cases where, for reason of certain 
emergencies or contingencies, the properties are purchased in the 
name of some other person without the intention that the title shall 
so vest permanently. If such motive is available and also is 
reasonable and plausible, a transaction can be held as benami, 
otherwise not. A property purchased with ones own sources in the 
name of some close relative like wife, son or daughter cannot be 
dubbed as benami when purchased with full intention of conferring 
title to the purchaser shown. If this principle is denied and that of 
benami attracted simply because the sources of consideration 
could not be proved in favour of the named vendee, it would shatter 
the most honest and bona fide transactions thereby bringing no 
end to litigation.” 

34.  Since  in  the  agreement  to  sell/iqrarnama  executed  between 

Shaukat  Iqbal  through  his  attorney  and  respondent  No.1,  it  has 

been explicitly stated that the vendor had received the entire sale 

consideration from respondent No.1, the oral evidence adduced by 

the petitioner to the contrary would have no significance in view of 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
17 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

the  principles  enshrined  in  Articles  102  and  103  of  the Qanun-e-

Shahadat Order, 1984.  

35.  Transactions  for  the transfer  of  properties  in  the  records  of 

the C.D.A., in accordance with the procedure prescribed for such 

transfer  between  family  members,  have  to  be  given  their  due 

sanctity.  Any  family  member  who is  a  party  to such a  transfer,  or 

any of his legal heirs or persons claiming under him/her, question 

such a transaction on the ground of fraud or forgery or deception, 

must come up with cogent and unimpeachable evidence in order to 

be successful in his/her endeavor.  

36.  To summarize it all, respondent No.1, in her evidence, did not 

give  any  particulars  of  the  fraud  allegedly  played  on  her  by  her 

husband for the transfer of the suit property from her name. She did 

not  even  depose  in  her  evidence  that  she  was  a  pardanashin 

illiterate  lady  not  capable  of  understanding  the  contents  of  her 

application  form  for  the  transfer  of  the  suit  house.  She  was  also 

unable  to  prove  that  her  signatures  on  the  application  form 

(Exh.D/1)  or  her  specimen  signatures  (Exh.D/2)  were  forgeries. 

After  the said  documents  were tendered  in evidence,  respondent 

No.1 made no effort to have her signatures on the said documents 

forensically  examined  in  order  to  prove  that  they  were  forged.  In 

such circumstances, I am of the view that the judgment and decree 

passed by the learned Appellate Court to the extent of granting the 

prayer in respondent No.1’s suit that the transfer of the suit house 

in  the  petitioner’s  favour  is  “illegal, void and based on foolish 

mischief,  and  forgery  and  ineffective on  the proprietary  and 

possessory rights of the plaintiff” is not sustainable. 

37.  Since  respondent  No.1  had  not  been  able  to  impeach  the 

transaction as to the transfer of the suit house from her name to that 

of  the  petitioner  on  the  ground  of  fraud,  forgery  or  under  the 

principles  governing  transactions  executed  by  pardanashin 

illiterate  ladies,  it  is  safe  to  hold  that  ownership  in  the  suit  house 

lawfully  vests  in  the  petitioner.  In  such  circumstances,  the 

petitioner  was  well  within  his  rights  to  have  instituted  a  suit  for 

possession against respondent No.1 and his own son. The learned 

Civil Court had decreed the petitioner’s suit for possession but had 

 
 
 
 
 
 
18 

C.Rs.No.455-D /2010  
& 456-D/2010 

denied  him  the  mesne  profits  claimed  by  him.  I  find  the  said 

judgment to be unexceptional.  

38. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  revision  petition  challenging  the 

appellate 

judgment  and  decree  dated  11.03.2010,  whereby 

respondent  No.1’s  suit  for  declaration  was  decreed,  is  partly 

allowed and the said judgment and decree to the extent of granting 

respondent  No.1’s  prayer  that  the  transfer  of  the  suit  house  in 

favour  of  the  petitioner  was  unlawful  etc.,  is  set-aside;  and  the 

appellate judgment and decree to the extent of holding that the suit 

house  was  purchased  by  respondent  No.1  from  Shaukat  Iqbal  is 

sustained. The appellate judgment and decree dated 11.03.2010 to 

the extent of dismissing the petitioner's suit for possession etc, is 

set-aside  and  consequently,  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 

05.07.2001,  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  to  the  extent  of 

allowing the petitioner's suit for possession etc, is restored.   

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2019 

Qamar Khan*        APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                                         (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Engr.  Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
