Form No: HCJD/C-121

TUDGEMENT SHEET

IN TT{E ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

National  Electric  Power  Regulatory  Authority
VS
Registrar  of Trade Unions,  NIRC, etc.

DATE  OF TIEARING:

27-LL-2014.

PETITIONER BY:

Mr Rashid Hanif  Advocate High Court.

RESPONDENTS BY:

Raja Saif-ur-Rehman  Advocate High Court.

ATHAR MINALLAH. J.-  The National  Electric  Power

Regulatory Authority (hereinafter referred  to as the "NEPRA") has invoked

the jurisdiction  of this Court  under Article 199 of the Constitution of the

Islamic  Republic  of Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter  referred to as the

"Constitution")  assailing  the order dated  07-l L-2013, whereby application

under Section I I of the Industrial  Relations  Act,20l2  (hereinafter  referred  to

as the "Act of 2012") was dismissed  by the respondent  no. 1. NEPRA  has

also impugned  the registration  of respondent  no. 2, granted vide  Certificate

dated  05-4-2012 and the Collective  Bargaining  Agent  Certificate  dated 05-6-

2014. The respondent No. 2 applied for registration,  and the respondent  No.

l, accepting the application,  issued the Certificate  No. L6l20l2 dated  05-4-

-2012, thereby  registering the respondent  No. 2 as a trade union under the Act

tf 2012.  Through the Certificate issued  under Section l9(l) of the Act of

012, respondent  no. 2 was declared  as a Collective Bargaining  Agent vide

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

2

Certificate  No. l2l2012  dated  05-6-2012.  NEPRA  filed an application  under

Section l1 of the Act of 2012 for cancellation  of the registration of the

respondent  No. 2, and the same was  dismissed  through order  dated 07-ll-

20131,  hence the instant petition.

2. 

Mr Rashid Hanif Advocate  High Court,  appearing on behalf of the

petitioner contends  that; NEPRA  is a regulatory  authority established  under

Section 3 of the Regulation of Generation,  Transmission and  Distribution  of

Electric Power Act, 1997 (hereinafter referred to as the "NEPRA  Act"); the

petitioner  is not an industry or an establishment  for the purposes  of the Act of

20121'  the respondent  No. I has no jurisdiction in the case of a regulatory

authority  not falling within the definition  of an establishment  or an industry;

the registration  granted to the respondent No. 2 is without  jurisdiction/coram

non-judice and therefore,  the superstructure  built  thereon  i.e. the CBA

Certificate is also without jurisdiction; no appeal  is provided nor any other

altemate  remedy  is available  under the Act of 2012 and therefore, the

jurisdiction  of this Court  has been  invoked;  the functions  and powers of

NEPRA  enumerated  under the Act of 2012 are in the nature of performing

functions, falling  within  the administration  of the State;  the impugned

registration  and the CBA Certificate,  having been granted/issued without

jurisdiction,  are a nullity in law.

3. 

Raja Saif-ur-Rehman,  learned  Advocate High Court, appearing  on

behalf of the respondent No. 2 contends that; the petition is not maintainable

as the NEPRA  had filed an application  under Section  I I of the Act of 2012

for the cancellation  of the registration  of respondent  No. 2, and therefore an

appeal would  lie against  such an order under Section 58 of the Act of 2012;

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

3

no cause of action  has accrued  in favour of the petitioner; Article 17 of the

Constitution  of the Islamic  Republic  of Pakistan, 1973 grants  all citizens the

right to form an association,  which essentially includes  the right to be

registered  as a trade union under the Act of 2012;  relies on the case of Union

of Civil Aviation Employees,  Lahore and another  VS Civil Aviation  Authority,

Islamabad  and 3 others [PLD  1993 Lahore 306] arguing that the Collective

Bargaining  Agent  is a democratic right recognized by the Act of 2012; the

provisions of the Act of 2012 we for the benefit of a vulnerable  class  and,

therefore, its provisions  have to be interpreted liberally in favour of the

beneficiary; NEPRA is not an entity involved  in the administration of the

State;  under the NEPRA  Act the role of the petitioner  is limited to the powers

expressly  conferred on NEPRA; relies on the cases of Inspector-General  of

Police  Punjab, Lahore and others VS Mahmood  Ilvam  [1998 SCMR  765]

and  State Bank of Pakistan, Lahore  VS Ch. Muhammad  Aklttar  and 2 others

[1998  SCMR  21091 in support of his contention that it is erroneous to

consider  a person concerned  with the implementation of the constitutional

responsibility  of the State  as being employed  for the administration  of the

State;  the respondent No. I i.e. the Registrar  of Trade  Unions, NIRC afforded

an opportunity  of hearing before  passing  the impugned  order dated 07-ll-

2013 and the same  was appealable  under Section  58 of the Act of 2012:-

NEPRA falls within the definition  of "establishment"  and therefore, the

respondent No. I is vested with jurisdiction  to exercise powers under the Act

of 2012;  relies on the cases  of Paftistan WAPDA  Employees PEGIIAM Union

VS Member,  NIRC,  Islamabad and others 12014 SCMR  16761, Essa  Cement

Industrtes  Workers'  Union VS Registrar of Trade  Unions, Hyderabad

Region,  and 4 others [1998  PLC 500], Messrs Dreamworld  Family  Resort

through  Secretary VS Registrar of Trade  Unions  and another  12010 PLC

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

4

2931, Pakistan International  Airline  Corporation  and others  VS Tanweer-ur-

Rehman  and others  [PLD 2010  S.C.  676].

4. 

After hearing the leamed counsels  at length and perusing the

record  with their  able  assistance, the opinion  of this Court is as follows:

5. 

The questions before this Cowt are two fold; whether  in the case of

NEPRA, the respondent No. I is vested with the jurisdiction  to exercise

powers, inter alia, of registration and issuance  of a CBA  Certificate,  and

whether an appeal is provided  under  the Act of 2012  against  an order  passed

by the respondent No. I in the exercise of powers  vested  under  Section  9 read

with Section l9 of the Actof  2012?.

6. 

In order to answer  the above two questions,  first of all, it is

necessary  to determine  the status of NEPRA,  ffid then to examine  whether

it would be treated  as an entrty  falling within the jurisdiction of the

respondent No. l, so as to entitle  the respondent no. 2 to be registered  under

the Act of 2012. NEPRA  was established under  Section  3 of the NEPRA  Act.

The object and purpose of the NEPRA Act,  as declared  in the preamble,  is to

provide for the regulation  of generation,  transmission  and distribution  of

electric  power,  and matters  connected  there  with and  incidental  thereto. The

powers and  functions  of NEPRA  are given  in Section 7 of the NEPRA Act,

which  makes it exclusively  responsible  for regulating  the provisions  of

electric  power  services.  It may be emphasized that it "regulates"  the senrices

and does not provide  the same.  Pursuant  to its regulatory  powers  and

functions, it  grants  licenses,  prescribes  procedures  and standards for

investment  programmes;  prescribes  and  enforces  standards and establishes a

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

5

uniform system of accounts.  NEPRA  has the power to determine  tarifi rates,

charges and other  terms  and conditions  for the supply  of electric  power

services  by the generation,  transmission  and distribution companies,  ffid

recommend  to the Federal Government  for notification  thereof.  A plain

reading  of the provisions  of the NEPRA  Act makes it obvious that NEPRA  is

a regulatory  authority,  and does not produce  and manufacfure  goods,  nor

provides services of a nature which  would fall within  the meaning  of carrying

on a business  or being  engaged  as an industry.

7. 

Section 2(x) of the Act of 2012  defines  'establishment'  while

'industry'  is defined  under clause  2(xvii).  An 'establishment'  has been defined

as meaning any offrce,  firm, factory,  society,  undertaking,  company, shop or

enterprise,  which  employs  workmen  directly  or through  a contractor  for the

purpose  of carrying  on any business or industry and includes all its

departments  and branches  in the Islamabad Capital Territory.  The essential

ingredient  to qualify  as an "establishment'is'to  employ  workmen  directly or

through a contractor  for the purpose of carrying any business  or Industry'.

'Industry' has been defined  as including  any business, trade,  calling,

employment  or occupation for production  of goods  or provisions  of services

in the Islamabad  Capital  Territory and falling in more than one  province,

excluding  those  that  are exclusively  set up for charitable  purposes. [n order to

qualiS as an 'Industry' it is mandatory to be engaged  in a business  for the

'production  of goods'  or the 'provision of services". The extent of the

application  of the Act of 2012 is provided  under Section  1(3) thereof. It

provides that it applies  to all persons  employed in any establishment  or

industry, in the Islamabad  Capital  Territory  or carrying on business in more

ince. Thus in order to athact the provisions  of the Act of 2012,

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

6

it is mandatory  to quafiry  as an'establishment' or'Industry'  as defined  therein.

Section l(3), clauses (a) to (e) provides  the exceptions.  It is, therefore,

unambiguous  that the Act of 2012  applies  only to persons who  are employed

in an 'establishmenf or 'industry' as defined in Section  2(x) & 2(xvii)

respectively, except  those  which would fall in one of the exceptions  provided

under  sub Section  3 of Section 1.

8. 

In order to fall within the definition of an industry,  as defined

under Section 2(xvii),  the employment  or occupation  must be for the

production  of goods or provision of services,  and essentially having  a nexus

with a business or industry. A distribution or generation  company would fall

within the definition of an establishment  or an industry as it produces

elecricity and thereafter distributes  and supplies  the same to the consumer,

for which the latter pays according  to the tariff determined  by NEPRA.

WAPDA, LESCO,  IESCO,  PESCO  and other such power distribution

companies  or entities are undoubtedly engaged  in business and are providing

services  and, therefore, in their case  the provisions  of the Act of 2012 apply.

However,  NEPRA is neither  engaged in any business,  or production  or

manufacture  of goods, or the provision  of services.

9. 

On the other  hand,  NEPRA  merely acts as a regulator  and, inter

alia,  determines  the tariff,  rates, charges, etc. There is no power  or function

vested in NEPRA which even remotely would  bring  it within  the definition of

an 'establishment'  or an 'industry'  as defured in the Act of 2012.  The

regulation of the generation,  transmission  or distribution  of electric power is a

function  within  the realm  of the administration of the State.

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

7

10. 

It is noted  that the expression  ' carrying on any business  or

industy' is a mandatory  ingredient for attracting the definition of an

'establishment' provided  in section  2 (x) of the Act of 2012 while for an

'Industry'  a business,  trade, calling,  employment or occupation  must be for the

production  of goods or provisions  of services.  Carrying on business  is,

therefore, an essential  ingredient for both the definitions. In the case of

K. G. Old, Principal, Christian  Technical  Training  Centre,  Gujranwala  VS

Presiding  Officer, Punjab  Labour Court, Northern  Zone  and 6 others

[PLD 1976 Lahorc  10971the  Latrore High Court interpreted the expression

'business, trade, manufacture,  calling,  employment  or occupation' in the

context of the definition of an 'industry' provided under the Industrial

Relations  Ordinance,  1969.  The court held that the use of the expression  is

not in accordance  with its ordinary dictionary meaning, but in line with  its

popular  and conventional meaning.  The entity  as a whole  is to be looked into

so as to find out its purpose.  This judgment was  approved by the Supreme

Court in case of A.F. Ferguson & Co. VS The  Sind Labour Court and another

[PLD 1985  SC 4291  and Livestock employees'  Union and others  VS

Government  of Balochistan,  Livestock Department  U996 PLC 5771. Nothing

has been pointed  out nor placed  on record so as to bring NEPRA within the

definition of an 'establishment'  or an 'industry' as defined  in the Act of 2012.

ll. 

Since NEPRA is not an establishment  or an industry for the

purposes  of the Act of 2012, it is, therefore, outside  the scope of the

application  of the provisions thereof.  The Act of 2012  can not be extended or

invoked  and, therefore,  a trade  union  formed by its employees is also not

liable to be registered  under Section 9 of the Act of 2012. As a corollary it

leads to the inevitable  conclusion  that the respondent  No. I  had no

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

8

jurisdiction  relating  to the application  filed  by the employees  of NEPRA, let

alone  proceedings  undertaken pr.usuant  thereto  by granting the registration

and declaring the respondent no. 2 as a Collective  Bargaining Agent.

Moreover, the superstructure built on the basis of the certificate  of registration

issued  to the respondent  No. 2 is, therefore,  also  without lawful authority,

jurisdiction  and as such  corum non judice.  The respondent no. I derives

powers  under the Act of 2012, and therefore  such  powers  cannot be exercised

in the case of the employees of NEPRA as they are not persons employed  in

any'establishment'or'industry'.  Any entity, such as NEPRA, which does not

quafiry as an establishment or industry,  is outside the jurisdiction  of the

respondent  no. 1, as the Act of 2012 does  not apply.  There is no cavil to the

proposition  that the Actof  2012  has to be interpreted  liberally in favour of the

beneficiary.  However,  by no stretch  of the imagination  can the definition  of

an'establishment'or'industry'  be extended to NEPRA  so as to make  the Act

of 2012 applicable  to the case of its employees.

12. 

Next, whether  any alternate  remedy  was available  to NEPRA

under the Act of 2012? Section 12 provides for an appeal against the

orders/decisions  of the respondent No. I i.e. the Registrar.  The right of appeal

is restricted  to a trade union, its members or an officer. An 'officer' is defined

in Section  2(xxiD. Section 12, therefore,  does not provide  a right of appeal  to

an employer  even if the order is without  jurisdiction.  Section  58 provides for

appeals  against orders  passed  by any Bench of the Commission,  and  not to

matters  relating  to the registration  of a trade  union passed  by the respondent

under the Act of 2012. However, in the present  case,  NEPRA  has been able  to

make  out a case of the impugned  proceedings  and orders  being without

jurisdiction  and coram  non-judice.  Any act without  jurisdiction  is a nullity in

W.P. No. 144 of 2014

9

law and,  therefore,  the same  is open to judicial review in exercise of the

powers  vested in this Court under  Article  199 of the Constitution.  The

Supreme  Court  has held in case of Essa Cement Industries Worlcers'  Union

VS Registrar of Trade  Unions,  Hyderabad  Region, Hyderabad  and 4 others

[1998 PLC 500] that jurisdictional  facts  are not immune  from the scrutiny of

the High Court  in the exercise of its jurisdiction  under  Article 199 of the

Constitution. It has already been held that the impugned  orders are without

jurisdiction and  coram non-judice,  and  since  an effrcacious altemate  remedy

was not available to the petitioner, therefore,  the petition is maintainable

under Article  199 of the Constitution.

13. 

For what  has been discussed  above, the impugned  orders  dated

07-ll-20t3,  the certificate  of registration dated  05-4-2012  and the CBA

Certificate  dated 05-6-2014  have been  passed/issued  without  jurisdiction  and

are therefore, coram  non-judice.  The instant  petition  is allowed and  the

impugned  orders are accordingly  set aside.

(A

LAH)

JUDGE

Announced  in open  Court,  on tSl&anuary,  2015.

__JIIE;I

Approved  for reporttng.

Tanveer Ahmed.

