ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT,ISLAMABAD
IUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

Writ Petition No. 3L46 ot 2O1.3,

Sara Noor
VS
Addl.  District  ]udge, Etc

Date of Hearing: -
Petitioner By: -
Respondents  BY:-

5ft December.  2013:
Mr.  Musharaf  Kran,  Advocate
Mr. Muhammad  Sanaullah,  Advocate

IUDGMENT

MUHAMMAD  ANWAR  KHAN  KASI' CJ:

The petitioner  namely Sara-Noor  [plaintiff  in main  suit for
dissolution of marriagel through instant constitutional petition
assails orders & Decrees  dated 22.10.2012  and L5.06.20L3,  passed
by leamed ]udge Family court &  leamed ADI  Islamabad
respectively,  whereby  her suit for dissolution  of marriage was
d.ecreed  on the basis  of her statement  subject to payment  of dowet
amount and  her appeal against the order of leamed Trial Court
also met with failure.
The facts, relevant for disposal of this petition, are that the
2- 
parties were married  to each  other but subsequently  their
relations tumed hostile which resulted into litigation  through suit
for dissolution  of marriage  wherein  the petitioner  on 22.10.20\2
got recorded statement  to the effect  that she is ready to forego  her
dower in lieu of l(rula. On the basis of her statement,  the learned
Trial  Court vide  order  dated n.rc.2012  decreed  her suit but with
stipulation  to return dower  consideration,  which, in the present
case, is gold ornaments  to the tune of seven  tolas'
3-Feelingaggrievedbytheorder,thepetitionerwentin
appeal but it was  also dismissed.  Her grievance  is that at the time
of desertion in August,  20L2, gold ornaments were  snatched  and
this fact is also evident from  Para  2 of her plaint, therefore,  in sudr
state of aff.aits,when  the ornaments  were already in possession  of
the respondent there  was no iustification  to burden her with
condition of its retum. It was also stipulated  in the plaint  that she
would  file a suit for rettrm  of the same  but after  deciding to get
I<}rula  opted to relinquish  her claim but the learned courts
misunderstood  her statement  which,  otherwise, was very specific
as she had forgiven the dower  claim and did not undertake to
reftrrn  the same. She had specifically  used  the word 'forego'rather

'return'.
4- 
Learned  counsel for the respondent-defendant  repelled the
above arguments  by stating that the petitioner cannot  escape  from

.ri&!&r-  esttu'r 

&ale*-*r:ri 

-'

2

llfi  Petttio n No.3  I 4 6/2 0 I 3

her liability if she intends  and wishes  to 8et divorce.  The law on
the subject is very specific  and  she had to return the consideration
in lieu of Khula  divorce.  If it is not the case, she cannot be held
entitled  to decree for dissolution of marriage  on the condition  of
Khula, until & tmless it is established  that with whom  the dower

Heard  and record  Perused.
The pivotal  question  whidr requires determination  is as to

consideration lies.
5- 
6- 
what will be the impact  upon a decree  for dissolution of marriage
on the basis  of Khula, when  it is passed  subiect to return of dower
consideration,  when the custody of dower consideration  is

disputed?
The dispute is with regard to the possession of gold
7- 
omaments / dower consideration.  The petitioner alleges that the
same are in custody of the respondent  whereas  the respondent
denies  this assertion,  therefore, this controversial  issue, cannot  be
settled without affording opportunity  to both the sides to adduce
their respective  evidence, but while  doing this exercise,  the decree
for dissolution of marriage  on the basis of I(hula, cannot be
revoked  and will remain  intact.  This view is fortified by the law

set in case of Doctor Akhlaq  VS Kishwar sultana  [PLD 1983 SC

169]  wherein it is held that "non paSment  of stipulated  consideration

for I(rula dose  not invalidate  the dissolution  of marriage by I(hula.  Once
the Family  Court  came  to the conclusion  cannot  remain with the limits of
God and the dissolution  of marriage by I(hula  must  take place,  the
inquiry  into the terms on which such dissolution shall take place does
not effect  the conclusion  but only  creates  civil  liabilities  to the benefits  to
be retumed  by the wife to the husband and  does  not effect the
dissolution  itself".
g- 
Following  the wisdom laid down in the case referred
above, it is concluded that the proper  course in this case would  be
to frame  an issue respectinS  claim & counter  claim of the parties
with regard to gold omaments,  by recording  evidence  of both  the
sides and to decide the case accordingly.  The decree for
dissolution of marriage  pronounced  vide order  dated  22.L0.20L2
shall remain intact and further proceedings  with regard to divorce
shall be conducted pursuant  to provisions  of family laws that
includes sending of notice to the concemed  union council. Here it
is also made  clear that in case the petitioner succeeds in her claim
regarding  possession of gold omaments with the respondent-
defendant,  she will not be entitled to recover  the same pursuant  to
her undertaking/statement  dated  22.10.20L2,  whereby  she had
forgiven dower consideration  and if the situation  is vice-versa,

*dt,Frrg.rrt*;J:ffii#ffi1 

]#;P''W[,'*'i  l

J

Wfl Pailion  No.31462013

then the respondent-defendant  would be entitled  to recover  the
same  as a civil liability. It is once  again made  clear that in both the
eventualities  the decree  for dissolution of marriage on the basis  of
Khula  has become  absolute on the day of passing i.e.22.10.20L2
when the petitioner  got recorded  her statement  that she is not
ready to live with the respondent  defendant at any cost'
g- 
In view of above,  both the impugned orders dated
22.10.2012 and L5.06.20L3  and the execution  petition and
proceedings  conducted there-under  are  set-aside  with  direction  to
the leamed Trial Court to commence the proceedings  from  the
22.L0.20L2,  aftet framing
stage where it had been  on the date 
necessary issues,  recording  evidence  and to proceed  with  the suit
in accordance with law and  observations made hereinhbove.  The
exercise should be culminated  within  shortest  possible  time
preferably within three  months of the receipt of this Judgment.

'of 

Parties to bear their own  costs.

cE)

M.Suhail
05.t2.2013

APPROED  FOR  REPORTING

