ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

1 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.   : 

ICA NO.109/2017 

BNP (Private) Limited & Another 
VS    
Capital Development Authority etc. 

Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Senior ASC 
Mr. Saad M. Hashmi, Advocate 
Dr. M. Ferogh Nasim, Advocate 
Mr. Babar Sattar, Advocate 
Mr. M. Ali Raza, Advocate 
Ms. Meryam Ali Abbas, Advocate 
Malik Qamar Afzal, Advocate 
Mr. Asad Zia, Advocate 
Mr. Saad Khan, Advocate  
Mr. Anique Salman Malik, Advocate 
Mr. Rashideen Nawaz Kasuri, Advocate 
Mr. Kashif Ali Malik, Advocate 
Mr. Aamir Latif Gill, Advocate 
Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, Advocate  
Mr. Nauman Munir Paracha, Advocate 
05.07.2018 

Appellants by          : 

Respondents by     : 

Date of hearing     : 

AAMER  FAROOQ  J.      This  judgment  shall  decide  instant  appeal  as 

well as other Intra Court Appeals mentioned in Schedule-A attached herewith, as 

they assail judgment dated 03.03.2017 passed by the Judge-in-Chambers in W.P. 

No.3043-2016  filed  by  the  appellant,  in  the  instant  appeal,  and  as  common 

questions of law and facts are involved.  

2. 

The  facts,  leading  to  filing  of  above  mentioned  appeals,  are  that  the 

controversy  pertains  to  the  cancellation  of  leasehold  rights  granted  to  the 

appellant  by  the  Capital  Development  Authority  (CDA).  In  this  regard,  the 

property in question  is  a Plot  measuring 13.5  acres  (650098 sq.yds.) situated at 

the  end  of  the  Constitution  Avenue,  Islamabad  adjacent  to  the  Convention 

Centre.  In  1996,  Federal  Government  granted  approval  for  construction  of 

Monument as well as Convention Centre, which was to be completed by 1997. 

Approval was also accorded by the Cabinet for amendment in the Master Plan 

for Islamabad for construction of the Monument and the Convention Centre, as 

the  same,  in  its  original  form,  did  not  permit  any  construction  in  the  vicinity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

2 

After  its  construction,  in  1997,  the  Cabinet  decided  to  privatize  Convention 

Centre  and  also  decided  to  construct  a  Five  Star  Hotel  at  the  given  site.  It  is 

pertinent  to  mention  that  for  the  said  purpose,  neither  the  Master  Plan  was 

amended  nor  any  scheme  was  sanctioned  under  Capital  Development 

Ordinance, 1960. Pursuant to the decision of the Cabinet in 1996, Master Plan 

of  Islamabad  was  amended  on  06.05.1997  providing  for  construction  of 

Convention Centre, as originally, the area was earmarked for Kashmir Highway 

and Murree Road, Islamabad. On 02.07.1997, a proposal was placed before the 

Cabinet  for  modification  of  the  Master  Plan  of  Islamabad  by  allowing 

construction  of  a  Five  Star  Hotel,  Shopping  Mall  etc.  along  with  Convention 

Centre,  but  no  approval  was  granted  by  the  Cabinet.  In  May  1998,  Cabinet 

Committee on Privatization, constituted a Sub-Committee to negotiate with M/s 

Daewoo Corporation for privatization of the Convention Centre; on 31.05.1999, 

Capital  Development  Authority,  in  its  meeting  held  on  10.11.1997,  approved 

byelaws  for  construction  of  Five  Star  Hotel  to  have  20-storeys.  Subsequently, 

since  there  were  issues  regarding  height of the  Building  in  light  of  the Zoning 

Regulation  of  Capital  Development  Authority,  therefore,  height  was  decreased 

from  180-feet  to  150-feet.  On  18.02.2004,  senior  officials  of  the  Capital 

Development Authority gave presentation to the Secretary, Ministry of Interior 

for  construction  of  Six  Star  Hotel  adjacent  to  the  Convention  Centre.  On 

12.04.2004,  Ministry  of  Interior  granted  approval  for  advertising 

the 

aforementioned Plot for construction of Five Star Hotel; pursuant to the same, 

Capital  Development  Authority  published  an  advertisement  inviting  Requests 

for  Pre-qualification  from  interested  parties  for  construction  of  a  Five  Star 

Hotel.  The  advertisement  specifically  provided  that  the  construction  was  for 

Five Star Hotel and according to the published byelaws, the construction was to 

include  Five  Star  Hotel-cum-Convention  Centre;  maximum  number  of  rooms 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

3 

mentioned in the byelaws was 500 including 20 VVIP Suites. The bidding took 

place, however, the appellant i.e. BNP Private Limited did not participate in the 

process  and  only  two  entities  namely  M/s  Pakistan  Services  Limited  and  M/s 

Hashwani  Hotels  Limited  qualified  in  the  bidding  process.  The  bidding  could 

not  materialize  for  administrative  reasons  and  hence  was  cancelled.  On 

28.09.2004,  a  fresh  advertisement  was  made  inviting  applications  for  Pre-

qualification; again the invitation was to construct and operate a Five Star Hotel 

at the property/Plot. Through a separate advertisement, bidding was also invited 

for  construction  of  a  Shopping  Mall  as  well  as  a  Five  Star  Hotel.  The  bidding 

documents  provided all the  relevant  details which  included that the target date 

for opening of the Hotel was in 2008 and scope of construction was a Five Star 

Luxury Hotel. Subsequently, Federal Government turned down the proposal for 

construction  of  a  Shopping  Mall.  It  is  pertinent  to  observe  that  only  bidders, 

who were prequalified by CDA, made a bid. In this regard, BNP Private Limited 

did  not  participate  in  the  process  however  four  juridical  persons  i.e.  Bismillah 

Textile  Pvt.  Ltd.,  Niagara  Mills  Pvt.  Ltd.,  Paragon  City  Pvt.  Ltd.  &  Belhasa 

International Company LLC, made a bid under the joint venture termed as ‘BNP 

Group’. On 25.02.2005, in response to the query of one of the bidders namely 

M/s  Hashwani  Hotels  Limited,  CDA  sent  letters  to  all  the  bidders  including 

BNP Group clarifying that ‘Serviced Apartments’ shall form integral part of the 

Hotel  Property,  which  are  to  be  operated  by  the  Hotel  Management  and  the 

same shall not be for sale. The same clarification also covered the shops  which 

were  again  not  to  be  for  sale.  On  07.02.2005,  a  document  was  issued  again 

clarifying that construction on the Plot was for the purposes of a Five Star Hotel 

along  with  Serviced  Apartments  and  related  facilities.  Meanwhile,  one  of  the 

bidders namely Hashwani Hotel Limited filed a petition (W.P. No.586 of 2005) 

before  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court,  Rawalpindi  Bench  Rawalpindi,  which  was 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

4 

dismissed on 27.04.2005. An Intra Court Appeal (ICA No.64 of 2005), assailing 

the judgment dated 27.04.2005,  was filed but the same  was dismissed for non-

prosecution on 25.05.2005. On 09.03.2005, BNP Group made a bid of Rs.75000 

per sq.yd., which was accepted hence it was the successful bidder. The successful 

bidder  had  to  pay  a  sum  of  Rs.4,888,235  million  in  15-years  and  was  also 

required  to  furnish  a  Bank  Guarantee  and  a  Performance  Guarantee.  In  this 

behalf, 15% of the total construction amount was to be paid within 45-days. On 

28.07.2005, a lease deed was executed between BNP Pvt. Ltd./the appellant and 

the CDA. It is pertinent to mention that BNP Pvt. Ltd. was neither a Member of 

BNP Group nor it had made the bid in its individual capacity, but was allowed to 

execute lease deed by CDA. On 15.06.2005, since the appellant/BNP Pvt. Ltd. 

did  not  adhere  to  the  terms  of  payment  of  installments  and  requested  for 

rescheduling  the  same.  On  26.02.2007,  the  matter  was  placed  before  the 

Economic  Coordination  Committee  (ECC),  which  decided  that  CDA  was 

competent to decide the issue regarding rescheduling of installments. Meanwhile, 

building plans were also submitted for approval and as those contained Luxury 

Apartments therefore the architects were informed accordingly that the same are 

in  violation  of  terms  of  lease.  On  16.08.2007,  payment  schedule  of  the 

installments  was  rescheduled  and  pursuant  thereto,  amended  lease  agreement 

was executed on 04.10.2007 modifying earlier payment schedule. On 29.03.2008, 

building  plans  were  submitted  which  included  Hotel  Tower  Apartments  and 

Serviced  Apartments.  Meanwhile,  the  appellant  requested  for  issuance  of  No 

Objection  Certificate  in  favour  of  banks  and  prospective  third  party  buyers 

pursuant  to  clause  2.6 of the lease  deed which  was  turned down  by CDA.  On 

26.08.2008,  the  appellant/BNP  Pvt.  Ltd.  sent  a  letter  denying  that  they  are 

constructing  and  re-selling  Residential  Apartments  and  it  was  clarified  that 

Serviced  Apartments  were  being  constructed  as  per  the  approved  drawings. 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

5 

Meanwhile, the issue regarding height of the Building was again raised, as Civil 

Aviation Authority/Ministry of Defence raised an objection. On said issue, the 

appellant  filed  a  Suit  before  the  Civil  Court  at  Islamabad.  Meanwhile, 

explanation was sought from CDA regarding the appellant being a non-member 

of  the  Consortium  Group.  The  reminders  were  also  issued  time  and  again.  A 

settlement was reached between CDA and appellant and consequently, the latter 

withdrew the Suit and a second amended lease deed was executed on 07.01.2013, 

by virtue of which, height of the Building was reduced from 45 to 23 storeys. An 

audit  objection  was  also  raised  by  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  regarding 

payment schedule of the installments on the ground that terms of the contract, 

once settled, could not be altered in light of Rule 19 (iv) of the General Financial 

Rules  of  the  Federal  Government.  The  Public  Accounts  Committee  issued 

directions  to  CDA  in  light  of  Audit  Para.  A  petition  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution (W.P. No.3755-2014) was filed by the appellant, which was decided 

vide judgment dated 03.03.2016 and CDA was directed to grant opportunity of 

hearing  to  the  appellant.  Pursuant  to  the  referred  directions,  opportunity  of 

hearing was granted by the Board of CDA before the Committee constituted for 

the said purpose. The report of the Committee was placed before the Board of 

CDA  and  in  light  of  which,  respondent  Authority  decided  to  cancel  the  lease 

granted to the appellant. The referred decision was challenged by the appellant 

and  others  by  way  of  a  petition  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  (W.P. 

No.3043-2016)  before  this  Court,  which  was  dismissed  by  the  Judge-in-

Chambers vide the impugned judgment dated 03.03.2017. In ICA No.229/2016 

CDA has challenged the decision by the Judge-in-Chambers to refer the matter 

to  CDA  Board  for  providing  opportunity  of  hearing  before  taking  any  action 

against BNP (Pvt.) Limited. 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

6 

3. 

There  are  two  sets  of  appeals  before  this  Court;  one  being  filed  by  the 

appellant which is the lessee with respect to the Plot  in question and the other 

filed by the third party interest holders, who claim to be the sub-lessees on the 

basis of sub-lease executed by the appellant with them.  

4.  Mr. Makhdoom  Ali  Khan,  Senior  Advocate  Supreme  Court  of Pakistan, 

appearing  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the  Judge-in-

Chambers has held that the appellant was unable to show a single document that 

the Plot in question was created, offered for sale or advertised for construction 

other than a Five Star Hotel let alone Residential Apartments.  In this behalf, it 

was  contended  that  bidding  process  expressly  referred  to  Serviced  Apartments 

and the said concept was also mentioned in the scope of the Project as well as 

byelaws  of  the  Project;  that  CDA’s  letter  dated  25.02.2005  addressed  to 

Hashwani Hotels referred to Serviced Apartments as well as the judgment of the 

Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court  dated  27.04.2005  in  W.P.  No.586-2005.  It  was 

further  contended  that  lease  deed  dated  28.07.2005  also  contains  three  recitals 

wherein reference to Serviced Apartments has been made and clause 2.6 permits 

sublease  without  prior  notice  to  CDA;  that  clause  3.3  refers  to  Apartments. 

Moreover,  approval  of 

the  Building  Plans  also 

refers 

to  Serviced 

Apartments/Tower B&C. It was contended that if there is any ambiguity in the 

documents,  the  same  has  to  be  construed  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  The 

invitation  to  submit  qualifications  and  lease  deed  was  approved  by  CDA  and 

they have to be interpreted contra proferentum.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  further  contended  that  the  Judge-in-

Chambers did  not  take  into  account  that  no  special  favour  was  granted  to  the 

appellant; that there is no special relationship between appellant and CDA and 

lease was executed as was in other similar cases including Serena and Centaurus. 

It  was  also  submitted  that  observation  by  the  Judge-in-Chambers  that  CDA, 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

7 

being the Regulator, gave up its obligation, is totally uncalled for and there is no 

collusion and irregularity either on part of appellant or the respondent Authority.  

6.  Mr.  Makhdoom  Ali  Khan,  ASC  also  submitted  that  appellant  had 

challenged letter dated 03.08.2016 issued by CDA, whereby it was informed that 

lease  in  favour  of  the  appellant,  with  respect  to  the  Plot  in  question,  stands 

cancelled  on  the  basis  of  the  meeting  of  CDA  Board  held  on  29.06.2016;  the 

reasons  provided  therein  were  violation  of  CDA  byelaws,  violation  of  lease 

agreement as well as change in the entity. It was submitted that lease has been 

cancelled without assigning any reason, which is in violation of Section 24-A of 

General Clauses Act, 1897 inasmuch as no specific reason has been stated and 

the  order  is  non-speaking.  It  was  argued  that  the  Judge-in-Chambers  did  not 

discuss the letter of cancellation in the impugned judgment and there is also no 

discussion on the decision by the CDA Board in the judgment.  

7. 

The  dispute  between  the  parties  namely  appellant  and  CDA  was 

contractual and a petition under Article 199 of the Constitution is  maintainable 

in  contractual  disputes,  it  was  argued  by  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant. 

Reliance  was  placed on  cases  reported  as  ‘Deewan  Petroleum  VS  GOP’  (2010 

CLD  988),  ‘Hazara  Development  Trust  VS  Qaisara  Elahi’  (2005  SCME  687), 

‘Ramna  Pipe  VS  SNGPL  (2004  SCMR  1274),  ‘Daewoo  Corporation  VS 

National  Highway  Authority’  (2000  MLD  1745),  ‘Airport  Service  Manager  VS 

Quaid-e-Azam  International  Airport’  (1998  SCMR  2268),  ‘M/s  Wak  Orient 

Power  and  Light  Limited  VS  GOP’  (1998  CLC  1178)  &  ‘M/s  Pacific 

Multinational Pvt. Ltd. VS IG Sindh Police’ (PLD 1992 Karachi 283). 

8. 

It was also contended on behalf of learned counsel for the appellant that 

appellant had challenged the cancellation of lease by CDA and the proceedings 

were adversarial in nature and not inquisitorial and the Judge-in-Chambers could 

not have looked beyond the reasons stated in the letter of cancellation; that the 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

8 

Judge-in-Chambers could not have examined the reasons stated in the Minutes 

of  the  Meeting  of  CDA  Board  and  the  impugned  judgment  is  liable  to  be  set 

aside  on  that score. Reliance  was  placed  on case reported as  ‘Ministry  of Inter 

Provincial  Coordination  VS  Maj.  (Retd.)  Ahmad  Nadeem  Sadal’  (2014  CLC 

600). 

9.  Mr.  Makhdoom  Ali  Khan,  Senior  Advocate  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan 

submitted  that  the  decision  of  CDA  Board  is  on  eight  points.  In  this  behalf, 

points  No.1  to  3  pertains  to  JV  participation  in  the  bid  and  the  appellant 

managed to sign the lease deed. It was argued that one of the participants of the 

bid was Elite Home Fashions Pvt. Ltd., the name of which was changed to BNP 

Pvt. Ltd. and where such is the case that name of the Company is changed, there 

are penal actions provided in the Companies Laws of Pakistan. It was submitted 

that the Judge-in-Chambers did not take into account the referred provisions of 

law  and  the  Companies  Law.  It  was  highlighted  that  a  Memorandum  of 

Understanding  was  executed  on  01.12.2004  between  JV  Partners  constituting 

BNP  Group  and  subsequently  an  agreement  was  executed  by  the  referred 

Partners  on  16.03.2005;  that  clauses  E&G  of  JV  Agreement  provide  for 

utilization  of  existing  company-Elite  Home  Fashions  Pvt.  Ltd.  for  the  Project; 

that  JV  Agreement  was  shared  with  CDA  and  the  lease  deed  was  executed  in 

favour  of  BNP  Pvt.  Ltd.;  likewise,  letters  by  CDA  approving  rescheduling  for 

payment addressed to BNP Pvt. Ltd. and the amendment of the lease deed were 

executed in favour of the appellant; even, settlement between BNP Pvt. Ltd. and 

CDA and the Certificate for remortgage was issued in favour of the appellant. In 

the referred backdrop, it was contended that there is estopple by conduct against 

CDA. Reliance was placed on cases reported as ‘Nazim-ud-Din VS Sheikh Zia-

ul-Haq Qamar’ (2015 SCMR 24), ‘Dr. Muhammad Javaid Shafi VS Syed Rashid 

Arshad’ (PLD 2015 SC 212), ‘Mian Muhammad Saeed VS The Province of West 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

9 

Pakistan’ (PLD 1964 SC 572), ‘TATA Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. VS Union of India’ 

[(2001)  2  SCC  41].  The  appellant  also  placed  reliance  on  the  case  law  with 

respect  to  the  agreement  that  CDA  failed  to  give  reasons  and  the  decision  of 

CDA  Board  is  in  violation  of  Section  24-A  of  General  Clauses  Act,  1897; 

‘Muhammad Majid VS Secretary, Ministry of Manpower’ (PLD 2017 Islamabad 

19),  ‘Muhammad  Amin  Muhammad  Bashir  Limited  VS  Government  of 

Pakistan’  (2015  SCMR  630),  ‘Airport  Support  Services  VS  Airport  Manager’ 

(1998 SCMR 2268), ‘Federation of Pakistan VS Tahir Latif’ (2007 SCMR 152), 

‘Secretary,  Ministry  of  Health  VS  Dr.  Rehana  Hameed’  (2010  SCMR  511)  & 

‘United  Bank  Limited  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan’  (2014  SCMR  856).  Learned 

counsel  further  submitted  that  the  Judge-in-Chambers  erred  in  observing  that 

possession  has  been  handed  over  to  the  third  party  without  completion 

certificate by CDA. In this behalf, it was contended that possession has not yet 

been  handed  over  and  the  third  party  buyers/sub-lessees  did  not  occupy  the 

premises; that there is no finding on this issue and no transfer of occupation.  

10. 

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  there  are  numerous  findings  by 

the Judge-in-Chambers  in the  impugned judgment  which are against  CDA and 

after doing so, the fate of third party purchasers has been put in the hands of the 

respondents,  which  could  not  have  been  done.  It  was  also  argued  that  State 

Agencies  stand  in  a  fiduciary  relationship  to  the  people  who  are  the  beneficial 

owners  of  state  owned  assets.  It  was  also  submitted  that  it  is  an  established 

principle that no one can benefit from his wrong. Reliance was placed on cases 

reported as ‘Justice Hasnat Ahmad Khan VS Federation of Pakistan’ (PLD 2011 

SC  680),  ‘Union of  India  VS  Major  General  Madan  Lal  Yadav’ (AIR  1996  SC 

1340), ‘Mian Allah Buksh VS Fazal Karim’ (PLD 1969 Quetta 13) & ‘Khairpur 

Textile Mills Ltd. VS Central Board of Revenue’ (PLD 1969 Karachi 163). It was 

also  argued  that  the  Hotel  was  not  constructed  without  any  fault  of  the 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

10 

appellant. In this behalf, it was submitted that on 08.10.2005, due to earthquake, 

Margalla  Towers  collapsed  and  CDA  revised  the  Building  Codes  and  in  this 

backdrop,  on  23.02.2006,  the  appellant  applied  to  the  Prime  Minister  for 

rescheduling  of  payments  and  the  matter  was  renegotiated  and  on  29.11.2006, 

the  appellant  submitted  the  building  plans  and  on  16.08.2007,  the  appellant’s 

schedule  was  altered  and  first  amendment  to  the  lease  deed  was  executed  on 

04.10.2007,  whereupon  the  appellant  paid  a  sum  of  Rs.120  millions  and  the 

remaining  amount  was  to  be  paid 

in  12-equal  yearly 

installments  of 

Rs.334,833,125/-.  It  was  contended  that  even  the  issue  of  height  cropped  up 

which  delayed  the  Project  and  even  NAB  intervened  and  the  settlement  was 

reached  between  the  parties  on  07.12.2012,  consequent  whereupon,  second 

amendment to the lease deed was executed; that on 14.02.2014, revised building 

plans were submitted which had not been approved by CDA till date.           

11.  Mr.  Makhdoom  Ali  Khan,  Senior  Advocate  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan 

argued next that power of CDA to cancel lease is not inherent and can only be 

done  under  Regulation  19  of  the  Islamabad  Land  Disposal  Regulation,  2005, 

which  include  non-payment  of  dues,  non-completion  of  building,  violation  of 

terms and conditions of allotment, violation of byelaws/regulations/instructions, 

whereas in the instant case, it was submitted, building was being constructed in 

accordance with lease deed and third part rights were created in accordance with 

clause  2.6  of  the  lease  deed;  that  no  byelaws/regulations/instructions  were 

violated  and  Hotel  construction  was  delayed  due  to  CDA’s  failure  to  approve 

revised building plans, hence the reasons given by CDA for cancellation of the 

lease i.e. violation  of byelaws of CDA as  well as lease deed, are not tenable. It 

was  contended  next  that  there  were  findings  of  illegality  in  the  impugned 

judgment  to  the  effect  that  construction  and  sale  of  Residential  Apartments  is 

illegal  however  there  is  no  finding  to  the  effect  that  lease  deed  was  void, 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

11 

therefore,  section  65  of  the  Contract  Act,  1872  applies,  where  agreement  is 

declared  void  ab-initio  and  the  person,  who  has  received  such  advantage,  is 

bound to restore it or to make compensation for it to the person, from whom, 

he  received  it.  Reliance  was  placed  on  case  reported  as  ‘Lakhra  Power 

Generation C. Ltd. VS Karadeniz Powership Kaya Bey’ (2014 CLD 337). 

12. 

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  effect  of  non-registration  of  the 

lease deed dated 28.07.2017 is non-consequential, as it was not a reason given by 

CDA  Board  in  its  decision  dated  29.07.2016,  hence  the  terms  and  conditions 

contained  therein  are  binding;  that  section  49  of  the  Registration  Act,  1908 

operates in a manner so as to invalidate transfer of property in question. Reliance 

was placed on section 53-A of the Transfer of Properties Act to argue that rights 

may  not  be  enforced  against  an  individual  having  taken  possession  in  part 

performance  of  the  agreement.  In  support  of  his  contentions,  learned  counsel 

placed reliance on cases reported as ‘Kalimuddin Ansari VS Director, Excise & 

Taxation, Karachi & Another’ (PLD 1971 SC 114) & ‘Mst. Ghulam Sakina VS 

Umar Bakhs & Another’ (PLD 1964 SC 456). It was also argued that in light of 

Section 47 of the Registration Act, 1908, lease deed shall operate retrospectively. 

Reliance  was  placed  on  case  reported  as  ‘Ghulam  Rasool  &  Others  VS  Akbar 

Ali  &  Others’  (2011  SCMR  794).  It  was  contended  that  lease  deed  was  signed 

and executed between BNP and CDA on 28.07.2005 and in light of Section 47 

of  the  Registration  Act,  1908,  if  Sale  Deed  is  registered  with  the  Joint  Sub-

Registrar today i.e. 15.05.2008, the lease deed shall operate from the date of its 

execution. 

13.  Mr.  Babar  Sattar,  Advocate  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  appearing  on 

behalf  of  appellants  in  ICA  No.102-2017,  inter  alia,  contended  that  stranger  to 

the lis is not prohibited to file an appeal. Reliance was placed on case reported as 

‘H.M.  Saya  &  Com.  Karachi  VS  Wazir  Ali  Industries  Limited,  Karachi  and 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

12 

others’ (PLD 1969 Supreme Court 65) and it was also contended that sub-lessees 

have vested right therefore have locus standi to file the instant appeal.  

13. 

Learned counsel, on facts, adopted the arguments by the learned counsel 

for the appellant in ICA No.109-2017.     

14. 

It  was  argued  that  CDA,  being  the  state  functionary  and  the  Regulator, 

performs  obligatory  duty  to  the  public  which  is  a  sacred  trust  and  so  is  the 

exercise  of  statutory  functions;  that  the  impugned  judgment  disregarded  the 

settled principle that right of innocent third party ought to be protected and no 

person  should  be  made  to  suffer  on  account  of  acts  of  public  functionary. 

Reliance was placed on cases reported as ‘The Montgomery Flour and General 

Mills Ltd. Montgomery VS The Director Food Purchases West Pakistan, Lahore 

and others’ [(PLD 1957 (W.P.) Lahore 914)], ‘Ikram Bus Service and others VS 

Board of Revenue, West Pakistan and others’ (PLD 1963 Supreme Court 564), 

‘Habib Ullah Energy Limited and another VS WAPDA through Chairman and 

others’ (PLD 2014 Supreme Court 47) & ‘Owaisco VS Federation of Pakistan’ 

(PLD 1999 Karachi 472). 

15.  Mr.  Babar  Sattar,  ASC  further  argued  that  court  can  look  into  the 

contractual matters in its jurisdiction under Article 199 ibid. It was also argued 

that rights of third party have been ignored and disregarded. In this  behalf, the 

distinction  between  occupation  and  possession  was  ignored;  that  the  Judge-in-

Chambers  decided  the  issues  beyond  the  subject  matter  and  pleadings  of  the 

parties and failed to draw a distinction between void and voidable orders. It was 

contended that writ petition ought not to be exercised in aid of injustice; that the 

conduct  of  CDA  attracts  estopple  against  it  and  it  cannot  approbate  and 

reprobate and the doctrine of substantial compliance has been ignored. Learned 

counsel  took  the  Court  through  various  doctrines 

including 

legitimate 

expectation  and  locus  poenitentiae  and  contended  that  same  are  attracted  in  the 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

13 

facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  Reliance  was 

placed  on  cases  reported  as 

‘Federal  Government  Employees  Housing 

Foundation VS Muhammad Akram Alizai, Deputy Controller, PBC, Islamabad’ 

(PLD 2002 Supreme Court 1079),  ‘Munir  Ahmad Ghulam Muhammad Akhtar 

VS  Pakistan  Defence  Housing  Authority  (DHA)’  (2004  YLR  2047  Karachi), 

‘Pakistan 

through 

the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Finance  VS  Muhammad 

Himayatullah Faruki’ (PLD 1969 Supreme Court 407), ‘Council of Civil Services 

Union VS Minister for the Civil Services’ [(1985) A.C. 374)], ‘National Buildings 

Construction  Corporation  VS  S.  Raghunath’  [(1988)  7  SCC  66)  &  ‘Food 

Corporation of India VS Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries’ [(19930 1 SCC 71]. 

16. 

Learned counsel further contended that in case of immovable properties, 

the  monetary  compensation  is  not  an  adequate  remedy  and  the  specific 

performance  is.  Reliance  was  placed  on  case  reported  as  ‘Province  of  Punjab 

through District Coordination Officer, Okara and others VS Market Committee, 

Okara through  Chairman/Secretary’ (2011 SCMR 1856). Learned counsel  took 

the Court through the provisions of Registration Act, 1908 as well as Transfer of 

Property Act, 1882 to argue that documents in question are enforceable and do 

not suffer from any illegality. Reliance was placed on cases reported as ‘Board of 

Trustees  through  Chairman/Additional  Secretary,  Government  of  Pakistan, 

Islamabad and another VS Jamila Akhtar and Another’ (2003 SCMR 1174), ‘Mst. 

Saadia  VS  Mst.  Gul  Bibi’  (2016  SCMR  662),  ‘Ali  Rehman  VS  Fazal  Mehmud 

and  8-others’  (2003  SCMR  327),  ‘Mst.  Ghulam  Sakina  VS  Umar  Baksh  and 

Another’  (PLD  1964  Supreme  Court  456) &  ‘Tufail Muhammad  through  L.Rs 

VS  Messrs  Siddique  Textile  Mills  Ltd.  and  others’  (2009  SCMR  1091).  It  was 

contended  that  allegation  of  fraud  ought  to  have  been  proved.  Reliance  was 

placed on cases reported as ‘Ghulam Ghous VS Muhammad Yasin and Another’ 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

14 

(2009  SCMR  70)  & 

‘Messrs  Vinder  Textile  Mills  Ltd.  VS  Industrial 

Development Bank of Pakistan’ (1999 YLR 1188). 

17.  The  other  learned  counsels  for  the  appellant  adopted  the  arguments  by 

learned counsels for the appellants in ICA No.109-2017 & 102-2017, however, 

Mr.  Ali  Raza,  Advocate  Supreme  Court  contended  that  questions  involved,  in 

the instant case, are disputed and need factual inquiry hence the matter ought to 

have  been referred to the courts  of plenary jurisdiction  and findings  on merits 

should not have been given by the Judge-in-Chambers.  

18. 

Similarly, Mr. Rashideen Nawaz Kasuri, Advocate, appearing on behalf of 

Bank of Punjab, inter alia contended that the property in question was mortgaged 

with  the  Bank  of  Punjab  and  since  the  appellant  defaulted  in  repayment  of 

finance therefore the Bank is pursuing its legal remedy.      

19. 

Learned counsel for the respondent CDA, inter alia, contended that instant 

appeals are not maintainable in light of proviso to section 3(2) of Law Reforms 

Ordinance,  1972.  In  this  behalf,  it  was  contended  that  Regulation  4.1.22  of 

Islamabad  Land  Disposal  Regulation,  2005  provides  right  of  appeal  to  CDA 

Board  hence  these  appeals  are  not  maintainable.  It  was  further  submitted  that 

new respondents have been impleaded in the appeal, which could not have been 

done;  that  Federation  of  Pakistan  was  added  in  two  of  the  appeals  i.e.  ICA 

No.125/2017  &  ICA  No.127/2017;  that  equitable  relief  cannot  be  granted  to 

any  party,  which  approaches  the  Court  with  unclean  hands,  as  the  remedy  is 

discretionary; that the land belongs to the people of Pakistan and held by CDA 

as a fiduciary therefore its disposal has to be fair, open and transparent; that the 

appellant has committed fraud with CDA by selling the commercial area to Bank 

of  Punjab  and  obtaining  loan  for  the  appellant  on  fake  and  bogus  documents 

and collecting Rs.5.3 billion  from buyers  by  sale  of the Apartments which  was 

not  permissible;  that  booking  with  respect  to  the  Apartments  is  for  a  sum  of 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

15 

Rs.7.3 billion. It was also contended that sale of Apartments in commercial space 

to third party is void in light of Section 23 of NAB Ordinance, 1999 inasmuch as 

NAB is investigating the matter and in this behalf, inquiry is pending.  

20.  Mr. Kashif Ali Malik, Advocate High Court contended that lease deed is 

not registered hence is not enforceable in light of Section 17 read  with Section 

49  of  the  Registration  Act,  1908.  Reliance  was  placed  on  cases  reported  as 

‘Government of Sindh VS Muhammad Shafi etc. (2015 SC 380) & ‘HBL VS Dr. 

Munawar Ali Siddiqui’ (1991 SCMR 1185). It was further submitted that factual 

controversy  has  been  raised  by  way  of  challenging  the  cancellation  of  lease; 

construction  issues,  land  disposal  issues,  payment  issues  and  scope  of  the 

Project,  which  cannot  be  looked  into  in  Constitutional  jurisdiction;  that 

document not produced before the Court in Writ Petition, cannot be considered 

in ICA. Reliance was placed on case reported as 2007 SCMR 130; that plea not 

taken  before  the  Court  in  Writ  Petition,  cannot  be  introduced  in  Intra  Court 

Appeal  (PLD  2002  Lahore  28).  It  was  further  contended  that  scope  of  Intra 

Court  Appeal  is  like  a  review  petition  under  Order  47  Rule  1  CPC  meant  to 

correct errors apparent on the face of record (2004 CLC 1104). 

21. 

Learned counsel contended that scope of the Project was construction of 

a  Five  Star  Hotel  and  Serviced  Apartments  and  was  not  for  Residential 

Apartments. The number of rooms was restricted to between 250 to 300,  with 

other  amenities  to  form  integral  part  of  the  Hotel  and  to  be  managed  by  the 

Hotel management; that the Apartments or commercial space was not meant for 

sale  or  sub-lease  in  view  of  CDA  letter  dated  25.02.2005;  that  Project  did  not 

include a Shopping Mall but the shops were meant to be part of the Hotel, as is 

the practice in other cases. It was further submitted that through collusion and 

fraud,  the  scope  of  the  Project  was  changed  and  enlarged  in  the  lease  deed, 

which was not possible and the leasehold rights were to be passed on payment 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

16 

of 100% of cost of land. Learned counsel further submitted that BNP Pvt. Ltd. 

has  no  experience  of  a  Five  Star  Hotel  which  could  only  be  attributed  to 

Belahasa which is part of BNP Group and had nothing to do with the Company. 

Even Belhasa was a Real Estate Management Company; that terms of conditions 

of auction along with building parameters were issued by CDA and the byelaws 

were  placed  before  the  Chairman,  CDA  for  perusal  and  not  for  approval, 

whereas byelaws duly approved by CDA Board on 11.10.1997, were ignored at 

the time of disposal of Plot. It was further contended that terms of auction as 

well as lease deed did not allow creation of sublease and therefore  the referred 

sub-lessees are strangers and have their remedy, if any, against the appellant and 

not against CDA. It was contended that even-otherwise, referred sub-lessees do 

not have any interest or right in the Apartments, as the transfer was void in light 

of  Section  23  of  NAB  Ordinance,  1999.  Moreover,  it  was  argued  that  even 

subleases  have  been  created through  an  unregistered document, which  again is 

not  tenable;  that  the  height  of  the  Building  could  not  have  been  increased 

without  approval  from  the  Federal  Government;  that  re-scheduling  of  the 

payment was a form of post-bid change. Learned counsel also submitted that the 

appellant is a distinct entity from Elite Home Fashions Pvt. Ltd. as well as BNP 

Group and that BNP Pvt. Ltd. cannot be equated with BNP Group; that sale of 

the  Apartments  by  the  appellant  to  the  strangers  as  Residential  Apartments  is 

violation of building laws of CDA; that leasehold rights were mortgaged without 

obtaining a formal NOC; that  the appellant is in default of CDA dues and the 

Project is in violation of the Islamabad Master Plan and building regulations. In 

this  behalf,  it  was  contended  that  the  appellant  had  violated  the  provisions  of 

CDA  Ordinance,  1960,  CDA  Building  Regulation,  2005,  CDA  Land  Disposal 

Regulation,  2005  and  CDA  Property  Manual  (Instructions,  Policies  and 

Practices). 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

17 

22.  The  arguments  on  behalf  of  learned  counsels  for  the  parties  have  been 

heard and the documents, placed on record, have been examined with their able 

assistance.   

23.  The  facts,  leading  to  filing  of  instant  appeals,  have  already  been 

mentioned hereinabove with brevity therefore need not be reproduced.  

24.  The appellants are aggrieved of cancellation of leasehold rights by CDA. 

25. 

In  order  to  examine  the  legality  of  the  action  taken  by  CDA,  it  is 

imperative  to  draw  chain  of  documents  and  the  obligations  created  upon  the 

appellant.  In  principle,  the  Government  of  Pakistan  decided  to  construct  a 

Monument, Convention Centre and a Banquet Hall at the Southern End of the 

Constitution Avenue, Islamabad between the existing Murree Road and Shahra-

e-Kashmir.  This  decision  was  taken  on  11.01.1996  and  it  was  also  decided  to 

amend the Master Plan to permit right-of-way of Shahra-e-Kashmir to 700-feet. 

After its construction, a decision was taken to privatize Convention Centre and 

to this effect, decision was taken on 06.05.1997. It was also acknowledged that 

under  the  Master  Plan,  the  area  was  earmarked  for  Kashmir  High  Way  and 

Murree Road therefore the same was modified partially. Subsequently, a decision 

was taken by the Federal Government on 17.06.1997 for construction of a Five 

Star  Hotel,  Shopping  Mall  etc.  along  with  Convention  Centre  and  permission 

was  sought  for  alteration  of  Master  Plan  as  well  as  change  in  the  Zoning 

Regulations.  In  this  behalf,  an  advertisement  was  made  for  construction  and 

operation  of  a  Five  Star  Hotel,  which  is  evident  by  examination  of  the  same 

appearing in Daily ‘DAWN’ on September 25, 2004. The applications were also 

invited  for  pre-qualification  to  participate  in  the  bidding  process  for  99-years’ 

lease to construct the Hotel and operate the same. The payment was to be made 

within 15-years. Under the terms, the Project’s scope was explained as under: - 

 
ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

18 

PROJECT SCOPE 
The  CDA  seeks  the  development  of  a  Five  Star  Luxury  Hotel  near 
Convention Center Islamabad with a target opening date of fall 2008, in close 
proximity  of  state  of  the  art,  Conventional  Center.  The  CDA’s  larger  goals 
through the development of the Project are to provide a positive economic impact 
resulting  in  quality  jobs  for  the  Islamabad  workforce  and  contribution  to  the 
long-term economic growth objective. 

The CDA’s interest in developing this facility is to provide a quality facility in 
the city. At present there are only two hotels, Serena and Marriot, catering to 
the needs of corporate, government and private sector. 

CDA  wants  construction  of  a  250-300  rooms  facility  with  a  major 
international brand with related amenities and facilities. The CDA desires that 
such  amenities  and  facilities  feature  at  least  ten  presidential  suites.  Other 
amenities  and  facilities  may  include  service  apartments,  restaurants,  various 
lounges,  a  business  center  and  ease  of  access  to  communication  and  internet 
technologies  throughout  the  facility.  Provision  of  adequate  parking  facilities  is 
one of the basic pre-requisite. 

This  is  not  intended  to  limit  Respondents  creativity  or  ability  to  propose  an 
alternative  scale  or  set  of  features  and  amenities  deemed  to  better  suit  the 
purpose of providing such facility through this Project. 

The said terms and conditions also laid down the experience and qualifications 

which is as follows: - 

I. Experience and Qualifications 
A.  Description  of  the  Development  Team:  A  brief  description  of  the 
developer  operator,  builder,  architect,  and  consultant  team—including  the 
following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

Name and contact information of participating teams. 
Name of lend firm and lend contract person. 
Years established. 
Size of each firm, indicating the number of principals. 
The role of each firms in the project. 

B. 
Statement  of  Project  Understanding:  the  Development  team  should 
submit  statement  of  understating  of  the  opportunities  the  site  presents.  The 
statement should convey to CDA the vision for the site and how the developer 
intends to achieve a high quality luxury hotel. Limit it to too pages. CDA is 
not requiring detailed building designs at this time, however the proponent may 
include a conceptual design.  

C. 
Key  Project  Personnel:  The  names  and  qualifications  of  the  principal 
and project manager in charge; for both the developer and other team members.  
Please limit to one page per team member. 

D. 
Project Team Qualifications: An outline of the firm and team member 
qualification  including  relevant  experience  with  similar  projects  such  as  full 
service  hotels,  multistory  office  with  underground  parking  in  an  urban 
environment or multistory commercial facility in the suburban area. 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

19 

E. 
Experience:  A  brief  narrative,  graphics  and/or  photos  of  the  projects 
developed  by  each  firm  that  are  most  similar  to  this  project.  The  project 
description should include the following: 
Project name and location. 
1. 
Names of the firms involved. 
2. 
Summary of the project. 
3. 
Project budget or coat. 
4. 
Role and level of involvement of key personnel. 
5. 
6. 
Dates of construction or completion. 
Reference, Related Experience, and Examples of Work: Reference for 
F. 
related  projects,  Specify  the  project,  location,  developer’s  role,  project  manager, 
financing, and the level of participation by public agency, if any. 

Successful experience with project in the development and operation of a 

G. 
world wide recognized hotel chain is required. 

Financing  Capabilities:  The  developer  must  explain  the  financing 
H. 
structure of the last major projects they have completed in order to demonstrate 
the team’s ability to finance the project through both debt and equity financing. 

A bank draft or Pay Order of PKR 25,000 (non-refundable) in the 
I. 
name  of  “Project  Development  Cell”  Capital  Development  Authority  should 
also be submitted as security fee. 

Apparently,  BNP  Group,  being 

the  Consortium  comprising  Members 

mentioned  hereinabove,  was  shortlisted  and  qualified.  The  conditions  and 

byelaws, provided in the bidding, are mentioned herein below: - 

Vision 
CDA envisions that besides providing Islamabad with much needed facility; the 
developer  will  build  an  iconic  building  symbolizing  the  model  and  moderate 
capital. 

CDA is visualizing a “performance criteria” for the selected developer to follow. 
These  Performance  criteria  have  been  prepared  to  provide  flexibility  to  the 
bidder while ensuring that a five star hotel facility as per international standard 
is  built.  The  bidders  is  to  ensure  that  standards  of  comfort  safety,  including 
structural,  and  fire  are  fulfilled  and  are  in  accordance  with  criteria  of  a 
international chain of operators of five star hotel facilities. 

BNP Group was declared as a successful bidder and consequently, a lease deed 

was  entered  into  between  the  appellant  and  CDA.  The  referred  document  is 

dated  28.07.2005  and  is  registered  with  the  Rent  Controller,  Islamabad  as 

required  under  Islamabad  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance,  2001.  It  is  pertinent  to 

observe  that  the  referred  document  is  not  registered  with  the  Registrar  of 

Documents  under  Registration  Act,  1908.  It  is  also  pertinent  to  observe  that 

 
ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

20 

referred  document  proposes  to  create  a  lease  in  favour  of  the  appellant  for  a 

period of 99-years and hence was required to be compulsorily registered under 

section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908.  

26.  The  Capital  Development  Authority,  vide  meeting  held  on  29.07.2016, 

took decision  to cancel the  lease  created in favour of  the appellant, which  was 

accordingly  communicated  to  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  appellant  on 

03.08.2016. The decision of the Board of CDA is as follows: - 

DECISION 
The Board after hearing point of view from both parties and carrying out deep 
analysis of the arguments presented, observed/decided the case on the following 
basis: 

•  That BNP Group (comprising of i.e. Bismillah Textile (Pvt.) Ltd., ii. 
Niagara Mills (Pvt.) Ltd., iii. Paragon City (Pvt.) Ltd., iv. Belhasa 
International Company LLC, participated in the bidding process and 
was declared as the highest bidder. 

•   BNP (Pvt.) Limited formerly known as Elite Home Fashions (Pvt.) 
Limited, which was a separate business entity from the ‘BNP Group’ 
without participating in the entire bidding process managed to sign the 
sale deed with CDA on 28.07.2005. 

•  That  as  per  company  ordinance  1984,  any  private  limited  company 
that under goes into such agreement under such circumstances is bound 
to declare both present and former names of the companies side by side 
on all legal contracts for at least a period of one year. 

•  That the several relaxations are extended to BNP Group from time to 
time  in  contradiction  to  rules  and  regulations  which  facilitated  the 
developer to the determent of the CDA and thus caused huge loss to the 
CDA. 

•  That the BNP Group affected these changes in terms & conditions and 

are accountable for their actions at appropriate forum. 

•  That without seeking completion certificate the petitioner has committed 
a  serious  violation  of  CDA  laws  and  regulations  by  handing  over 
possession  to  third  parties  as  has  been  mentioned  in  the  writ  petition 
filed  in  Islamabad  High  Court.  The  creation  of  third  party  interests 
without obtaining ‘completion certificate’ or permission from CDA was 
absolutely illegal and amounted to fraud. 

•  That as regards the involvement of CDA officials in this project at the 
relevant  times,  the  Board  decided  that  appropriate  action  may  be 
initiated by the competent forums. 

•  That the site which was initially declared as hotel site and auctioned as 
one is not utilized yet, which was an integral part of the project. This 
along with several other issues pointed out above is a clear violation of 
CDA by-laws. 
Accordingly, the Board decided to cancel the lease agreement/allotment 
of M/s BNP (Pvt.) Ltd., in accordance with law after completion due 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

21 

process.  The concerned directorate should complete all codal formalities 
in this regard”. 

27.  As noted above, the decision of CDA was challenged through a petition 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  which  was  dismissed  by  the  Judge-in-

Chambers vide the impugned judgment.  

28.  One of the  main grounds for cancellation of lease  agreement  is that the 

appellant i.e. BNP Pvt. Ltd. never participated in the process of bidding and was 

not  prequalified.  In  this  regard,  the  pre-qualification  was  of  BNP  Group  and 

participation  was  also  by  it  in  the  bidding  process,  which  is  a  Consortium 

comprising Bismillah Textile Pvt. Ltd., Niagara Mills Pvt. Ltd., Paragon City Pvt. 

Ltd.  &  Belhasa  International  Company  LLC.  At  the  time  of  prequalification, 

Memorandum  of  Understanding  was  presented  to  CDA  and  later  on,  Joint 

Venture Agreement entered into between the parties, was also placed on record. 

It was only at the time of execution of lease deed that BNP Pvt. Ltd. surfaced. It 

is  pertinent  to  observe  that  CDA,  at  the  time,  did  not  raise  any  objection 

regarding  legal  status  of  BNP  Pvt.  Ltd.  or  at  least  there  is  no  document  on 

record to the effect. The JV Agreement between the parties is dated 06.03.2005; 

under  the  same,  the  object  of  the  Company  was  to  implement  the  Project.  In 

Clause  3.1,  it  was  provided  that  the  parties  shall  change  the  name  of  existing 

Company i.e. Elite Home Fashions Pvt. Ltd. to BNP Pvt. Ltd. The authorized 

share capital of the Company was to be Rupees 20-million and its shareholders 

were  to  be  Abdul  Hafeez  Sheikh,  Imran  Ahmed,  Shazia  Hafeez  Sheikh, 

Muhammad Abdul Hameed Sheikh & Abdul Majeed Sheikh. The Management 

of the Company was to vest in its Directors and Bismillah Textile Limited was to 

nominate/appoint  two  Directors,  whereas  Niagra  Mills  Ltd.  and  Paragon  City 

Pvt.  Ltd.  were  to  nominate/appoint  one  Director  each.  Pursuant  to  the  said 

Agreement,  change  in  the  name  of  Elite  Home  Fashions  (Pvt.)  Limited  took 

 
ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

22 

place on 02.05.2005 and a Certificate was accordingly issued by the Securities & 

Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan.  The  list  of  shareholders,  appended  with 

Articles of Association, indicates Farooq Ahmad Sheikh, Shazia Hameed Sheikh 

& Razia Sheikh as its shareholders. Form-29, appended with the appeal, indicates 

that Mr. Abdul Hafeez Sheikh is the Chief Executive with Shazia Hafeez Sheikh 

and M. Abual Adham Sheikh as Directors. In the referred position, it is evident 

that  appellant  is  a  ‘distinct  entity’  from  BNP  Group.  Moreover,  Joint  Venture 

Agreement  between  JV  Partners  envisaged  formation  of  a  Company  and 

appointment  of  Directors  and  shareholders  in  a  particular  manner  and  of 

number  which  did  not  materialize.  The  examination  of  the  requirements  for 

prequalification  for  construction  of  the  Hotel  and  running  the  same,  required 

expertise  and  experience  in  the  Hotel  business,  which  the  appellant  and  its 

shareholders  do  not  possess  hence  the  prequalification  was  made  of  a 

person/entity different from one, which signed the lease deed.  

29. 

It is fundamental principle of Company Laws that a Company formed and 

incorporated under the law, is a ‘distinct person’ from its shareholders and as is 

commonly  termed  that  when  a  company  is  formed,  “veil  of  incorporation”  is 

cast between the entity created and its shareholders. In certain situations, veil of 

incorporation can be lifted to examine who effectively is running the Company 

and managing its affairs. In the present case, as noted above, BNP Pvt. Ltd. is a 

different  entity  from  BNP  Group  and  even  to  examine  the  assertion  of  the 

appellant  that  it  is  one  and  the  same,  if  the  veil  of  incorporation  is  lifted,  it  is 

seen  that  the  appellant  is  a  private  affair  of  Mr.  Abdul  Hafeez  Sheikh  and  his 

family  primarily.  The  Joint  Venture  Agreement  envisaged  appointment  and 

nomination of the Directors of JV Partners, however, Form-29, appended with 

the record, does not reflect the same. The execution of lease deed between CDA 

and  appellant  was  not  in  conformity  with  the  bidding  process,  as  the  entity 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

23 

which  executed  the  lease  deed,  was  not  the  same,  which  participated  in  the 

process. No document or verbal assertion was made on behalf of the appellant 

to  show  that  the  shareholders  of  the  appellant  have  requisite  experience  and 

expertise  in  construction  of  a  Hotel  and  running  the  same.  The  deal  by  CDA 

with  appellant  and  its  Management,  if  not  in  collusion,  is  reflective  of 

incompetence on its part. The finding by the Judge-in-Chambers, on the issue in 

hand which is one of the reasons for cancellation of lease agreement, does not 

suffer  from  any  factual  or  legal  infirmity  as  CDA  did  not  conclude  the 

transaction in a transparent manner.  

30.  The other main reason ascribed in the decision by the Board of CDA for 

cancellation  of  lease  in  favour  of  the  appellant,  is  violation  of  CDA  laws 

including Rules and Regulations. In this behalf, the parent statute which governs 

the functioning of CDA, is the Capital Development Authority Ordinance, 1960. 

Under  section  11  of  the  same,  there  has  to  be  a  Master  Plan  for  Islamabad 

Capital Territory and in all schemes/sectors, development work is to be carried 

out according to said Master Plan. Section 51 of the 1960 Ordinance, authorizes 

CDA  to  frame  regulations  for  the  purposes  of  carrying  out  its  functions. 

Pursuant  to  referred provision, CDA has  framed various rules and regulations. 

The  relevant  ones,  for  the  purposes  of  present  controversy,  are  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory  (Zoning)  Regulation,  1992  and  Islamabad  Land  Disposal 

Regulation, 2005.  

31.  As  noted  above,  initially  when  approval  for  construction  of  Convention 

Centre was granted, Master Plan was accordingly amended, however there is no 

document  on  record  which  shows  that  Master  Plan  was  amended  for 

constructing  a  Five  Star  Hotel  with  other  amenities,  as  advertised.  This  is  in 

violation of provisions of CDA Ordinance, 1960. Under the Islamabad Capital 

Territory  (Zoning) Regulation, 1992, the Islamabad  Capital  Territory  is divided 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

24 

into five Zones as delineated in the Master Plan. The property in question falls in 

Zone-III, which includes Margalla Hills National Park as notified under section 

21  of  the  Islamabad  Wild  Life  (Protection,  Preservation,  Conversion  and 

Management)  Ordinance,  1979.  Other  protected  ranges,  forest  areas  and 

unacquired  land  fall  between  Margalla  Hills  and  North  of  Murree  Road, 

Islamabad.  Under  clause  4,  the  development  for  the  land  in  the  Zones,  is 

subjected to certain conditions. In this regard, clause 4(iii) provides for the land 

use in Zone-III. The bare reading of the land use shows that no sale/purchase of 

land  which  entails  change  in  the  land  use,  is  to  be  allowed  and  neither  any 

residential  scheme  could  be  floated  in  the  Zone  nor  construction  of  houses 

would be allowed. The  appellant has  controverted the position by arguing that 

the land does not fall within Zone-III however, no cogent material was placed 

on record to substantiate the referred argument.  

32.  The  land  is  to  be  disposed  by  CDA  pursuant  to  the  Islamabad  Land 

Disposal Regulation, 2005. In this regard, the land use has been placed in various 

categories by classification of plots as provided in Regulation 3. Regulation 3(2) 

defines  commercial  and  business  plots  and  includes  plots  for  Hotels.  Under 

Regulation  6,  all  commercial  and  business  plots  are  to  be  sold  or  leased  out 

through  open  auction  as  commercial  plots  for  activities  provided  under 

Regulation 3(2). In this regard, under Regulation 6(2), plots are leased out or sold 

for any of the activities within the scope of commercial plot as defined in clause 

3(2). Under clause 3, CDA may permit a different land use subject to payment of 

conversion  fee  however  plots  allotted  for  construction  and  use  as  inter  alia 

Hotels/Five Star Hotel/Sites for Multi Storey Building, will not be allowed any 

conversion. Under Regulation 16, the construction is to be completed within the 

prescribed  time  period,  however  under  Regulation  17  ibid,  the  completion 

period  may  be  extended.  Regulation  19  provides  for  cancellation  of  plots  on 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

25 

account of non-payment of dues within the prescribed period, non-completion 

of building within the specified period, violation of other terms and conditions 

of  allotment  e.g.  non-conforming  use  and  violation  of  municipal  byelaws  and 

building zoning and other regulations.  

33.  Admittedly,  the  appellant  has  not  paid  the  installments,  which  it  was 

required to do under the lease deed and the amendments made thereto; even the 

building  is  not  yet  complete  and  the  plot  was  leased  out  for  construction  of  a 

Five  Star  Hotel  with  Serviced  Apartments  and  other  amenities  but  it  is  an 

admitted  position 

that 

the  Apartments  constructed  have  been  sold 

out/subleased  to  strangers,  for  consideration,  to  be  used  as  Residential 

Apartments;  the  above  facts  amount  to  violation  of  terms  of  allotment  and 

hence compelled CDA to cancel the lease of Plot as provided under Regulation 

19. The conditions of lease and byelaws clearly provide that the purpose of the 

Project  is  to  build  a  Five  Star  Hotel  or  of  higher  rating  along  with  Serviced 

Apartments  and  related  facilities.  It  has  been  argued vehemently  that  since  the 

Apartments shall be managed by the Builder/appellant by way of maintenance, 

therefore,  they  are  Serviced  Apartments,  hence  there  is  no  violation.  The 

referred argument is spurned inasmuch  as  the concept of Serviced  Apartments 

in  the  common  parlance  is  that  it  is  a  letting  for  a  shorter  or  longer  term 

generally on the basis of a license; they are furnished and provide amenities for 

house-keeping  and  allied  services  for  guests.  The  Serviced  Apartments  offer 

facilities  much  like  a  traditional  Hotel  but  with  added  space,  convenience  and 

privacy  like  a  home  (The  concept  as  is  provided  by  Association  of  Serviced 

Apartments).  The  sublease(s)  executed  between  the  appellant  and  others  does 

not  envisage  this  concept  and  creates  a  sublease  for  a  period  shorter  than  99 

years  for consideration. Moreover,  the  bare  perusal  of  the  sub-lease  agreement 

shows that permitted use is residential. The examination of terms and conditions 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

26 

makes it evident that the transaction is more or less sale of the leasehold rights 

defeating  the  purpose  for  which,  the  Plot  was  to  be  utilized.  Likewise,  the 

advertisement  was  for  amenities  related  to  hotel  business  including  shops  etc. 

and  did  not  provide  for  establishment  of  a  Shopping  Mall.  Reliance  has  been 

placed,  on  behalf  of  appellant,  on  clause  2.6  of  the  lease  deed  to  justify 

mortgaging or subleasing its rights. The recitals in the lease deed make reference 

to the newspaper advertisement and bidding by BNP Group however, the word 

‘Serviced’ has been omitted there-from, which could be inadvertent or deliberate 

on part of CDA officials. As noted above, all along in the advertisement as well 

as  in  the  conditions  for  sale  and  byelaws,  it  was  emphasized  that  a  Five  Star 

Hotel and Serviced Apartments are to be constructed. The noteable omission of 

the word ‘Serviced’ in the Lease Deed shows that appellant along with CDA has 

flouted  the  purpose  for  which,  the  Plot  was  to  be  used.  The  lease  agreement 

could not deviate from the purpose, for which, the property was leased out. The 

construction  and  sale  of  Residential  Apartments  is  in  clear  violation  of 

Islamabad Land  Disposal  Regulation, 2005  as  well  as  1992 Zoning  Regulation, 

which has the status of law, as the same have been framed under section 51 of 

Capital  Development  Authority  Ordinance,  1960.  It  is  trite  law  that  any 

agreement, which is in violation of law, is not sustainable.  

34. 

It  has  been  argued  on  behalf  of  appellant  that  CDA  is  estopped  from 

denying  the  position  regarding  construction  of  Residential  Apartments  and/or 

other  infirmities  raised  by  it.  It  is  an  admitted  position  that  there  can  be  no 

estopple against law. The Plot was leased out specifically as a Hotel site and was 

to  include  Serviced  Apartments  and  not  Residential  Apartments,  as  has  been 

done through sub-leases. As mentioned above, sublease defeats the purpose of 

Serviced  Apartments,  as  the  word  or  concept  is  understood  in  the  common 

usage. 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

27 

35.  Another aspect of the matter though is not provided in the Minutes of the 

Meeting of CDA Board, whereby it was decided that the lease shall be cancelled 

but was argued before the Court, is the effect of non-registration of lease deed. 

The CDA executed lease in favour of appellant for a period of 99-years. Under 

section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, where lease is for a period of more than 

eleven  months,  the  same  is  compulsorily  registered.  Under  section  49  of  the 

Registration  Act,  1908  if  a  document  which  is  required  under  the  law  to  be 

compulsorily  registered  is  not  registered,  it  does  not  create  any  right.  The 

amendments made in the lease deed were also not registered. The appellant has 

placed  reliance  on  section  53-A  of  Transfer  of  Properties  Act  to  argue  that 

where purchaser is put in possession in part performance of sale agreement, he is 

deemed to be the owner. We are afraid that the referred argument is not tenable 

however no detailed deliberation is required on this aspect of the case inasmuch 

as the lease was not cancelled on the basis of unregistered document. However, 

since the document is unregistered, it did not create rights for 99-years therefore 

lease could have been revoked/cancelled.  

36.  The appellant filed a petition under Article 199 of the Constitution against 

cancellation of lease. This Court, in exercise of powers under Article 199 of the 

Constitution ibid, had limited scope to examine the administrative action taken 

by CDA. In this regard, three general principles, on the basis of which, judicial 

review against any administrative action is undertaken, are illegality, irrationality 

and procedural impropriety. The detailed questions of fact cannot be gone into, 

in  a  petition  under  Article  199  ibid.  The  impugned  action  of  CDA  does  not 

suffer  from  referred  principles  namely  illegality,  irrationality  and  procedural 

impropriety inasmuch under the law, CDA is empowered to cancel the lease and 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

28 

the appellants were provided opportunity of hearing before doing so. The action 

taken is within the parameters of law.      

37.  Third parties, which claim to have acquired interest on the basis of sub-

leases  executed by the  appellant  in  their favour, sink or sail with the appellant. 

An argument was advanced that they are bonafide purchasers for value without 

notice. This argument is not sustainable in jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 

Constitution, as it requires evidence and the sub-lessees emay agitate the matter 

in  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction.  The  sub-lessees  also  have  the  remedy 

against  the  appellant  which  they  may  agitate  before  court  of  competent 

jurisdiction.  In  light  of  case  law  reported  as  ‘H.M.  Saya  &  Com.  Karachi  VS 

Wazir  Ali  Industries  Limited,  Karachi  and  others’  (PLD  1969  Supreme  Court 

65), no specific permission was granted to sub-lessees to file appeals as they were 

not  parties  in  the  writ  petition,  however  they  were  heard  and  the  appeals  are 

being decided on merit.  

38.  Moreover, all  along, it was advertised and existed in the documents  that 

Apartments were Serviced Apartments and not Residential Apartments therefore 

no  misrepresentation  existed  on  part  of  CDA  to  the  public  at  large.  At  best, 

CDA failed to  warn  the public when  it came to  its notice that Apartments are 

being sold for residential purposes. As regulator, it was expected of CDA to be 

more  vigilant  and  avoid  the  situation  which  has  been  created  due  to  their 

inaction,  in  the  form  of  third  party  rights  and  erection  of  twin  towers.  The 

impugned judgment does not suffer from any error of law or factual infirmities 

calling for interference in appeal. 

39. 

In view of above, above mentioned appeals except ICA No.229/2016 are 

without merit and are accordingly dismissed. ICA No.229/2016 is dismissed as 

ICA No.109-2017 etc. 

29 

having  become  infructuous.  All  pending  applications  are  accordingly  disposed 

of.   

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

       JUDGE  

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

Announced in Open Court on 03.09.2018 

       JUDGE  

Zawar 

JUDGE 

Uploaded by: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
