ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Election Appeal No.01/2016 

Chaudhary Wajid Ayub and another 
VS
Malik Rizwan Ahmed and others 

Dates of Hearing: 
Appellants by: 

Respondents by:  

01.03.2019, 15.03.2019 & 22.03.2019 
Malik Qamar Afzal and Mr. Saad Khan,  
Advocates   
M/s Tanveer Iqbal, Ali Murad Baloch and 
Salman Ajaib, Advocates.  

_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

appeal,  the  appellants,  (Chaudhary  Wajid  Ayub  and  Khurram 

Zeb  Khan),  impugn  order  dated  17.10.2016,  passed  by  the 

learned  Election  Tribunal, 

Islamabad,  dismissing  election 

petition  No.53/2016,  filed  by  the  appellants  to  challenge  the 

election  of  respondent  No.1  (Malik  Rizwan  Ahmed)  and 

respondent  No.2  (Najam  Hayat)  as  Chairman  and  Vice 

Chairman  of  Union  Council  No.47,  Tehsil  and  District 

Islamabad, respectively.  

2. 

 The 

record  shows 

that 

the  appellants  and 

the 

respondents  contested  elections  for  the  seat  of  Chairman  and 

Vice Chairman of Union Council No.47. The elections were held 

on  30.11.2015.  Respondents  No.1  and  2  were  declared  as 

returned  candidates  and  in  this  regard,  notification  dated 

05.12.2015 was  issued by the Election Commission  of Pakistan 

(“E.C.P.”). 

3. 

On  02.01.2016,  the  appellants  filed  an  election  petition 

under  Section  37  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Local 

Government  Act,  2015  (“I.C.T.-L.G.  Act”)  before  the  learned 

Election Tribunal, Islamabad. In the said election petition, it was 

pleaded  inter alia  that  respondent  No.1,  in  his  nomination 

papers,  concealed  his  and  his  wife‟s  assets;  that  respondent 

No.1‟s wife owned 63 kanals, 16 marlas of land in Mouza Tarnol, 

Tehsil and District Islamabad; that a portion of the said land was 

used  for  agriculture,  whereas  buildings  were  constructed  on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                2 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

the  rest  of  the  land;  that  respondent  No.1  had  also  concealed 

his  and  his  wife‟s  share  in  a  plot  measuring  2  marlas  and  96 

square  feet  purchased  through  registered  sale  deed  dated 

01.01.1990,  in  three  shops  purchased  through  registered  sale 

deed  dated  08.04.1990,  and  in  other  property  inherited  by 

respondent  No.1  and  his  wife;  that  the  disclosure  made  by 

respondent  No.1  in  his  nomination  papers  regarding  his  share 

in  the Jammu &  Kashmir Cooperative  Housing Society was not 

accurate;  that  the  said  concealment  disqualified  respondent 

No.1  from  being  elected  as  Chairman  of  Union  Council  No.47; 

and that  respondent No.1 had not paid income tax with respect 

to  the  rental  income  from  his  properties  disclosed  in  the 

nomination papers. 

4. 

The  said  election  petition  was  contested  by  respondents 

No.1  and  2  (i.e.,  the  returned  candidates)  by  filing  a  written 

reply.  In  the  said  reply,  the  said  respondents  took  preliminary 

objections  to  the  maintainability  of  the  election  petition.  It  was 

pleaded inter alia  that  since  the  appellants,  before  the  filing  of 

the  election  petition,  had  not,  either  personally  or  through 

registered post with acknowledgment due, served a copy of the 

election  petition  on 

the 

respondents, 

the  mandatory 

requirements  in  Rule  60  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

(Conduct  of  Election)  Rules,  2015  (“the  2015  Rules”)  had  been 

violated  rendering  the  election  petition  liable  to  be  dismissed. 

Another  objection  taken  by  the  said  respondents  was  to  the 

effect  that  the  election  petition,  its  schedule  and  annextures 

had not been verified in accordance with the law. Furthermore, 

it  was  pleaded  that  respondent  No.1  had  provided  complete 

details  of  his  assets  as  required  by  law  and  nothing  had  been 

concealed; that the details of respondent No.1‟s properties had 

been  provided  in  Form-XVII;  and  that  respondent  No.1  and  his 

family  had  been  given  plots 

in  the  Jammu  &  Kashmir 

Cooperative  Housing  Society  as  compensation 

for 

the 

acquisition of their ancestral land. 

 
                                3 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

5. 

From  the  divergent  pleadings  of  the  contesting  parties, 

the  learned  Election  Tribunal  framed  13  issues,  which  are 

reproduced herein below:-  

1.  Whether the petitioners have got cause of action to file 

the instant election petition? OPP 

2.  Whether this election petition is not maintainable, in 
view of the objections raised by the respondents? OPR 
3.  Whether the petitioners are estopped by their conduct 

to file the instant petition? OPR 

4.  Whether the petition is false, frivolous and allegations 

are vague? OPR 

5.  Whether  any  corrupt  or  illegal  practices  were 
committed and bogus votes were casted in favour of 
respondents and fake thumb impressions were affixed 
on ballots during the election of chairman & vice 
chairman on 30.11.2015? OPP 

6.  Whether  the  returned  candidates  and  returning 
officers  were  having  nexus  with  each  other  and 
rigging  took  place  to  favour  the  respondents  in 
connivance with the election staff? OPP 

7.  Whether  the  returned  candidates  concealed  their 

assets? If so its effects? OPP 

8.  Whether respondent No.1 is defaulter of WAPDA and 

income tax, if so, its effects? OPP 

9.  Whether 680 votes were illegally rejected? OPP  

10.  Whether some ballot papers were considered spoiled 
and thumb marked, if so, the rights of the petitioners 
become prejudiced? OPP 

11.  Whether there are differences between number of 
votes polled and number of entries in electoral roll, if 
so, its effects? OPP 

12.  Whether  the  petitioners  are  entitled  to  the  relief 

prayed for? OPP 

13.  Relief? 

6. 

Before  the  learned  Election  Tribunal,  the  appellants  did 

not press issues No.5, 6, 9, 10 and 11. The witnesses produced 

and  the  documents  tendered  in  evidence  on  behalf  of  the 

contesting  parties  are  detailed  in  paragraphs  5  to  18  of  the 

impugned  judgment  dated  17.10.2016.  The  learned  Election 

Tribunal decided issue No.2 in favour of respondents No.1 and 

2 and held that the election petition was not maintainable in the 

eyes of law. Nevertheless, after holding so, the learned Election 

Tribunal  went  ahead  and  decided  the  remaining  issues  on 

merits. Vide impugned judgment dated 17.10.2016, the election 

petition  was  dismissed.  In  this  appeal,  the  said  judgment  has 

been assailed.  

 
 
                                4 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

7. 

The  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  contesting 

parties  were  spread  over  several  dates  of  hearings  and  were 

supported by voluminous documents and case law.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  THE 
APPELLANTS:- 

8. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants,  after  narrating  the 

facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  appeal,  submitted  that 

the impugned judgment suffers from legal infirmities and factual 

errors;  that  the  non-service  of  the  election  petition‟s  copy  on 

the  respondents  personally  or  through  registered  A.D.  was  a 

mere  technicality;  that  a  copy  of  the  election  petition  was 

served  on 

the  respondents 

through  courier; 

that 

the 

requirement of Rule 60 of the 2015 Rules was directory and not 

mandatory,  because  no  penal  consequence  is  provided  for  its 

non-compliance;  that  the  learned  Election  Tribunal,  vide  order 

dated  02.01.2016,  directed  summons  to  be  issued  to  the 

respondents  through  courier;  that  notice  served  on  the 

respondents  through  courier  was  valid  since  the  same  was  in 

compliance with the order of the learned Election Tribunal; that 

the requirements of Rule 60 of the 2015 Rules were sufficiently 

and  substantially  complied  with  when  the  respondents  were 

served  with  the  notice  regarding  the  filing  of  the  election 

petition; that the respondents tendered appearance before the 

learned Election Tribunal after they were served with the notice 

through courier; and that the verification of the election petition 

was strictly in accordance with the law.  

9. 

Furthermore, 

learned  counsel 

for 

the  appellants 

submitted  that  the  placement  of  the  Oath  Commissioner‟s 

signature  has  been  made  a  ground  by  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal to oust the appellants; that all material documents had 

been  signed  by  the  Oath  Commissioner;  that  all  documents 

brought on record by the appellants were verified on oath; that 

the object of the Legislature was achieved when the documents 

on  record  were  attested  on  oath;  that  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal unlawfully discarded several documents that had been 

„marked‟;  that  the  documents  on  the  record  could  be  looked 

into; 

that 

the 

learned  Election  Tribunal  erred  by  not 

 
 
 
                                5 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

appreciating  that  the  nature  of  certain  documents  was  such 

that they did not need to be formally exhibited; that documents 

which  came  within  the  meaning  of  public  documents  were  not 

required  to  be  formally  exhibited;  that  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal  did  not  adjudicate  upon  the  admissibility  of  the 

documents;  and 

that 

the 

learned  Election  Tribunal 

concentrated  on 

the  preliminary  objections 

raised  by 

respondents No.1 and 2 and failed to adjudicate upon the issue 

regarding declaration of assets. 

10.  Learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that 

the  learned  Election  Tribunal  did  not  adequately  dilate  on  the 

issue  regarding  the  declaration  of  assets;  that  the  election  of 

respondents  No.1  and  2  was  liable  to  be  declared  void  on 

account of non-disclosure of assets by respondent No.1 and his 

wife;  that  asset  declaration 

is  the  foundation  of  all  the 

nomination  papers;  that  a  candidate  is  required  not  just  to 

declare his own assets but also those of his spouse; that there 

should be zero tolerance for non-declaration of assets; that if a 

candidate  declares  most  of  his  assets  but  omits  to  declare 

certain  other  assets,  he  is  liable  to  be  disqualified;  that  the 

concept  of  substantial  compliance  does  not  apply  regarding 

declaration  of  assets  in  the  nomination  papers;  that  strict 

compliance  is  to  be  shown  with  the  requirement  to  declare 

assets in the nomination papers; that in the impugned judgment, 

there is a clear admission that respondent No.1 did not declare 

his  inherited/ancestral  property;  and  that  the  requirement  to 

declare  assets  has  been  made  applicable  to  the  Local 

Government elections. 

11.  Learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that 

respondent  No.1  did  not  declare  six  of  his  bank  accounts;  that 

respondent  No.1  in  his  first  nomination  papers  mentioned  his 

inherited  share  to  be 1/11th,  whereas  in  the second  nomination 

papers, he  changed the same  into  1/10th; that  respondent No.1 

has not mentioned any rental income in his nomination papers; 

that  respondent  No.1  did  not  declare  his  ownership  of  Mehran 

Plaza  and  land  situated  in  village  Tarnol,  Islamabad,  in  his 

 
                                6 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

nomination  papers;  that  respondent  No.1  has  a  share  in  three 

commercial  buildings  called  Mehran,  Rizwan  and  Usman 

Plazas; and that respondent No.1 did  not declare  all his  assets 

fearing  that  he  may  be held  accountable  to  the  tax  authorities; 

that  respondent  No.1  was  a  tax  evader;  that  respondent  No.1 

was  not  exempt  from  disclosing  of his  inherited  property  in  his 

nomination  papers;  that  respondent  No.1  was  also  under  an 

obligation to  have  disclosed  his  wife‟s  assets;  that  Sections  12 

and  76-A  of  Representation  of  People  Act,  1976  (“R.O.P.A.”) 

have  to  be  strictly  construed;  that  due  to  non-disclosure  of 

respondent  No.1  and  his  wife‟s  assets,  respondent  No.1‟s 

election  was  liable  to  be  declared  as  void;  that  the  impugned 

judgment  is  contrary  to  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court;  that  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Ibrahim  VS 

Aftan  Shaban  Mirani  (2016  SCMR  722),  it  has  been  held  that 

under  Section  55  of  R.O.P.A.,  every  election  petition  and 

schedule annexed to that petition shall be signed by the election 

petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in Order VI, Rule 

15  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908(“C.P.C.”);  that  the 

learned  Election  Tribunal  erred  by  not  taking  into  account 

documents  which  were  part  of  the  Tribunal‟s  record;  and  that 

respondent  No.1  was  liable  to  be  disqualified  under  Article 

62(2)(f)  of  the  Constitution  since  he  was  not  sagacious, 

righteous,  non-profligate,  honest  and ameen.  Learned  counsel 

for  the appellants  prayed  for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed,  and  for 

the impugned judgment dated 17.10.2016 to be set-aside. 

CONTENTIONS  OF 
THE 
RESPONDENTS NO.1 AND 2:- 

LEARNED  COUNSEL 

FOR 

12.  On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents No.1 

and 2 submitted that under Section 37(2) of the I.C.T.-L.G. Act, 

an election petition is to be filed in a “prescribed manner”; that 

Rules  60  and  61  of  the  2015  Rules  prescribe  the  manner  in 

which an election petition is to be filed; that Rule 60 of the 2015 

Rules  obligates  the  election  petitioner  to  “serve personally or 

by  registered  post  with  acknowledgment  due  on  each 

respondent a copy of his petition”;  that  the  employment  of  the 

 
 
 
                                7 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

word “shall” in Rule 60 makes the said requirement mandatory; 

that the appellants did not serve a copy of the election petition 

on  respondents  No.1  and  2  (herein  after  referred  to  as  "the 

respondents") in accordance with the requirements of Rule 60; 

that  the  requirement  to  serve  the  respondents  with  a  copy  of 

the  election  petition  either  personally  or  through  registered 

post 

is  obligatory  under  Rule  60(1);  that 

in  his  cross-

examination, PW-11 (i.e., appellant No.1) admitted that a copy of 

the election petition had not been served personally or through 

registered  post  on  the  respondents;  that  even  in  appellant 

No.1‟s affidavit-in-evidence (Ex.PW-11/A), there is no mention of 

the service of the election petition  on the respondents  through 

registered  post;  that  it  was  also  not  proved  that  service  of  the 

election  petition  on  the  respondents  was  affected  through 

courier;  that  although  the  courier  receipt  was  appended  with 

the election petition, it was not tendered in evidence; that it was 

not  even  pleaded  in  the  election  petition  that  a  copy  of  the 

election  petition  was  sent  to  the  respondents  through  courier; 

that  even  in  the  election  petition,  it  has  not  been  pleaded  that 

the respondents were served with a copy of the election petition 

prior  to  its  filing;  that  under  Section  27  of  the General  Clauses 

Act, 1897, the presumption of service only applies when service 

is  made  through  registered  post;  that  the  requirement  in  Rule 

60(1)  of  the  2015  Rules  is  akin  to  the framing  of  a  charge;  that 

under Section 265(c) Cr.P.C., the statement of allegations have 

to be provided to the accused seven days before the framing of 

the charge; and that Rule 60(1) would be rendered redundant if 

strict compliance therewith is not ensured. 

13.  Furthermore, 

learned  counsel 

for 

the  respondents 

submitted that the respondents had disclosed all their assets in 

their  nomination papers; that the  2015 Rules did not obligate a 

candidate to declare his wife‟s assets in the nomination papers; 

that the provisions of R.O.P.A. cannot override the provisions of 

the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  or  the  rules  made  thereunder;  that  the 

provisions  of  R.O.P.A.  have  been  made  applicable  only  for  the 

purpose of elections; that as per the law laid down in the case of 

 
                                8 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

Election  Commission  of  Pakistan  VS  JavaidHashmi  (PLD  1989 

S.C. 396), election commences from the date of the issuance of 

the election schedule till the publication of the notification of the 

returned candidate; that the conduct of elections ends upon the 

notification  of  the  returned  candidate;  that  there  are  three 

different  phases  of  elections viz  (i)  pre-election  phase,  (ii)  the 

election  itself,  and  (iii)  post-election  phase;  that  Section  17  of 

the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  is  with  respect  to  the  conduct  of  elections; 

that Section  28  of  the I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  provides  that  the  election 

to  a  Local  Government  shall  be  conducted  in  a  prescribed 

manner; that by virtue of Section 17(3) of the I.C.T.-L.G. Act, the 

mechanism provided in R.O.P.A. from the stage of the receipt of 

the  nomination  papers  till  the  notification  of  the  returned 

candidate  has  been  adopted;  that  the  provisions  of  R.O.P.A. 

pertaining  to  the  post-election  scenario  cannot  be  made 

applicable by the Election Tribunal constituted under the I.C.T.-

L.G.  Act;  that  where  there  are  inconsistent  provisions  in  two 

separate laws, the special law will prevail over the general law; 

that  the  I.C.T.-LG  Act  is  a  special  law  with  respect  to  the  local 

elections;  that  R.O.P.A  applies  to  the  elections  for  Parliament 

and  the  Provincial  Assemblies;  that  Section  76-A  of  R.O.P.A 

applies  only  to  an  Election  Tribunal  constituted  under  Section 

57 of R.O.P.A. and not to an Election Tribunal constituted under 

Section 38 of the I.C.T.-L.G. Act; that the Election Tribunal that 

passed  the  impugned  judgment  was  constituted  under  Section 

38  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act,  and  not  under  Section  67  of  R.O.P.A; 

and  that  a  penal  provision  in  R.O.P.A.  cannot  be  applied  to 

anything  done  under  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondents No.1 and 2 submitted that the impugned judgment 

passed  by 

the 

learned  Election  Tribunal 

is  strictly 

in 

accordance  with  the  law.  He  prayed  for  the  appeal  to  be 

dismissed.  

14. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

contesting parties, and have perused the record with their able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  appeal 

 
                                9 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

have been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 6 above, 

and need not be recapitulated.  

15. 

I  propose,  first,  to  decide  whether  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal was correct in its findings that the election petition was 

not  maintainable  on  account  of  non-compliance  by  the 

appellants with Rule 60 of the 2015 Rules and non-verification of 

the  election  petition  and  its  annexures  in  accordance  with 

Section 55(3) of R.O.P.A.  

16.  The  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  was  enacted  on  03.08.2015  (i.e.,  the 

date  on  which 

it  received  the  Presidential  assent).  On 

14.10.2015,  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  was  amended  by  the  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory  Local  Government  (Amendment)  Ordinance, 

2015  (“I.C.T.-L.G.  Amendment  Ordinance.”).  Through  the  said 

Ordinance,  Sub-Section  (3)  was  added  in  Section  17  of  the 

I.C.T.-L.G.  Act.  The 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Local 

Government  (Amendment)  Act,  2016  (“I.C.T.-L.G.  Amendment 

Act”)  was  enacted  on  27.07.2016.  The  I.C.T.-L.G.  Amendment 

Act  was  said  to  be  in  the  same  terms  as  the  I.C.T.-L.G. 

Amendment  Ordinance.  Sub-Section  (3)  of  Section  7  of  the 

I.C.T.-L.G. Act, as amended, reads as follows:- 

“(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act and for the 
purpose of election to the Local Governments under this Act, 
the provisions of the Representation of People Act, 1976 
(LXXXV of 1976) shall mutatis mutandis apply.” 

17.  Section 1(2) of I.C.T.-L.G. Amendment Act provides that it 

shall come into force at once and shall be deemed to have taken 

effect  on  14.10.2015.  The  2015  Rules  were  notified  on 

17.09.2015.  

18.  As  per  the  election  schedule,  the  last  date  for  filing  the 

nomination  papers  was  28.06.2015.  It  is  an  admitted  position 

that  respondents  No.1  and  2  filed  their  nomination  papers  on 

26.06.2015.  As  mentioned  above,  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  was 

enacted  on  03.08.2015.  After  the  enactment  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G. 

Act,  the  candidates  again  filed  their  nomination  papers  on 

28.10.2015.  By  this  time,  the  2015  Rules  had  already  been 

notified. The elections in question were held on 30.11.2015.  

 
 
 
                                10 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

19.  Now, Section 37(1) of the I.C.T.-L.G.  Act provides that an 

election to an office of a Local Government shall not be called in 

question  except  by  an  election  petition.    Section  37(2)  of  the 

said  Act  provides  that  a  candidate  may,  “in the prescribed 

manner”,  file  an  election  petition  before  the  Election  Tribunal 

challenging an election under this Act. Section 2(kk) of the said 

Act  provides  that  the  word “prescribed”  means  prescribed  by 

the Rules as defined in Section 2(tt) of the said Act. Section 2(tt) 

of  the  said  Act  provides  that  “rules”  means  rules  under  the 

Capital  Development  Authority  Ordinance,  1960  or  “may be 

made under this Act”.  The  2015  Rules  were  made  by  the 

Federal  Government  in  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by 

Section  117  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act.  Chapter-X,  titled  “Election 

Petitions” in the 2015 Rules inter alia prescribes the manner in 

which an election petition is to be filed. Rule 60(1) in Chapter-X 

of the 2015 Rules reads as follows:- 

“The  petitioner  shall  join  all  contesting  candidates  as 
respondents in his election petition and shall serve personally 
or by registered post with acknowledgment due on each 
respondent a copy of his petition” 
 (Emphasis added)  

20.  Now, it is an admitted position that the appellants did not 

serve  a  copy  of  the  election  petition  on  the  respondents  in  the 

manner  as  required  by  Rule  60(1)  ibid. The  appellants  assert 

that they sent copies of the election petition to the respondents 

through courier. Section 54(b) of R.O.P.A., although not strictly 

in pari materia, but is similar in nature to Rule 60(1) of the 2015 

Rules.  Section  54(b)  of  R.O.P.A.  provides  that  the  petitioner 

shall join as the respondents to his petition any other candidate 

against whom any allegation of any corrupt or illegal practice is 

made and “shall serve personally or by registered post on each 

such respondent”  a  copy  of  the  petition.  Section  54(b)  of  the 

R.O.P.A.  was  interpreted  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  the 

case  of  Inayat  Ullah  VS  Syed  Khursheed  Shah  (2014  SCMR 

1477), in the following terms:- 

“2.  …Considering  the  contents  of  section  54(b)  of  the 
Representation  of  the  Peoples  Act,  1976  (The  Act),  the 
undeniable position which emerges from the record is that the 
Election  Petition  was  not  served  on  the  nineteen  (19) 

 
 
 
                                11 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

respondents by the appellant Inayatullah personally. It is also 
clear from the record and indeed it has not been urged before 
us that the copy of the petition was served on the respondents 
through  registered  post.  The  question,  therefore,  which 
remains  is  whether  the  courier  service  employed  by  the 
appellant  could  be  construed  as  service  effected  on  the 
respondents by the appellant personally. 
3.  Considering  the  provisions  of  the  various  statutes 
including the Civil Procedure Code (C.P.C.) the distinction 
between  personal,  service/appearance  etc.  and 
appearance/service etc. through an agent is well recognized. 
The courier service can at best be treated as an agent of the 
appellant. Service through an agent, keeping in mind the 
similar provisions of the Civil Procedure Code (C.P.C.) and 
other statutes will not constitute service effected personally. 
As far as service through registered post is concerned, that 
has not even been claimed by the appellant. In any event, the 
Postal Service of Pakistan has been created under the Post 
Office Act, 1898. There are a number of courier services 
operating in Pakistan. Our research staff has accessed reports 
which show that legislative efforts are a foot to regulate the 
services of couriers. As a result, the Pakistan Private Courier 
Regulatory Bill, 2012, was prepared. However, the said Bill has 
not become a law. In any event, service through registered 
post raises statutory presumptions in the ordinary course. No 
such  presumption  attaches  to  service  through  courier. 
Learned counsel for the appellant made a feeble attempt to 
argue that service through courier could be considered valid 
on the ground of practice and usage. This plea is not legally 
tenable in view of the express wording of the Act.” 

21.  The requirement to serve a copy of the election petition on 

the respondents  personally  or  by  registered  post  is  mandatory 

under  Section  54(b)  of  R.O.P.A.  This 

is  because 

the 

consequence  of  non-compliance  with  the  said  requirement  is 

provided in Section 56 of R.O.P.A., which provides inter alia that 

if  the  Commissioner  finds  that  any  provision  of  Section  54  has 

not  been  complied  with,  the  petition  shall  be  dismissed 

forthwith.  No  such  consequence  or  penalty  is  provided  in  the 

I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  or  the  Rules  made  thereunder 

for  non-

compliance with  the requirement  of  Rule  60  of  the  2015  Rules. 

Rule  67  of  the  2015  Rules  provides  that  an  Election  Tribunal 

may  dismiss  an  election  petition  if  the  provisions  of  Rules  64 

and  65  of  the  2015  Rules  are  not  complied  with  or  where  the 

allegations  contained  in  the  election  petition  are  vague  or  do 

not  disclose  the  commission  of  any  corrupt  practice,  material 

irregularity  or  any  other  illegal  act.  Rule  67  of  the  2015  Rules 

does  not  empower  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  to  dismiss  an 

 
 
 
                                12 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

election  petition  for  non-compliance  with  the  requirements  of 

Rule  60  of  the  2015  Rules.  This  being  so,  I  am  of  the  view  that 

the penal provision in R.O.P.A. (i.e., Section 56 of R.O.P.A.) will 

not be attracted if the election petitioner does not serve a copy 

of  the  election  petition  personally  on  the  respondents  or  does 

not send the same to the respondents through registered post.  

22.  Even  though  Section  1(2)  I.C.T.-L.G.  Amendment  Act 

provides  that  the  amendments  made  in  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  will 

be deemed to have taken effect on 14.10.2015, it is well settled 

that  penal  provisions  in  a  statute  cannot  be  inserted  with  a 

retrospective  effect.  Furthermore,  the  provisions  of  R.O.P.A. 

have  been  made  applicable mutatis mutandis “for the purpose 

of election” to the Local Governments under the I.C.T.-L.G. Act. 

The  term “for the purpose of election”,  in  my  view,  is  relatable 

to the conduct of an election, which is catered for in Chapter-IV 

of R.O.P.A.   

23.  Additionally,  the  provisions  of  R.O.P.A.  have  been  made 

mutatis mutandis  applicable  for  the  purpose  of  election  to  the 

Local  Governments  under 

the 

I.C.T.-L.G.  Act,  “without 

prejudice to the provisions of the [I.C.T.-L.G. Act]”. Therefore, if 

the  provisions  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  or  the  Rules  made 

thereunder cater for a certain situation or an eventuality, resort 

to the provisions of R.O.P.A. is not necessary. In the event of a 

conflict  between  the  provisions  of  R.O.P.A.  and  the  provisions 

of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  or  the  Rules  made  thereunder,  the  latter 

shall  prevail  as  regards  the  elections  of  Local  Governments. 

Therefore, it is my view that the learned Election Tribunal erred 

by holding that the election petition filed by the appellants was 

not  maintainable  due  to  the  appellants‟  failure  to  have  shown 

compliance  with  Section  54(b)  of  R.O.P.A.  and  Rule  60  of  the 

2015 Rules.  

24.  As  regards  the  findings  of  the  learned  Election  Tribunal 

that  the  election  petition  was  not  maintainable,  because  the 

appellants  had  not  verified  the  election  petition  and  the 

documents  annexed 

therewith 

in  accordance  with 

the 

requirements of Section 55(3) of R.O.P.A. and Rule 61(3)  of the 

 
                                13 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

2015  Rules,  I  am  of  the  view  that  since  Rule  61(3)  of  the  2015 

Rules  provided  as  to  how  every  election  petition  and  every 

schedule  or  annex  to  that  petition  was  to  be  verified,  recourse 

to  the  requirements  of  Section  55(3)  of  R.O.P.A.  was  not 

necessary.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  Rule  61(3)  of  the  2015 

Rules  and  Section  55(3)  of  R.O.P.A.  are  in  pari materia. Rule 

61(3) of the 2015 Rules provides that every election petition and 

every  schedule  or  annex  to  that  petition  shall  be signed  by  the 

petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in C.P.C. for the 

verification  of  pleadings.  Unlike  the  2015  Rules,  Section  63  of 

R.O.P.A.  provides  that  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  shall 

dismiss  an  election  petition  if  the  provisions  of  Section  55  of 

R.O.P.A. are not complied with. Since neither the I.C.T.-L.G. Act 

nor  the  2015  Rules  provide  a  penalty  for  non-compliance  with 

the  requirements  of  61(3)  of  the  2015  Rules,  I  am  of  the  view 

that  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  erred  by  holding  that  the 

appellants‟  election  petition  was  not  maintainable  for  want  of 

verification in accordance with Section 55(3) of R.O.P.A. or Rule 

61(3) of 2015 Rules. 

25.  The manner in which pleadings are required to be verified 

is  set  out  in  Order  VI,  Rule  15  C.P.C.,  which  is  reproduced 

herein below:-  

Rule 15: Verification of pleadings 
(1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time 
being in force, every pleading shall be verified on oath or 
solemn affirmation at the foot by the party or by one of the 
parties pleading or by some other person proved to the 
satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of 
the case. 
(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the 
numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he verifies of 
his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information 
received and believed to be true. 
(3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it 
and shall state the date on which and the place at which it 
was signed. 
(4) The person verifying the pleading shall also furnish an 
affidavit in support of his pleadings. 

26.  Under  Section  63(a)  of  R.O.P.A.,  an  election  petition  can 

be dismissed by the learned Election Tribunal if the same is not 

verified  in  accordance  with  Section  55(3)  of  R.O.P.A.  There  is 

no  provision  in  the  I.C.T.-LG.  Act  in  pari materia  with  Section 

 
 
                                14 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

63(a) of R.O.P.A. Therefore, if an election petition is not verified 

in accordance with Rule 61(3) of the 2015 Rules, the I.C.T.-L.G. 

Act  or  the  said  Rules  do not impose  a  penalty  similar  in  nature 

as can be imposed under Section  63(a) of R.O.P.A. Under Rule 

67 of the 2015 Rules, an Election Tribunal has been empowered 

to dismiss an election petition during trial only if the provisions 

of  Rules  64  and  65  of  the  2015  Rules  have  not  been  complied 

with  or  if  the  allegations  contained  in  the  election  petition  are 

vague  or  do  not  disclose  the  commission  of  any  corrupt 

practice, material irregularity or any other illegal act. 

27.  The  learned  Election  Tribunal  erred  by  not  specifying  as 

to which requirement in Order VI, Rule 15 C.P.C. the appellants 

had  not  shown  compliance  with.  The  learned  Election  Tribunal 

also  erred  by  holding  that  the  verification  was  not 

in 

accordance  with 

the 

law,  because  although 

the  Oath 

Commissioner  had  affixed  his  stamp,  he  had  not  signed  the 

certificate  at  the  end  of  the  election  petition  and  other 

documents  annexed  therewith.  I  do  not  see  how  this  would 

amount  to  a  violation  of  the  requirements  of  Order  VI,  Rule  15 

C.P.C. Requirements which are not expressly provided in Order 

VI, Rule 15 C.P.C., cannot be read into it.  

28.  Ordinarily,  when  a  Court  or  a  Tribunal  comes  to  the 

conclusion  that  the  petition  before  it  is  not  maintainable,  it 

should  not  proceed  further  and  give  a  finding  on  the  merits  of 

the  case.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  learned  Election  Tribunal, 

after  holding  that  the  appellants‟  election  petition  was  not 

maintainable, went ahead and also gave a finding on the merits 

of  the  case.  Since  I  have  held  that  the  appellants‟  election 

petition was maintainable, and since the learned counsel for the 

contesting  parties  also  made  detailed  submissions  on  the 

merits of the case, I now propose to decide the appeal on merits 

as well.   

29.  Section  117(1)  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  empowers  the 

Federal  Government  to  make  rules  for  the  purpose  of  carrying 

out  the  said  Act.  Section  117(2)  provides  that  such  Rules  may 

provide for all or any of the matters specified in part-I of Eighth 

 
                                15 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

Schedule  to  the  said  Act.Item  No.1  in  part-I  of  the  Eighth 

Schedule  is  “Local Government (Conduct of Elections)”.  Rule 

12(4) of the 2015 Rules reads thus:- 

“Every  nomination  paper  shall  be  accompanied  by  a 
declaration,  in  Form-XVII,  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  the 
candidate, which shall be open to inspection.” 
(Emphasis added)  

30.  Form-XVII  requires  the  candidate  to  give  a  statement  of 

assets  and  liabilities  of  himself “or any member of [his] family 

and dependents”.  Furthermore,  the  verification  in  Form-XVII 

requires a candidate to declare that the statement of assets and 

liabilities of his own self, his spouse and dependents is correct 

and  complete  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  and  belief.  The 

statement  of  the  candidate  and  the  verification  required  under 

Form-XVII is almost in the same terms as the one required under 

Form-I  for  “Statement of Assets and Liabilities”  under  the 

Representation of the People (Conduct of Election) Rules, 1977, 

which have been made by  the E.C.P.  in  exercise  of  the  powers 

conferred under Section 107 of R.O.P.A.  

31.  Section  12(2)(f)  of  R.O.P.A.  requires  every  nomination 

paper to be accompanied by a candidate‟s statement of assets 

and  liabilities “and those of his spouse and dependents on the 

prescribed form”.  Such  prescribed  form  finds  its  place  in  the 

Schedule to Representation of the People (Conduct of Election) 

Rules, 1977. Now, unlike Section 12(2)(f) of R.O.P.A., there is no 

requirement in Rule 12(4) of the 2015 Rules for a declaration of 

the  assets  and 

liabilities  of  the  candidate‟s  spouse  and 

dependents.  Had  the  legislature  or  the  rule-making  authority 

intended  to  require  a  candidate  for  the  local  government 

elections to make a declaration as to the assets and liabilities of 

the candidate‟s spouse and dependents, Rule 12(4) of the 2015 

Rules would have been couched in the same or similar terms as 

Section  12(2)(f)  of  R.O.P.A.  This  the  legislature  or  the  rule 

making authority consciously did not do while making the 2015 

Rules.  This  conscious  omission  cannot  be  supplied  by  making 

the  provisions  of  Section  12(2)(f)  of  R.O.P.A.,  applicable  to 

elections under the I.C.T.-L.G. Act.   

 
 
 
                                16 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

32.  Given  the  apparent  conflict  in  the  requirement  as  to  the 

declaration of assets in Rule 12(4) of the 2015 Rules and Form-

XVII,  I  am  of  the  view  that  Rule  12(4)  being  a  substantive 

provision will prevail over Form-XVII, which finds its place in the 

Schedule  to  the  said  Rules.  In  the  case  of  District  Bar 

Association,  Rawalpindi  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2015 

S.C.  401),  it  has  been  held  that  a  schedule  to  a  statute  was 

always subservient to the substantive provisions of the law and 

could  not  operate  independently.  It  may  be  reemphasized  that 

had  it  been  the  intention  of  legislature  that  a  candidate  must 

declare  his  own  assets  as  well  as  those  of  his  spouse,  the 

language  of  Section  12(2)(f)  of  R.O.P.A.  could  have  been 

adopted  in  Rule  12(4). Unlike  Rule  12(4)  of  the  2015  Rules, 

Section  12(2)(f)  of  R.O.P.A.  requires  a  candidate  to  declare  in 

his  nomination  papers “a statement of his assets and liabilities 

and those of his spouse and dependents on the prescribed form 

as on the preceding thirtieth day of June”. Accordingly, I am of 

the  view  that  respondent  No.1  did  not  commit  any  mis-

declaration  by  not  mentioning  his  spouses‟  and  dependents‟ 

assets and liabilities in his nomination papers.  

33.  Section  17(3)  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  cannot  be  interpreted 

such  that  provisions  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  are  overridden  in 

their  entirety  by  the  provisions  of  R.O.P.A.  It  is  only  when  a 

certain  scenario  or  process  or  eventuality  is  not  specifically 

provided  for  in  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  or  the  2015  Rules  that  the 

provisions of R.O.P.A. will apply “for the purpose of election” to 

the Local Governments by dint of Section 17(3) of the I.C.T.-L.G. 

Act.  An  appeal  under  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  is  filed  under  Section 

45  thereof,  whereas  an  appeal  under  R.O.P.A.  is  filed  under 

Section  67(3)  thereof.  Under  Section  67(3)  of  R.O.P.A.  an 

appeal  lies  to  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court,  whereas  under 

Section  45  of  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act,  an  appeal  lies  before  the  High 

Court.  Under  Section  37(2)  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act,  an  election 

petition  is  to  be  filed  directly  before  an  Election  Tribunal, 

whereas under Section 53 of R.O.P.A., an election petition is not 

filed directly before an Election Tribunal but before the Election 

 
                                17 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

Commission,  which  transmits  it  to  an  Election  Tribunal.  The 

grounds  on  which  the  election  of  a  returned  candidate  under 

the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  can  be  questioned  are  different  from  the 

grounds  under  which  an  election  can  be  questioned  under  the 

provisions of R.O.P.A. The meaning given to “corrupt practice” 

in Section 78 of R.O.P.A. is different from the  meaning given to 

"corrupt practice”  in  Section  46 of the I.C.T.-L.G.  Act.  There is 

no provision in the I.C.T.-L.G. Act or the 2015 Rules which gives 

the  learned  Election  Tribunal  suo moto  powers,  like  the  ones 

given  by  Section  76-A  of  R.O.P.A.  to  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal to, on its own motion, take cognizance of an incorrect 

statement  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  a  candidate.  There  is  no 

denying  the  fact  that  the  provisions  of  R.O.P.A.  are  different 

from  the  those  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  on  several  subjects  or 

issues.  Could  by  virtue  of  Section  17(3)  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act, 

could 

the  provisions  of 

the 

I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  which  are 

inconsistent  with  those  of  R.O.P.A.  be  permitted  to  be 

overridden by provisions of R.O.P.A.? I would say, certainly not.  

34.  Section  78(3)(d)  of  R.O.P.A.  provides  that  a  person  shall 

be  guilty  of  corrupt  practice  if  he  makes  a  false  statement  or 

submits a false or incorrect declaration in respect of his assets 

and  liabilities.  Section  99(IA)(l)  of  R.O.P.A.  provides  that  a 

person  shall  be  disqualified  from  being  elected  as,  and  from 

being, a member of an Assembly “if he is found guilty of corrupt 

or illegal practice”  under  any  law  for  the  time  being  in  force, 

unless a period of five years has elapsed from the date on which 

that order takes effect.  

35.  Under  the scheme  of R.O.P  A.,  a candidate who  makes  a 

false  statement  or  submits  a  false  or  incorrect  declaration  in 

respect  of  his  assets  and  liabilities  can  be  found  guilty  of 

corrupt  practice  by  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  and  can 

consequently  be  disqualified  from  being  elected  as,  and  from 

being,  a  member  of  an  Assembly.  Now, 

it  needs  to  be 

determined whether under the scheme of the I.C.T.-L.G. Act or 

the  2015  Rules,  a  candidate  making  such  a  false  statement  or 

incorrect  declaration  could  be  disqualified. “Corrupt practice” 

 
                                18 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

has  not  been  defined  in  the  definition  section  of  either  in  the 

I.C.T.-L.G.  Act  or  the  2015  Rules.  However,  Section  46  of  the 

I.C.T.-L.G. Act reads thus:- 

“46. Corrupt practice.-A person guilty of bribery, personating 
or undue influence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or with fine which may 
extend to one hundred thousand rupees or with both.”   

36. 

It  is  an  admitted  position  that  respondents  No.1  was  not 

alleged  to  have  been  guilty  of  bribery,  personation  or  undue 

influence.  Respondents  No.1  was  also  not  alleged  to  have 

committed  any  “illegal practice”  in  terms  of  Section  50  of  the 

I.C.T.-L.G. Act. Although the I.C.T.-L.G. Act and the 2015 Rules 

do not contain provisions in pari materia to Sections 78(3)(d), 76 

and  99(IA)(l)  of  R.O.P.A.,  Section  41(a)  of  the  I.C.T.-L.G.  Act 

provides  that  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  shall  declare  the 

election  of  a returned  candidate to  be void  if it  is  satisfied  that 

the  nomination  of 

the  returned  candidate  was 

invalid. 

Concealment of assets in the statement as to the declaration of 

assets filed by the returned candidate along with his nomination 

papers  would,  in  my  view,  render  the  nomination  of  such  a 

candidate invalid. Furthermore, Rule 14(3)(c) of the 2015 Rules 

empowers the Returning Officer to reject the nomination papers 

of a candidate if he is satisfied that any provision  of Rule 12 of 

the  2015  Rules  had  not  been  complied  with.  As  mentioned 

above,  Rule  12(4)  requires  the  nomination  papers  of  a 

candidate  to  be  accompanied  with  a  declaration  of  his  assets 

and liabilities. This being so, it needs to be determined whether 

respondent  No.1,  in  his  statement  as  to  the  declaration  of  his 

assets, did not make a disclosure of his assets or concealed the 

same.  

37.  Respondent  No.1‟s  assets  which  as  per  the  appellants‟ 

pleadings  in  their  election  petition  were  not  disclosed  in  the 

statement  filed  by  respondent  No.1  along  with  his  nomination 

papers were as under:- 

“i.  Respondent No.1‟s share in plot measuring 2 marlas and 
96 square feet purchased by respondent No.1‟s father 
and  uncle  through  registered  sale  deed  dated 
01.01.1990. 

 
 
 
                                19 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

ii.  Respondent No.1‟s share in the three shops purchased 
by  respondent  No.1‟s  father  and  uncle  through 
registered sale deed dated 08.04.1990.  

iii.  Property inherited by respondent No.1 from his father 
through inheritance mutation sanctioned on 29.01.1999. 
iv.  Usman  Arcade  situated  on  main  Fateh  Jang  Road, 

District Rawalpindi.” 

38.  Other  than  the  above,  the  appellants,  in  their  election 

petition,  had  pleaded  that  respondent  No.1,  in  his  nomination 

papers, had declared his share in 70 plots in Jammu & Kashmir 

Cooperative  Housing  Society  to  be  1/10th,  which  according  to 

the appellants, came to 7 plots but respondent No.1 in fact had 

8  plots.  It  was  also  pleaded  that  in  the  earlier  nomination 

papers,  respondent  No.1  had  declared  his  share  in  the  said 

plots  to  be  1/11th.  The  appellants,  in  their  evidence,  produced 

registered  sale  deeds  as  Exh.F(1-8),  Exh.PG(1-6),  Bank 

Statements Exh.PA(1-2), Exh.PB(1-3), Exh.PC(1-2), Exh.PD(1-2), 

Exh.PE(1-19),  periodical  Record  of  Rights  Revenue  Estate 

Tarnol for the years 2004-05, Exh.PG(1-16), copy of Assessment 

Register  issued  by  Excise  and  Taxation  Officer,  Property  Tax, 

Rawalpindi  Exh.PH,  Inheritance  mutation  of  Ghulam  Dastagir 

deceased  Mark-A(1-2),  Inheritance  mutation  of  Ghulam  Fareed 

deceased  Mark-B,  and  Jammu  and  Kashmir  Cooperative 

Housing  Society  allotment  letters  photocopy  Mark-C(1-11).  No 

document  was  brought  by 

the  appellant 

to  show 

that 

respondent No.1 was the owner of Usman Arcade.  

39.  Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  and  2  had 

contended  before  this  Court  as  well  as  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal  that  inherited  property  of  the  said  respondents  does 

not  fall  within  the  definition  of  assets.  It  was  further  asserted 

that  the  said  respondents  had  not  made  an  intentional  mis-

description  of  assets  or  omission  to  declare  assets.  The 

impugned order dated 07.10.2016 also shows that a submission 

had  been  made  on  behalf  the  respondents  that  “inherited 

property is quite different from the property self-acquired”.  It 

was  also  submitted  before  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  that 

respondent  No.1  and  his  wife  had  not  purchased  any  property 

and  that  the  property  was  given  to  them  through  inheritance 

 
 
 
 
                                20 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

and  if  any  property  was  purchased  by  them,  it  was  with  the 

consideration from the inherited property. 

40.  Under  Rule  12(4)  of  the  2015  Rules,  a  candidate  is 

required to make a disclosure as to his assets. The law does not 

absolve  a  candidate  from  making  a  disclosure  as  to  assets 

which  have  been  inherited  by  him.  All  properties  whether 

purchased  by  a  candidate  or  inherited  by  him  or  gifted  to  him, 

form  a  part  of  his  assets,  which  he  is  under  an  obligation  to 

disclose  in  his  statement  along  with  his  nomination  papers.  A 

candidate is also under an obligation to disclose his share in the 

property  jointly  owned  by  him.  The  non-mention  of  the  assets 

inherited  by  a  candidate  would  be  tantamount  to  a  mis-

declaration.  

41. 

It  ought  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  respondent  No.1,  in  his 

nomination papers, gave a declaration as to ownership of 1/10th 

share  in  160  shops  at  Tarnol  valuing  Rs.18,00,00,000/-,  1/10th 

share  in  70  plots  in  Jammu  &  Kashmir  Cooperative  Housing 

Society valuing Rs.50,00,00,000/-, 1/10th share in 1070 kanals of 

land  at  Tarnol  valuing  Rs.30,00,00,000/-  and  half share  in 1350 

kanals  of 

land  at  Fateh  Jang  and  Taxila  valuing 

Rs.15,00,00,000/-.  It  was  also  declared  that  respondent  No.1‟s 

owned prize bonds worth Rs.1,00,00,000/-, 30 tolas of gold, one 

vehicle (Toyota KG-786-2007), Rs.95,00,000/- as proceeds from 

the  sale  of  land,  furniture  and  fittings  worth  Rs.3,00,000/-.  The 

appellant  also  made  a  disclosure  as  to  his  five  bank  accounts 

with deposits of more than Rs.17,00,000/-.  

42.  Respondent  No.1, 

in  his  cross-examination,  clearly 

deposed  that  compensation  in  the  form  of  121  plots  had  been 

given  to  respondent  No.1‟s  whole  family  by  the  Jammu  & 

Kashmir  Cooperative  Housing  Society.  He  could  not  tell  as  to 

the  number  of  plots  that  were  allotted  to  him  individually.  He 

had  clearly  deposed  that  “[t]he plots were allotted to us as a 

joint property”, and that “the allotment letter was issued jointly 

and not individually”.  The  said  testimony  appears  to  be  in 

consonance with the declaration of his assets  in the statement 

 
                                21 

                              Election Appeal No.01/2016 

filed along with his nomination papers, which mention his share 

in immovable property.  

43.  Be  that  as  it  may,  there  is  no  admission  on  the  part  of 

respondent No.1 as to the non-disclosure of the assets inherited 

by him in his nomination papers. Heavy onus lies on the election 

petitioner to provide through cogent evidence that the returned 

candidate  was  the  owner  of  the  property  which  was  not 

declared  in  the  statement  of  assets  filed  along  with  the 

nomination  papers.  The  appellants  in  the  instant  case  did  not 

produce  any  document  to  show  that  respondent  No.1  was  the 

owner  of  the  property  which  was  purchased  by  his  father  and 

uncle  in  the  year  1990  or  that  at  present  a  share  in  the  said 

property vested in respondent No.1. As regards the plots in the 

Jammu  and  Kashmir  Society,  it  is  well  settled  that  documents 

have  to  be  formally  exhibited  in  evidence  and  a  „Mark‟  has  no 

evidentiary value. Reference in this regard may be made to the 

law laid down in the case of State Life Insurance Corporation of 

Pakistan etc VS Javaid Iqbal (2011 SCMR 1013). 

44. 

In view of the above, the instant appeal is  dismissed with 

no order as to costs.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2019 

                                                    (JUDGE) 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
