ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

Muhammad Jahanzeb Abbasi 

VS 

Mst. Naima Akhtar Abbasi & others 

PETITIONER BY:      

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr.  Muhammad  Munir  Gondal  and  
Mr. 
Cheema, 
Advocates alongwith petitioner. 

Iftikhar 

Ahmad 

Mr. Aamer Mahmood and Mr. Sheraz 
Ahmed  Ranjha,  Advocate  alongwith 
respondent No.1. 
Mr.  Alam  Zeb,  respondent  No.2  in 
Writ  Petition  No.2134  of  2020,  in 
person. 

DATE OF HEARING: 

29.08.2022. 

======================================== 

BABAR SATTAR, J.- Through this judgment this Court 

will  decide  Writ  Petition  No.3363  of  2021  and  Writ  Petition 

No.2134  of  2020.  For  purposes  of  this  judgment,  Muhammad 

Jehanzeb Abbasi, the petitioner in Writ Petition No.3363 of 2021 

and  respondent  No.1  in  Writ  Petition  No.2134  of  2020,  will  be 

addressed  as  Petitioner  and  Mst.  Naima  Akhtar  Abbasi,  the 

petitioner in Writ Petition No.2134 of 2020 and respondent No.1 

in  Writ  Petition  No.3363  of  2021,  will  be  addressed  as 

Respondent. 

2. 

The  Respondent  filed  Writ  Petition  No.2134  of  2020 

impugning  the  order  of  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  dated 

25.02.2020,  pursuant  to  which  an  application  filed  by  the 

Petitioner for setting  aside ex-parte judgment and  decree dated 

18.02.2019  was  allowed  by  holding  that  a  partial  ex-parte 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 2 

judgment  and  decree  in  favor  of  the  Respondent  dated 

22.03.2018 would stand. The Respondent has impugned the said 

order  before  this  Court  without  availing  the  remedy  of  appeal 

before  the  learned  District  Court.  The  Petitioner  has  impugned 

order  dated  25.02.2020  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court  and  the  order-in-appeal  dated  23.06.2021  passed  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Court,  whereby  the  order  passed  by 

the learned Judge Family Court was upheld. 

3. 

The  relevant  facts  are  that  the  Petitioner  and  the 

Respondent  are  married  and  the  Respondent  filed  a  suit  for 

recovery of maintenance and dower against the Petitioner before 

the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  in  Islamabad.  The  proceedings 

continued  against  the  Petitioner  ex-parte  in  Family  Suit  No.251 

of  2017  and  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated  22.03.2018 

were  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court.    Aggrieved  by 

such  judgment  and  decree  the  Petitioner  filed  an  appeal  before 

the  learned  Additional  District  Court,  which  was  partially 

accepted  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Court  by  judgment 

dated  01.12.2018  and  the  matter  was  remanded  back  to  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court  for  decision  on  the  question  of 

maintenance and dower afresh. The learned Judge Family Court 

continued  to  proceed  against  the  Petitioner  ex-parte  and  after 

hearing  the  ex-parte  arguments  of  the  Respondent  passed 

another  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated  18.02.2019.  The 

Petitioner  then  filed  two  applications  one  for  setting  aside  the  

ex-parte judgment and decree dated 22.03.2018 and the second 

for  setting  aside  the  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated 

18.02.2019.  The  learned  Judge  Family  Court  accepted  the 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 3 

Petitioner’s  application  for  setting  aside  ex-parte  judgment  and 

decree  dated  18.02.2019  on  the  basis  that  after  remand  of  the 

matter  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Court  the  learned 

Family Court had issued no fresh summons to the Petitioner and 

consequently,  the  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  had  been 

passed  without  serving  any  notice  on  the  Petitioner.  The 

Petitioner’s  application  for  setting  aside  ex-parte  judgment  and 

decree  dated  22.03.2018  was,  however,  dismissed  on  the  basis 

that  the  application  did  not  state  how  the  Petitioner  came  to 

know about the ex-parte judgment and decree, which led to the 

filing  of  the  application  twenty  months  after  the  ex-parte 

judgment  and  decree  was  passed  on  22.03.2018.  The  learned 

Additional District Court found that the address of the Petitioner 

as  mentioned  in  the  suit  was  that  of  his  family  home  also 

mentioned on the  Nikahnama and the Petitioner could therefore 

not assert that he had no knowledge of the proceedings pending 

before the learned Family Court. It also upheld the reasoning of 

the learned Judge Family Court that the Petitioner did not clearly 

plead  how  he  came  to  know  that  the  ex-parte  judgment  and 

decree  had  been  passed  and  concluded  that  the  Petitioner  had 

dodged  the  service  and  was  silently  observing  the  proceedings 

and  now  come  to  the  Court  seeking  setting  aside  of  the 

judgment and decree. 

4. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  submitted  that 

the  Petitioner  had  been  living  in  Ireland  since  2015  and  at  the 

time  when  the  suit  was  filed  by  the  Respondent,  the  Petitioner 

was  not  in  Pakistan.  This  fact  was  also  revealed  by  the 

Respondent  herself  in  her  plaint.  There  was  no  report  that  the 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 4 

Petitioner  had  been  served  and  in  the  absence  of  any  record  of 

service on the Petitioner, the learned Judge Family Court decided 

to  proceed  against  him  as  ex-parte.  The  decision  to  proceed 

against  the  Petitioner  ex-parte  was  taken  without  affecting 

service  in  accordance  with  Order  V  of  the  Code  of  Civil 

Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”), or affecting substituted service. While 

there  was  a  proclamation  issued,  the  correct  address  of  the 

Petitioner  was  not  mentioned  in  the  proclamation.  And  finally, 

the  Petitioner  and  the  Respondent  were  not  only  married  and 

their  marriage  was  subsisting,  but  they  were  also  family 

members  and  the  Respondent  had  previously  filed  a  family  suit 

against  the  Petitioner  in  the  Family  Court  in  Sadiqabad  where 

the  Respondent  resided  and  within  the  territory  of  which  the 

Petitioner’s  family  home  was  located.  And  in  such  case  too,  the 

Respondent  had  ensured  that  the  service  was  not  affected  and 

had  procured  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  by  abusing  the 

process  of  the  Court.  Such  suit  was  finally  withdrawn  on 

24.04.2017  when  it  was  being  contested  by  the  Petitioner.  And 

after  withdrawing  such  suit,  the  suit  in  which  the  ex-parte 

judgments  and  decrees  were  passed,  was 

instituted  on 

08.06.2017 

in 

Islamabad,  even 

though 

the  Respondent 

continued  to  reside  in  Ireland  and  his  family  home  was  also  in 

Sadiqabad and not in Islamabad. 

5. 

The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that 

the Petitioner and the Respondent were married in 2009 and the 

Petitioner  then  took  a  second  wife  in  2011  and  had  been 

negligent  toward  the  Respondent  ever  since.  And  in  2015  the 

Petitioner  moved  to  Ireland  and  had  not  paid  dower  to  the 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 5 

Respondent. He further  submitted that  notices were duly issued 

to  the  Petitioner  at  the  address  mentioned  on  the  plaint,  which 

was the same address as mentioned on the Nikahnama and the 

family  of  the  Petitioner,  including  his  brother,  still  lived  at  such 

address.  He  stated  that  the  Petitioner  had  been  delinquent  in 

discharge  of  his  responsibilities  to  maintain  the  Respondent  as 

his  wife  and  to  pay  the  dower  to  her  and  was  now  seeking  to 

have  the  judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the  learned  Family 

Court, Islamabad, set-aside only to delay the matter. 

6. 

It is admitted that  the marriage between the Petitioner 

and the Respondent subsists and they are still legally married. It 

is  also  admitted  that  the  Respondent  has  been  aware  that  the 

Petitioner  has  been  living  in  Ireland  since  2015  and  such  fact 

was stated in the Family Suit No.251 of 2017 in relation to which 

the  impugned  orders  have  been  passed.  Despite  the  knowledge 

of such fact, the Respondent did not  provide the address of the 

Petitioner  in  Ireland  for  service  of  notice.  The  notices  that  were 

served according to the record of the learned Family Court were 

served at the family home of the Petitioner where he admittedly 

has  not  been  residing  since  2015.  It  is  also  evident  from  the 

record  adduced  before  this  Court  that  the  Respondent  filed  a 

family  suit  before  the  Family  Court  in  Sadiqabad  in  which  an  

ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated  10.11.2014  was  issued  in 

favor of the Respondent. The Petitioner then filed an application 

for setting aside such ex-parte judgment and decree on the basis 

that he was in Ireland at the time when the suit was filed and no 

notices  had  been  served  upon  him.  The  learned  Civil  Judge, 

Sadiqabad,  by  order  dated  13.10.2015  found  in  favor  of  the 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 6 

Petitioner and set-aside the ex-parte judgment and decree dated 

10.11.2014.  The  said  suit  filed  by  the  Respondent  was  then 

withdrawn  as  recorded  in  order  dated  24.04.2017  when  the 

Petitioner was also before the Civil Court in Sadiqabad contesting 

it. No satisfactory explanation has been furnished by the learned 

counsel  for  the  Respondent  as  to  why  the  proceedings  pending 

before the Family Court in Sadiqabad were withdrawn to initiate 

fresh proceedings before the learned Family Court in Islamabad. 

7. 

The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that 

the  Respondent  came  to  Islamabad  alongwith  her  father  who 

was unwell and then decided to stay at Bharakahu in Islamabad 

and therefore filed the suit in Islamabad. 

8. 

This  Court  asked  both 

the  Petitioner  and 

the 

Respondent,  who  appeared  before  this  Court  in  person,  to 

determine  if  a  settlement  could  be  reached  amicably  given  that 

their marriage was subsisting and further that they were not just 

spouses  but  were  also  cousins.  However,  none  of  the  parties 

were  willing  to  attempt  an  amicable  resolution.  What  emerged 

from  the  submissions  made  by  the  Petitioner  and  the 

Respondent before this Court was that various settlement efforts 

had been made between the parties in relation to the question of 

maintenance and dower. But such efforts did not succeed. It also 

emerged  that  the  Respondent  was  not  living  in  Islamabad  on  a 

permanent  basis.  While  she  continued  to  visit  Islamabad,  she 

spent  substantial  of  the  time  in  Sadiqabad  where  her  family 

lived.  This  Court 

is, 

therefore,  not  convinced  that  the 

Respondent  could  not  effectively  serve  notices  on  the  Petitioner 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 7 

while  providing  his  address  in  Ireland  and  by  requesting  the 

learned Family Court to affect service through substituted means 

under  Order  V  Rule  20  of  CPC  at  the  address  in  Ireland,  if  she 

had so wanted. 

9. 

It  is  also  settled  law  that  a  Court  must  first  affect 

service  on  a  defendant  through  ordinary  means  as  provided 

under  Order  V  of  CPC.  And  once  service  cannot  be  affected 

under  Order  V  Rules  15  to  19  of  CPC,  the  Court  is  to  resort  to 

substituted  means  of  service  under  Order  V  Rule  20  of  CPC.  In 

order  for  the  Court  to  proceed  ex-parte  against  a  defendant,  it 

must be satisfied that the conscience of the party is affected by 

the  knowledge  of  proceedings  pending  before  the  Court  and 

despite  such  knowledge  such  party  has  elected  not  to  appear 

before the Court to defend himself. [For the law on the manner 

in  which  service  is  to  be  affected  see  for  example  Mrs.  Nargis 

Latif  VS  Mrs.  Feroz  Afaq  Ahmed  Khan  (2001  SCMR  99), 

Yaqoob  Ali  through  L.Rs  and  others  VS  Muhammad  Ayub 

and  others  (PLD  2021  Lahore  678)  and  Muhammad 

Hussain  VS  Rana  Sohail  Anjum  and  8  others  (2022  CLC 

1529)]. 

10. 

In  the  instant  case,  a  perusal  of  the  record  does  not 

reflect  that  the  learned  Family  Court  applied  its  mind  to 

determine  whether  or  not  the  Petitioner  was  duly  served  given 

that  the  plaint  itself  stated  that  the  Petitioner  was  living  in 

Ireland.  Prudence  demanded  that  the  learned  Family  Court  to 

have  sought  from  the  Respondent  the  address  of  her  spouse  

(i.e.  the  Petitioner)  in  Ireland  to  affect  service  upon  him.  But 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 8 

that was not done. This Court therefore finds that the Petitioner 

was  not  duly  served.  The  learned  Family  Court  and  the  learned 

Additional District Court have both assumed that as notices were 

served  on  the  Petitioner  at  his  family  home,  it  was  not  possible 

that  he  had  not  been  informed  by  his  family  members  that 

notices  were  served.  Other  than  basing  such  conclusion  on 

conjecture,  there  is  nothing  on  record  to  establish  that  the 

Petitioner’s conscience  was in fact affected by knowledge  of the 

proceedings. The Petitioner and the Respondent are first cousins 

and spouses. But the Respondent has also produced no evidence 

to  establish  that  the  Petitioner  had  been  informed  about  the 

proceedings.  The  previous  round  of  litigation  in  Sadiqabad 

wherein the Respondent also procured an ex-parte judgment and 

decree  against  the  Petitioner  also  creates  some  doubt  in  the 

mind of  this Court  and the benefit of such doubt must be  given 

to  the  Petitioner  as  at  stake  in  the  present  proceedings  is  the 

right  of  the  Petitioner  to  due  process  and  fair  trial  guaranteed 

under Article 10A of the Constitution. 

11. 

The  second  argument  that  prevailed  with  the  learned 

Family  Court  and  the  learned  Additional  District  Court  was  that 

the  Petitioner  had  not  clearly  pleaded  as  to  how  he  became 

aware of the present proceedings. Perusal of the application filed 

by  the  Petitioner  reflects  that  he  had  pleaded  that  he  had  been 

informed  by  his  brother  on  12.12.2019  with  regard  to  the  

ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated  22.03.2018.  This  Court 

summoned  the  Petitioner’s  brother,  Mr.  Alam  Zeb  son  of 

Muhammad  Feroz  Khan,  who  is  also  respondent  No.2  in  Writ 

Petition  No.2134  of  2020  and  he  confirmed  that  he  had  been 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 9 

informed by a family member that the Respondent had procured 

ex-parte  judgments  and  decrees  from  the  learned  Family  Court 

in  Islamabad.  He  submitted  that  the  Petitioner  and  the 

Respondent were cousins and consequently, it was during one of 

the conversation with a family member that he was made aware 

of  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  22.03.2018  and  after  which 

he informed the Petitioner. This Court has no basis to doubt the 

averment  of  Mr.  Alam  Zeb.  While  there  is  a  practice  of  dodging 

service and watching proceedings silently and then subsequently 

seeking  setting  aside  of  ex-parte  judgments  and  decrees  to 

delay  the  adjudication  of  rights,  the  Court  cannot  assume  that 

this  is  what  the  Petitioner  has  done  in  this  case,  without  any 

evidence being led before the Court supporting such conclusion. 

No such evidence has been led by the Respondent in the present 

case. 

12. 

While this Court has sympathy for the circumstances of 

the  Respondent,  who  claims  to  not  being  maintained  by  the 

Petitioner  after  marring  for  a  second  time  and  also  not  having 

been  granted  her  right  to  dower.  Such  sympathy  cannot  be  a 

basis  to  deny  the  Petitioner’s  right  to  a  fair  trial.  The  record 

reflects  that  at  the  time  of  filing  of  the  suit  the  Petitioner  was 

living  in  Ireland  and  no  service  was  ever  affected  on  the 

Petitioner.  The  Petitioner  claims  that  he  found  out  about  the 

proceedings 

from  his  brother  and 

immediately 

filed  an 

application  for  setting  aside  the  ex-parte  judgments  and 

decrees. There is nothing on record to controvert such assertion 

by the Petitioner. 

 
 
Writ Petition No. 3363/2021 

P a g e  | 10 

13. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  Court  finds  that  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court  and  the  learned  Additional  District  Court 

passed the impugned orders based on misreading of the law and 

record.  The  Writ  Petition  No.3363  of  2021  is  therefore  allowed 

and  the  Writ  Petition  No.2134  of  2020  is  dismissed.  The 

impugned  orders  dated  25.02.2020  and  23.06.2021  are  

set-aside.  The  ex-parte 

judgments  and  decrees  dated 

22.03.2018 and 18.02.2019 are also set-aside. The suit filed by 

the  Respondent  will  be  deemed  pending  before  the  learned 

Family  Court.  The  parties  will  appear  before  the  learned  Family 

Court  on  05.12.2022.  On  such  date  the  Petitioner  will  file  his 

written  statement  before  the  learned  Family  Court.  And  the 

learned  Family  Court  in  consultation  with  the  learned  counsels 

for  the  parties  will  put  together  a  schedule  to  conclude  the 

proceedings in  the  suit within a  period of three months and will 

proceed with the matter on weekly basis and render a judgment 

within  a  period  of  three  months.  In  the  event  that  any  of  the 

parties  seeks  adjournment  to  delay  the  matter,  the  learned 

Family  Court  will  exercise  its  penal  powers  under  provisions  of 

the CPC.      

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 25.11.2022. 

A.Rahman Abbasi.  

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
