ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.1358  of 2021 
Nasir Mehmood 
VS
Addi. District Judge Islamabad West and others 

Petitioner by: 
Respondent No.3 by: 
Date of Hearing: 

Ch. Muhammad Shafqaat, Advocate 
Mr. Muhammad Waqas Malik, Advocate 
03.03.2022 

Sardar Ejaz Ishag  Khan, J:  The petitioner's  ex-wife  filed a suit 

for dissolution of marriage and recovery of maintenance, dowry articles and 

dower  before  the  Family  Court  (West),  Islamabad.  The  suit  claimed  that 

the  dower  was  fixed  at  8  tolas  gold  and  monthly  pocket  money  at 

Rs.5,000/-.  It went on to state that all the dowry articles were handed over 

to the husband and received by him at his residence where he signed the list 

of dowry  articles.  They were  married  a  few months  only.  The  pleadings 

were  at  variance  as  to  the  circumstances  of the  wife's  departure,  the  wife 

claiming  she  was  beaten  and thrown  out, the  husband  claiming  she  left  of 

her  own  volition,  and  the  learned  trial  court  found  on  evidence  the 

husband's  version to be the correct one. 

2 

The  learned family court decreed the dissolution  of marriage on the 

basis of khula on failure of reconciliation proceedings and set the remaining 

questions  relating  to  the  possession  and  return  of  dower  and  dowry  and 

maintenance,  etc. for trial.  After consideration of the evidence, the learned 

family court  concluded that the dower gold weighing  8  tolas was given by 

the husband to the wife on the wedding day and remained in her possession. 

However,  citing Tuharat  Firdos VSImtiaz  Khan  (2019 CLC  1562) and 

Aurangzeb  VS Mst.  Gulnaz  (PLD 2006 Karachi  563), the  family court 

invoked  the  principle  of  'reciprocal  benefits',  concluded  that  it  had 

discretion  in the matter and, given that the wife had  lived with the husband 

for some months, allowed the wife to retain half the dower and ordered her 

to return the remaining half 4 tolas as consideration for khula. 

Writ  Petition  No. 1358 of2021 

-2- 

3 

On  the  question  of return  of dowry  articles,  the  court  believed  the 

wife's  version  in evidence  and accepted  the  dowry  list appended  with  the 

plaint  for return  of the  items listed therein,  citing  the judgment  titled Mst. 

Saib Noor VS Zafar Iqbal (2011 YLR  1268), whereby the list of dowry 

articles  annexed  with  the  plaint  right  from  the  inception  of the  suit  and 

exhibited  without  objection  by the  defendant  was  to  be taken  as authentic 

and  correct,  the  receipts  of  purchase  of  the  dowry  articles  not  being 

produced in evidence notwithstanding, as the rigours of the law of evidence 

did  not  apply  to  a  family  suit.  The  court  also  referred  to  the  admission 

made  by  the  husband  in  his  cross-examination  that  he  had  received  the 

dowry  articles  and  had  signed  the  list  and,  given  that  the  husband  was  a 

well-educated  person,  his  contention that  he  signed  the  dowry  list without 

due  care  was  rejected.  Nonetheless,  the  family  court  did  not  allow  the 

entire  dowry  list;  it  rejected  the  part  thereof  listing  22  tolas  gold  for  the 

reason that  there  wasn't  enough evidence to believe  that this gold actually 

existed.  Resultantly,  the  family  Court  allowed  the  recovery  of the  dowry 

list items except the 22 tolas gold listed therein. 

4 

Both  the  husband  and  the  wife  appealed  the  judgment  which  was 

disposed  of  by  a  consolidated  judgment  dated  26.01.2021.  The  learned 

appellate  court  dismissed  both the appeals and  agreed with  the findings of 

the learned family court. 

5 

The  main  thrust  of  the  petitioner  husband's  learned  counsel  was 

that:- 

i) 

ii) 

the  wife  was  not  entitled  to  retain  50%  of the  dower  because  she 
had  obtained  khula  and  that  she  had  herself  left  the  house  of the 
petitioner without any lawful justification;  and 

the  evidence  of the  defendant  admitting  the  list  of dowry  articles 
was recorded  in the  absence of his counsel  in a hasty manner  and 
the  personal  belongings  of the  wife  were  intentionally  written  in 
the list of dowry articles but they were not actually there. 

6 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  during  arguments  attempted 

for this Court to reappraise the evidence, which  however  is not the task  of 

this  Court  sitting  in  its  Constitutional jurisdiction;  the  scope  is  limited  to 

cure any illegality,  failure or excess of jurisdiction,  material error of fact or 

law patent on the face of record, and the like, and which does not entail that 

Writ Petition  No.  1358 of2021 

-3- 

this Court substitute its view on appraisal of the evidence for the view taken 

by the trial or the appellate court.  I therefore confine myself to the question 

of law raised by the  learned counsel that both the  learned family court and 

the  appellate  court  committed  an  error  of  law  in  permitting  the  wife  to 

retain  half the  amount  of dower  despite  taking  khula  before  the  trial  and 

given the  wife's  admission  in evidence that  she  left the  house  and refused 

to stay with her husband. 

7 

Learned  counsel submitted that it was true that  in some cases where 

the marriage  had lasted for a long period the courts do allow half dower to 

be  retained  by  the  wife,  but  submitted  that  this  was  not  the  correct  legal 

position, that the said judgments  were motivated by compassion alone, and 

that  this  could  not  in  any  event  be  valid  for  the  instant  case  where  the 

marriage had lasted a few months only.  The following cases were cited: 

i) 

Shagufta  Bibi  VS
(2013 MLD  487 [Lahore]) 

Judge  Family  Court,  Mailsi  and  others 

Distinguishing  Muhammad  Zafar  VS Judge.  Family  Court  and 
another  (2005 CLD  1844) it  was  held  that,  when  the  marriage  was 
dissolved  at  the  reconciliation 
the 
entire  trial,  then  the  court  had  no  discretion  to  refuse  the  return  of 
dower  in  view  of the  proviso  to  section  10(4) of the  West  Pakistan 
Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  which 
in 
mandatory  terms. 

stage  without  going  through 

the  court  found  couched 

ii) 

Muhammad  Saeed  VS Additional  District  Judge  and  others 
(2019 CLC  1008 [Lahore]) 

iii) 

iv) 

Here  too  the  court  found  that  on  the  basis  of khula,  the  dower  had 
to  be  returned  by  the  wife. 

Muhammad  Kamran 
(2018 YLR  1251  [Lahore]) 

VS Mst.  Samera  Majeed  and  others 

Here  too  the  court  found  that  where  the  wife  obtained  a decree  for 
dissolution  of marriage  on  the  basis  of khula,  it was  always  subject 
to  return  of  dower  and  she  subsequently  could  not  claim  it  as  of 
right  and  that,  in  case  of khula,  the  wife  would  have  to  either  remit 
the  dower  if  she  had  not  received  it  or  pay  back  the  same  to  the 
husband  if she  had  received  it. 

Khurram  Naseer  VS
(2016 MLD  1183 [Islamabad]) 

Judge  Family  Court  (West)  and  others 

Here  too  the  Islamabad  High  Court  held  that  the  wife  had  to  restore 
if  the 
haq  mehr  received  by  her  in  consideration  of  marriage 
marriage  was  dissolved  on  the  basis  of  khula  right  after  the  pre  
trial  reconciliation  proceedings  and  before  the  entire  evidence  was 
led  and  the  court  referred  to  the  proviso  to  section  10(4)  to  come  to 
the  conclusion 
the  dower  had  to  be 
returned. 

that  in  such  circumstances 

Writ  Petition  No.  1358 of2021 

-4- 

8 

I  am unable to agree with the reliance by the  learned trial court and 

the  agreement  therewith  by  the  learned  appellate  court  on  the  'reciprocal 

benefits'  principle  in  the  circumstances  of this  case.  The  reliance  by  the 

court  on  Aurangzeb  VS Mst.  Gulnaz  (supra)  is  uncalled  for  because 

there the wife had lived with the husband for over  1.5  years and this on the 

facts of that case was to be treated as sufficient reciprocal  benefit received 

by  the  husband  for  a  dower  of  Rs.42,000/-,  given  that  the  wife  was 

destitute.  More to the point is that the application of the proviso to section 

I 0( 4)  was  not  discussed  in  the  said  judgment.  The  second  judgment 

Tuharat  Firdos  VS Imtiaz Khan (supra) relied  on by the  learned family 

court is  also not attracted to the facts of this case as the wife there belonged 

to  a poor  family  and  the  law report  shows  this  factor  was  predominant  in 

the decision to allow her to retain the dower house.  Neither  of these cases 

discussed the proviso  to section  10( 4 ). 

In view  of the  fact that  in this case 

the  wife  lived  for  a  few  months  only  with  the  husband,  in  view  of there 

being no finding of the wife's  destitution, and in view of the finding of the 

learned  trial  court  that  the  wife  admitted  during  the  course  of  cross 

examination  that  she  herself  left  her  husband's  house  and  that  she  turned 

down the efforts of the husband and the mother for reconciliation, I  find the 

reliance  on  the  'reciprocal  benefits'  principle  by  the  family  court  an 

excessive  exercise  of jurisdiction  bordering  on  largesse uncalled  for  in  the 

circumstances of this case. 

Above  all,  I  find  it  difficult  to  reconcile  the  principle  of reciprocal 

9 
benefits with the proviso to section  10( 4) which is reproduced below 1 

:- 

S. IO. Pre-trial  proceedings.- 

If  no  compromise  or  reconciliation 

(4) 
the  Court 
shall  frame  the  issues  in  the  case  and  fix  a  date  for  the  recording  of 
the  evidence; 

is  possible 

l!Provided  that  notwithstanding  any  decision  or judgment  of 
any  Court  or  tribunal,  the  Family  Court  in  a  suit  for  dissolution  of 
fails,  shall  pass  decree  for  dissolution  of 
marriage, 
the  Haq  Mehr 
marriage 
received  by  the  wife  in  consideration  of  marriage  at  the  time  of 
marnage. 

if reconciliation 
forthwith  and  also  restore 

the  husband 

1  Reproduced  per  the  statutory  provision  prevalent  in  Islamabad. 
2  Proviso  added  by  Amending  Ordinance.  LY  of2002  dated  I. I 0.2002. 

Writ P~tition No. 1358 or2021 

-5- 

10 

The aforesaid  proviso makes it mandatory  for the wife to return the 

dower on the basis of khula given under section  10(4) of the Family Courts 

Act,  1964.  Both  the judgments  relied  on by  the  learned  family  court  are 

judgments  of Single Benches, therefore  are not binding  on this Court, and 

since  they  do  not  evaluate  the  impact  of  the  proviso  to  section  I 0( 4 ), 

respectfully, can be said to be per incuriam to this extent. 

11 

In  view  of  the  foregoing,  I  find  that  the  principle  of  reciprocal 

benefit cannot be applied without due regard to the proviso to section  10( 4) 

of the Family Courts Act,  especially where there is no finding of the wife's 

destitution.  Therefore,  I  am  inclined to  follow the  ratios  in Shagufta Bibi 

(supra) and Khurram  Naseer (supra), which  appear to  me to be the correct 

interpretation of the proviso to section  I 0( 4) which does not use any words 

'such  part  of  the  dower  as  the  Court  may  order',  or  similar,  and  I  am 

therefore  unable  to  read  a  discretion  of  the  family  court  therein  on  the 

principle  of reciprocal  benefit.  It  is clarified  that  this  does  not  entail  that 

return of dower  is to be a condition precedent to khula being ordered -  far 

from  it -  but  is  an obligation that  arises and  fastens  in parallel  with  khula 

being granted under section  10(4), to be fulfilled by the wife there and then 

or thereafter. 

12 

I  am  however  persuaded  by  the  learned  counsel  for the  respondent 

ex-wife that the dowry articles ordered to be returned by the family court is 

not to  be  interfered with  by questioning  the  failure  of the  wife  to produce 

receipts  of purchase  or  a  later  objection  of the  husband  to  the  dowry  list. 

The learned counsel cited, and I  respectfully adhere to, the judgment  of the 

Hon 'ble  Supreme  Court  in Shafique Sultan VSMst.  Asma  Firdous and 

others (2017  SCMR 393), where  it was held that the  list of dowry articles 

provided  by the  wife  consisting  of articles  of daily  use  generally  given  to 

brides  on  weddings  was  to  be  accepted  where  the  articles  were  not 

extravagant  nor  shown  to  be  beyond  the  financial  resources  of the  wife's 

family,  and  that  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984 was  not stricto  senso 

applicable  and,  accordingly,  the  husband's  contention  therein  (as  herein) 

regarding  the  proof  of receipts  and  effect  of non-production  of authors  of 

such receipts was found to be misconceived. 

Writ Petition  No.  1358 of2021 

-6- 

12 

Resultantly,  this writ petition is allowed in  part to the extent that the 

judgment  and  decree  allowing the  wife  to  retain  half the  dower  of 4  tolas 

gold  is  declared  to  be  unwarranted  in  law and  is  set  aside.  The wife  will 

return  the  entire  dower  of  8  tolas  gold  to  the  husband.  The  rest  of the 

decree is not interfered with. 

13 

There is no order as to costs. 

(Sardar Ejaz Ishaq Khan) 
Judge 

Announced in open Court on Q} · 0 b · 21)?2, 

Approved for reporting. 

Judge· 

