Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Criminal Misc. No. 631-B of 2021 

Mubeen Ahmed 
VS
The State & another  

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that 
of parties or counsel where necessary. 

   30.07.2021.  Mr.  M.  Inam  Mughal,  Advocate  for  the 

petitioner.  
Mr.  Yasir  Ali  Raja,  Advocate 
complainant.  
Mr. Shazeb Nawaz Khan, State Counsel.  
Mr. Muhammad Amin, ASI along with record.   

the 

for 

Through  this  petition  the  petitioner  is  seeking  bail 

after  arrest  in  case  FIR  No.  215  dated  06.06.2021  wherein 

the petitioner has been charged for an offence under section 

377B  and  34  of  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860  (“PPC”) 

registered at Police Station Shahzad Town, Islamabad.  

2.   

Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that in 

the  instant  case  the  allegation  is  that  the  petitioner 

attempted to commit an offence and not that he committed 

an  unnatural  act  with  the  seven  years  old  son  of  the 

complaint.  That  the  complainant  is  not  an  eye-witness  as 

alleged  in  the  FIR.  The  eye  witness  is  the  wife  of  the 

complainant who told the complainant that she saw her son 

in the shop of the petitioner with his trouser pulled down and 

the complainant then sought the registration of FIR after the 

delay  of  approximately  25  hours.  He  submitted  that  the 

medical  record  reflected  no  marks  of  violence  or  torture  on 

the  body  of  the  child  or  any  bruises  which  would  have 

 
 
 
 
 
-2-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

suggested that the accused had forced himself on the child. 

That  the  petitioner  recorded  a  statement  under  section  161 

of Cr.P.C in which he refuted the allegation against him. The 

neighbourers  and  acquaintances  of  the  petitioner  from  the 

area  recorded  statements  in  favour  of  the  petitioner  giving 

evidence  of  his  good  character.  He  relied  on  Suleman  VS 

The State (2008 YLR 2722) for the proposition that where 

no  penetration  was  established  through  medical  evidence, 

the accused was granted bail. He also relied on Mazhar Ali 

VS  The  State  and  another  (2019  PCr.LJ  899),  wherein 

in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  complainant  was  not  the  eye-

witness  and  no  bruises,  scratches  or  signs  of  violence  were 

evident  from  the  evidence  collected  and  in  the  absence  of 

proof  of  penetration,  the  accused  was  granted  bail.  The 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contended  that  the 

complaint is tainted with mala fide as the complainant owed 

an  amount  of  Rs.31,000/-  for  purchase  of  items  from  the 

shop of the petitioner on credit and it was on demand by the 

petitioner  to  settle  the  account  that  the  complainant  had 

implicated  the  petitioner  in  a  false  case.  He  further 

submitted that the co-accused had been granted bail by the 

learned  trial  court  and  the  petitioner  was  entitled  to  the 

same in view of the principle of consistency. 

3.   

Learned counsel for the complainant submitted that 

for  purposes  of  section  377A  an  offence  stands  constituted 

upon  mere  attempt  to  engage  with  a  child  in  obscene  or 

sexually  explicit  conduct  and  such  offence  cannot  be 

confused  with  an  offence  under  section  376  or  377  of  PPC 

 
 
 
-3-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

for  which  penetration  might  be  relevant.  He  submitted  that 

under  section  377B,  the  punishment  for  offence  of  sexual 

abuse under section 377A was a term not less than fourteen 

years  and  the  offence  fell  within  the  prohibitory  clause  of 

section  497(1)  of  Cr.P.C.  He  submitted  that  wife  of  the 

complainant  was  the  eye-witness  who  had  seen  her  seven 

years  old  son  in  the  shop  of  the  petitioner  with  his  trouser 

pulled  down  and  then  her  son  narrated  the  story  of  sexual 

abuse that he suffered at the hands of the petitioner both to 

his  mother  as  well  as  his  father.  He  submitted  that  the 

medical  report  also  recorded  that  the  victim  had  been 

subjected to multiple attempts of sexual assault.  

4.   

Learned  State  Counsel  took  the  Court  through  the 

legislative  history  of  the  promulgation  of  section  377A  of 

PPC.  He  submitted  that  the  said  provision  was  promulgated 

through  the  Criminal  Law  (Second  Amendment)  Act,  2016 

and  was  given  effect  from  22.03.2016.  That  the  statement 

of objects and reasons of the said amendment reflected that 

it  was  to  implement  the  provisions  of  the  United  Nations’ 

Convection  on  Rights  of  Child  and  to  protect  children  from 

exposure  to  seduction,  sexual  abuse,  cruelty,  trafficking  in 

human  beings,  etc.  He  submitted  that  the  offence  that  the 

petitioner was charged with was non-bailable and fell within 

the prohibitory clause of section 497 of Cr.P.C. He relied on 

Arbab  Ali  VS  Khamiso  and  others  (1985  SCMR  195) 

and  Shoukat  Ilahi  VS  Javed  Iqbal  and  others  (2010 

SCMR  966)  to argue that where an offence falls within  the 

prohibitory clause, bail would only be granted if the accused 

 
 
 
-4-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

made out a case of further inquiry or if the accused is either 

sick,  infirm  or  a  child,  and  that  none  of  these  conditions 

were  attracted  in  the  present  case.  He  relied  on  Waseem 

Bashir  VS  the  State  (2016  PCr.LJ  454),  Ghulam 

Hussain  VS  The  State  (2020  YLR  1959)  and  Sakhi 

Rehmat  VS  The  State  (2021  MLD  75)  for  the  argument 

that  where  the  accused  is  implicated  in  the  heinous  offence 

of sexual abuse, which has not just against a minor but also 

against the society at large, the accused did not deserve the 

concession  of  bail.  He  submitted  that  the  FIR  contained 

specific  allegations  against 

the  accused.  That  mere 

inducement  to  engage  in  sexually  explicit  conduct  was 

sufficient  to  constitute  an  offence  under  section  377A  and 

that  consummation  of 

intercourse 

is  not  a  required 

ingredient  of  the  offence  that  the  petitioner  was  charged 

with.  And  consequently  the  medical  report  reflecting  no 

signs of  violence or  injury had  no relevance for purposes of 

an offence under section 377A. For this proposition he relied 

on  Waseem  Bashir  VS  The  State  and  other  (2016 

PCr.LJ 454).  He further relied on Sakhi Rehmat VS The 

State (2021 MLD 75) to argue that where the allegation is 

specific  and  witness  had  recorded  statements  under  section 

161  of  Cr.P.C  implicating  the  accused  and  the  medical 

evidence  supported  the  allegation,  bail  to  the  accused  was 

denied. He further contended that while another person was 

also named in the FIR but as there was no role attributed to 

him  by  either  the  wife  of  the  complainant  or  the  child  who 

suffered  sexual  abuse,  the  learned  trial  court  had  rightly 

 
 
 
-5-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

granted  such  accused  the  benefit  of  doubt.  However,  the 

role  of  the  petitioner  and  the  co-accused  was  completely 

different  according  to  the  FIR,  and  thus  the  principle  of 

consistency  would  not  be  applicable.  He  further  submitted 

that  the  general  character  and  statements  provided  by  the 

acquaintances of the  petitioner  were of no value as none of 

them were present at the place of occurrence as is often the 

case  in  incidents  of  sexual  abuse,  which  often  involve  by 

someone  known  to  the  victim.  He  further  argued  that  in  a 

case of sexual abuse it is hard to find independent witnesses 

and  the  motive  being  attributed  by  the  petitioner  to  the 

complainant  and  his  wife  is  almost  inconceivable  as  no 

parent can be expected to stoop so low so as to expose their 

seven  year  old  child  to  allegations  of  sexual  abuse  in  order 

to settle an account of Rs.31,000/-.   

5.   

Sections 377A and 377B state the following:  

377A.  Sexual  abuse.  Whoever  employs,  uses,  forces, 

persuades,  induces,  entices,  or  coerces  any  person  to 

engage  in,  or  assist  any  other  person  to  engage  in 

fondling,  stroking,  caressing,  exhibitionism,  voyeurism 

or any obscene or sexually explicit conduct or simulation 

of  such  conduct  either  independently  or  in  conjunction 

with  other  acts,  with  or  without  consent  where  age  of 

person is less than eighteen years, is said to commit the 

offence of sexual abuse.  

377B.  Punishment.  Whoever  commits  the  offence  of 

sexual  abuse  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of 

either description for a term which shall not be less than 

fourteen  years  and may  extend up  to  twenty  years  and 

with fine which shall not be less than one million rupees. 

 
 
 
-6-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

6.   

The  said  provisions  were  incorporated  pursuant  to 

the Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Act, 2016 in order to 

ensure  that  Pakistan  discharges  its  obligations  under  the 

United  Nations’  Convention  on  Rights  of  Child  which  was 

ratified  in  1990.  An  explicit  object  of  the  Act  as  reflected 

from  the  statements  of  objects  and  reasons  was  to 

criminalize  the  act  to  exposing  children  to  obscene  and 

sexually  explicit  conduct.  Section  377  as  originally 

promulgated  carried  a  punishment  of  upto  seven  years 

imprisonment,  read  together  with  fine.  The  said  provision 

was amended by the Act No. XXVII of 2018 with effect from 

22.05.2018  and  the  punishment  was  enhanced  to  a 

minimum  of  fourteen  years  and  upto  a  maximum  of  twenty 

years and fine of upto one million Rupees.   

7.   

The  United  Nations’  Convention  on  Rights  of  Child 

includes the following: 

Article 19 

1.  States  Parties  shall  take  all  appropriate  legislative, 

administrative,  social  and  educational  measures  to 

protect  the  child  from  all  forms  of  physical  or  mental 

violence, 

injury  or  abuse,  neglect  or  negligent 

treatment,  maltreatment  or  exploitation, 

including 

sexual  abuse,  while  in  the  care  of  parent(s),  legal 

guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the 

child. 

2.  Such  protective  measures  should,  as  appropriate, 

include  effective  procedures  for  the  establishment  of 

social programmes to provide necessary support for the 

child  and  for  those  who  have  the  care  of  the  child,  as 

well  as 

for  other 

forms  of  prevention  and 

for 

identification, 

reporting, 

referral, 

investigation, 

treatment  and 

follow-up  of 

instances  of  child 

 
 
 
-7-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

maltreatment described heretofore, and, as appropriate, 

for judicial involvement. 

Article 34 

States  Parties  undertake  to  protect  the  child  from  all 

forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. For these 

purposes,  States  Parties  shall  in  particular  take  all 

appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral measures 

to prevent: 

(a)  The  inducement  or  coercion  of  a  child  to 

engage in any unlawful sexual activity; 

(b) The exploitative use of children in prostitution 

or other unlawful sexual practices; 

(c)  The  exploitative  use  of 

children 

in 

pornographic performances and materials. 

8.   

Article  34  of  the  United  Nations’  Convention  on 

Rights of Child  that had  inspired the creation of the offence 

of sexual abuse in Pakistan. The object of introducing section 

377A  of  PPC  is  to  protect  children  who  form  a  vulnerable 

segment of the society and are unable to guard against and 

comprehend the consequences of actions of others (and the 

consequences  of  even  their  own  actions).  It  is  for  this 

purpose  that  through  promulgation  of  section  377A,  the 

State  has  assumed  the  obligation  to  protect  children  from 

any form of sexual abuse.   

9.   

Section 377A does not require the consummation of 

sexual intercourse of any sort. Mere persuasion, inducement 

or enticement to engage a minor less than eighteen years of 

age 

in 

fondling, 

stroking, 

caressing,  exhibitionism, 

voyeurism  or  any  obscene  or  sexually  explicit  conduct  or 

stimulation of such conduct constitutes the offence of sexual 

abuse.  Thus, merely fondling a child, which would inflict no 

 
 
 
-8-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

marks  of  violence  or  hurt  on  the  body  of  such  child,  would 

constitute sexual abuse. The manner in which ingredients of 

the  offence  have  been  defined  in  section  377A  and  the 

punishment  prescribed  in  section  377B,  as  amended  and 

enhanced in 2018, makes the legislative intent unequivocal.  

10. 

The law on bail is now well settled. In cases where 

the offence falls outside the non-prohibitory clause of section 

497(1) of Cr.P.C., bail is to be granted as a matter of course 

and rejection of the same is an exception. Where, however, 

an  offence  falls  within  the  prohibitory  clause,  bail  can  only 

be granted if the court comes to the conclusion that there is 

no  reasonable  ground  for  believing  that  the  accused  has 

committed  a  non-bailable  offence  or  where  an  accused 

makes  out  a  case  of  further  inquiry  into  a  guilt  of  the 

accused or in case the accused is under the age of 16 years 

or  is  sick  or  infirm.  Due  to  the  punishment  prescribed  in 

section  377B  as  originally  promulgated  the  offence  under 

section 377A did not fall in the prohibitory clause of section 

497(1) of Cr.P.C. The legislature then amended section 377B 

in  order  to  enhance  the  punishment,  rendering  the  offence 

under section 337A non-bailable and one that falls within the 

prohibitory  clause  of  section  497(1)  Cr.P.C.  The  legislative 

intent behind the amendment is obvious. In view of the law 

as  already  settled  by  the  august  Supreme  Court,  the 

legislature  wished  to  ensure  that  a  person  accused  of  an 

offence of child abuse is not let loose on bail pending trial for 

the charge against him.  

 
 
 
-9-   

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

11. 

The  law  on  bail  attempts  to  strike  a  balance 

between  the  individual  rights  of  the  accused  and  the 

collective rights of the society that are seemingly in conflict. 

An  individual  has  the  right  to  liberty,  to  be  presumed 

innocent  until  proven  guilty  and  not  to  be  subjected  to 

pretrial  punishment.  The  society,  on  the  other,  has  a 

collective  interest  in  maintaining  safety,  affording  citizens 

protection against crime and violence and to ensure that no 

one  is  allowed  to  obstruct  justice.  These  can  seem 

contradictory  rights.  Bail  is  denied  in  cases  where  the 

accused is a flight risk or is likely to engage in obstruction of 

justice if released on bail or is accused of an offence of such 

nature  that  his  release  creates  a  risk  that  he  might  engage 

in  a  repetition  of  the  offence  charged  or  that  his  conduct  is 

such that releasing him into the society would subject other 

individuals within the society to the possibility of harm.   

12. 

In  view  of  competing  rights  and  interests  of  an 

individual  and  the  society  in  relation  to  an  offence  under 

section  377A,  the  legislature  by  amending  section  377B 

made the policy choice of categorizing the offence of sexual 

abuse as a non-bailable offence falling within the prohibitory 

clause  of  section  497(1)  Cr.P.C.  It  appears  to  the 

legislature’s expressed intent that releasing  an alleged child 

molester on bail during trial could jeopardize the safety and 

interest of children who form a vulnerable part of the society 

and that the State is under an obligation to protect.   

 
 
 
-10-  

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

13. 

In  relation  to  section  377A  the  criminal  justice 

system  must  make  allowance  for  the  child  victim’s  inability 

to  comprehend  the  inappropriateness  of  sexual  abuse  that 

he/she  suffers  and  the  fear  factor  that  may  lead  to  non-

disclosure  of  the  abuse  suffered  or  delayed  disclosure  of 

such abuse or self-blame due to the fear of being disbelieved 

by parents or family members or out of fear of being hurt by 

molester.  When  it  comes  to  children  as  victims  of  sexual 

abuse,  the  ordinary  rules  regarding  the  need  for  the  victim 

of  an  offence  reporting  a  crime  to  the  police  without  delay 

cannot be applied in a straightjacket manner. The argument 

of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  that  the  complaint 

was filed after a delay of 24 hours is of no consequence for 

purposes of grant of bail. The child in this case has recorded 

his statement with the police and stated therein that he has 

been  subjected  to  repeat  incidences  of  sexual  abuse  by  the 

petitioner and that it was out of fear of his parents as well as 

out  of  fear  of  the  petitioner  that  he  did  not  previously 

disclose the abuse he suffered. It was only after his mother 

herself  witnessed  that  his  trouser  was  pulled  down  in  the 

shop of the petitioner that he revealed the whole story to his 

mother and subsequently to his father.   

14. 

The  argument  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner  that  there  is  no  independent  witness  to  connect 

the  petitioner  with  the  offence  that  he  has  been  charged 

with is also without force. The mother of the child is an eye-

witness  who  has  recorded  her  statement  under  section  161 

of Cr.P.C and stated that she found her seven years old son 

 
 
 
-11-  

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

behind  the  counter  in  the  petitioner’s  shop  with  his  trouser 

pulled down and  there was no one else present in  the shop 

of the petitioner except the petitioner himself and the child. 

Even  in  the  absence  of  the  mother’s  statement,  the  child’s 

own statement is also admissible in evidence. It was held by 

the august Supreme Court in State VS Abdul Khaliq (PLD 

2011  SC  554)  that  depending  upon  the  facts  and 

circumstances of a case, the testimony of the victim himself 

that  could  be  believed  in  cases  where  there  was  no 

background  of  any  grudge  between  the  parties.  The  august 

Supreme  Court  has  clarified  the  law  on  the  admissibility  of 

testimony  of  a  child  in  Raja  Khurram  Ali  Khan  VS 

Tayyaba  Bibi  (PLD  2020  SC  146),  wherein  it  has  been 

held  that  subject  to  passing  the  ‘rationality  test’  (i.e. 

whether  the  child  or  the  person  has  the  capacity  and 

intelligence  to  understand  the  questions  put  to  him,  and  is 

able  to  rationally  respond  to  them)  the  testimony  of  a  child 

is  admissible.  In  the  said  case  the  august  Supreme  Court 

even  hinted  that  the  statement  of  a  child  could  possibly  be 

taken into account as an exception to the rule on hearsay in 

the  event  that  the  child  is  not  just  a  witness  but  also  a 

victim.   

15. 

In the instant case, the child is the victim of sexual 

abuse  has  recorded  a  statement  before  the  police  under 

section  161  of  Cr.P.C  implicating  the  petitioner  that  he 

repeated  acts  of  sexual  abuse  and  for  threatening  to  inflict 

harm on him due to which he did not reveal the fact of such 

sexual abuse to anyone. And further, the mother of the child 

 
 
 
-12-  

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

has  also  recorded  a  statement  under  section  161  of  Cr.P.C 

stating that she found her child alone with the accused with 

the  child’s  trouser  pulled  down.  There  is  sufficient  material 

available  on  record  connecting  the  petitioner  with  the 

offence that he has been charged with under section 377A of 

PPC.  As  already  mentioned,  in  a  case  of  sexual  abuse  the 

offence  does  not  involve  intercourse  and  further  a  seven 

years  old  child  cannot  be  expected  to  vigorously  protest 

unwanted actions of a sexual predator (due to fear or shock) 

that would result  into a physical struggle resulting  in marks 

of  violence  in  each  such  case.  Thus,  the  argument  of  the 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  that  the  medical  report 

reflecting  no bruises on the body of the child is evidence  of 

lack  of  an  offence  under  section  377A  having  been 

committed is without force. 

16. 

Given  that  the  offence  in  question  falls  within  the 

prohibitory clause of section 497(1) of Cr.P.C, the judgment 

cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner Suleman VS 

The  State  (2008  YLR  2722)  does  not  relate  to  section 

377A  and  consequently  is  of  no  use  to  the  petitioner.  With 

all due respect, I am not inclined to follow the precedent laid 

down by the learned Peshawar High Court in Mazhar Ali VS 

The  State  (2019  PCr.LJ  899)  as  it  appears  that  the 

learned  counsel  for  the  parties  appearing  before  the  Court 

failed  to  bring  sections  377A  and  377B  of  PPC  to  the 

attention of the Court. 

 
 
 
-13-  

Crl. Misc. No. 631-B/2021 

17. 

For  the  aforesaid  reasons,  this  Court  feels,  as  a 

prima  facie  matter,  that  sufficient  material  is  available  on 

record to connect the petitioner with the offence that he has 

been charged with and consequently he is not entitled to be 

admitted to bail. The instant petition is dismissed. 

18. 

Needless to mention that the observations recorded 

in  the  instant  petition  are  based  on  tentative  assessment, 

which  ought  not  prejudice  the  proceedings  before  the 

learned trial court. 

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

Approved for reporting  

Saeed* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
