HOD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

CRL. MISC.  NO.  152-B  of 2020. 

Junaid  Mumtaz. 
VERSUS 
The State,  etc 

S.No.  of order/  Date of 
hearin 
Proceedin 

Order with  signature of Judge, and that  of  parties or 
counsel  where necessa  . 

05.03.2020.  Mr Muhammad Afzal Khan Jadoon, Advocate for the 

petitioner. 
Syed Muhammad Tayyab, Deputy Attorney  General. 
Mr Abbas Akbar, complainant in  person. 
Mr Fazal  Maabood, S.I. 1.0. FIA with  record. 

The  petitioner  Junaid  Mumtaz  son  of  Muhammad  Mumtaz 

has  sought  post  arrest  bail  in  case  F.I.R.  No.  23,  dated  05.07.2019, 

registered  under  sections 500,  509,  377,  109/34  of  Pakistan Penal  Code, 

1860  and 20,  21  and  24 of  the  Prevention of  Electronic Crimes Act,  2016 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FIRj  at  Police  Station  FIA, Cyber Crime 

Reporting Centre, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief facts as  narrated in  the  FIR are that  the  petitioner  was 

alleged to  have uploaded, generated and posted objectionable  pictures of 

the complainant on social media. Hence the  instant petition. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel for  the  petitioner  has contended  that; 

offences  under  section  377  of  PPC  and  22  of  PECA  are  not  attracted 

against  the  petitioner;  medical  examination  of  the  victim  was  not 

conducted  so  as  to  attract  offence  under  section  377  of  PPC;  the  co- 

accused  has  been  enlarged  on  bail  vide  order,  dated  27.01.2020;  no 

-2- 

Crl. Misc. No.  152-B  of 2020. 

incriminating  material  was  recovered from  the  petitioner;  the  petitioner 

has  been  incarcerated for  eight  months;  investigation  qua  the  petitioner 

has  been  completed  and  he  is  no  more  required  for  purposes thereof; 

further  incarceration  of  the  petitioner  will  not  serve  any  useful  purpose; 

allegations  against  the  petitioner  are  false,  frivolous  and  vexatious;  the 

petitioner  has  been  falsely  involved  in  the  instant  case  just  to  harass, 

pressurize  and  humiliate  him;  the  petitioner  has  not  committed  the 

alleged offences;  medical examination of the  petitioner was not conducted 

so  as  to  attract  the  offences under sections 377 of  PPC  and 22  of  PECA;  at 

the  most  section  109  of  PPC  is  attracted  against  the  present  petitioner; 

the  petitioner  has  not  used  an  electronic  device  by  transmitting  explicit 

material  relating  to 

the  complainant;  recovery  if  any  is 

fake  and 

concocted; the  petitioner  is  previously non-convict and non-record  holder; 

there  is  no  chance of  abscondance of the  petitioner  or tampering  with  the 

prosecution evidence; the  case  against the  petitioner  is  based on malatide 

and ulterior  motives of the complainant; the offences do not fall within  the 

ambit of  prohibitory  clause of  section 497 of  Cr.P.C.;  report  under section 

173  of Cr.P.C.  has  been submitted  before the  learned trial  Court;  the  case 

against the  petitioner  is  that  of further  probe; story as  narrated in  the  FIR 

is  false,  frivolous  and  baseless;  hence  the  learned  counsel  urges  the 

petitioner to  be  released on bail. 

4. 

The  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  appeared  alongwith 

Fazal  Maabood 5.1.  LO.  FIA.  They  have  contended  that;  recovery  has 

been  affected  from  the  petitioner;  the  petitioner  has  been  specifically 

nominated  in  the  FIR;  the  petitioner  has  deliberately  uploaded  personal 

and  objectionable  pictures  of  the  complainant;  the  said  act  of  the 

petitioner  has  destroyed the  honour and  modesty of  the  complainant  not 

-3- 

Crl. Misc, No. 152-B of 2020. 

only  in  family  but  also  in  the  community;  investigation qua the  petitioner 

has  been  completed  and  report  under  section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has  been 

submitted  before  the  learned  trial  Court;  charge  has  been  framed  and 

statement  of  one witness  has  been  recorded and  the  trial  of  the  case  will 

be  concluded in  near future;  hence urges for dismissal of bail. 

5. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that 

the  co-accused  of 

the 

petitioner  namely,  Sanaullah was  earlier  granted  bail.  The  case  of  the 

present  petitioner  is  at  par  with  the  co-accused.  The  only  allegation 

against  the  present  petitioner  is  that  he  was  accompanying  the  main 

accused  and  they  were  arrested  at  the  crime  scene.  Perusal  of  record 

does  not  show  that  the  number/sim  used  for  sending  the  objectionable 

pictures  and  messages  was  in  the  name  of  the  petitioner  or  in  his  use. 

Investigation  against  the  petitioner  has  been  completed  and  further 

incarceration of  the  latter  will  not serve any  useful purpose. Report under 

section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has  been submitted  before the  learned trial  Court. 

The  main  accused  has  been  declared  as  innocent.  Whether  or  not  the 

offences  mentioned  in  the  FIR  are attracted  to  the  extent  of  the  present 

petitioner  needs  further  probe.  Deeper appreciation  of  evidence  at  bail 

stage is  not  permissible. The  petitioner  does not  have a  criminal  record. 

The continued custody of the  petitioner is  not likely to  serve any beneficial 

purpose at  this  stage.  Nothing has  been  placed  on  record to  indicate that 

the  petitioner  may  abscond  if  he  is  released  on  bail.  This  Court  is, 

therefore,  of  the  opinion  that  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  be  released  by 

extending the concession of bail. 

-4- 

Crl.  Misc.  No.  152-B  of  2020. 

6. 

It  has  been aptly  observed by the  august Supreme Court in 

the  case  of  ''Manzoor and 04 others  VS  The State"reported  as  [PLO  1972 

S.C.  81]  as  follows: 

"The ultimate  conviction and  incarceration  of a guilty 

person  can repair  the  wrong  caused by  a  mistaken  relief  of 

interim  bail  granted  to  him,  but  no  satisfactory  reparation 

can  be  offered  to  an  innocent  man  for  his  unjustified 

incarceration at any  stage of the  case albeit  his acquittal  in 

the long nm: 

In  the  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances of  the  present 

case,  refusal of  bail  will tantamount  to  punishing the  petitioner. 

7. 

In  the  circumstances as  mentioned  above,  this  petition  is 

allowedand  the  petitioner  is  admittedto  bail, subject to  furnishing  bail 

bonds in  the  sum  of  Rs.2.00.0001- (Rupees two  hundred thousand  only) 

with  one  surety  in  the  like  amount  to  the  satisfaction  of  learned  trial 

Court. 

Asad!(/* 

Needless  to  mention  that  the  observations  recorded  in  the 
instant  petition  are  based  on  tentative  asses 
ent,  which 
will  obviously  not  prejudice  the  proceedin  s  before  the 
learned trial  Court. 

(CHI

