ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT

R.F.A NO. 95 0F 2020

Mrs. Shamim Rehman

VS

Public  at large and 2 others.

DATE OF HEARING:

14.09.2020.

APPELLANT BY:

RESPONDENTS:

Barrister Suleman  Khan,
Advocate.
Mr. Naveed Akbar, Advocate
for respondent  No 2
Ch. Aziz ur Rehman, Advocate
for respondent  No 3

F

AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN .J. -  Through
the instant Regular  First Appeal, appellant  impugns
judgment  and decree  dated 10.02.2020,  passed  by
learned Civil Judge 1st Class, lslamabad (West),
whereby her suit for declaration  &  mandatory
injunction  was dismissed.
2. 
Facts,  relevant for the disposal of instant
appeal are that on 26.03.2019,  appeltanuplaintiff filed
a suit for declaration and mandatory  injunction  with
the averments  that she is real sister and surviving
legal heir of Ms Kaniz  Fatima yusuf ("herein after to be
referred  as 'the latC'), who passed away on 23.11.2019
leaving behind the estate  i.e. house No 14-B, street
No 63, F-814 lslamabad (,sutt propertl,); that the
respondent  No 2/defendant No Z (Arif T Sufi) is
nephew and surviving legal heir of the late along with
the appellant and entifled to inherit the suit property;
that the respondent  No 2 waived his right of
inheritance in the suit property in favour of the
appellant;  that as per record of respondent  No

R.F.A  No  95  of 2020

-2-

3/defendant  No 3-C.D.A dated 20.1,1.1g93, the late
was owner of suit property, appellant,  being legal
heir of the !ate, be declared  lawfu! owner  of the suit
property  and the respondent  No. g/c.D.A be directed
to transfer the same in her name and issue fresh
allotment  letter in due course.
3. 
The respondent  No 1 (public-at-targel  was
proceeded against  ex-parte after issuance of
proclamation in the newspaper  vide order dated
15.05.2019,  while the respondent No 2  filed
conceding written statement  on the same  date
through special Attorney (frts Rehana suft/hts mothe),
who was also representing  the appellant  as specia!
Attorney.  Subsequenfly, on 1S.Ol.2O1g,  respondent
No. 3/C.D.A filed written statement wherein  they
testified ownership of the late, qua the suit property,
transferred  in her name on zo.11.1ggg. The learned
Trial Courtframed  following issues on 11.0g.2019:-

I

2.

3.

Whether the plaintiff  has got cause of
action?  OPP
Whether  the plaintiff is entiiled  to
decree as prayed for? Opp
Relief

4. 
Thereafter, Speciat Attorney of  the
appellant,  Ms Rehana Umer Sufi got recorded her
statement on 02.10.2019 as pw-1 and tendered  in
evidence Special Power  of Attorney Ex.p-1,  Family
Registration  Certificate ("F.R.C") Ex.p-2,  death
certificate of late Ex.P-3, c.D.A transfer letter Ex.p-4,
utility bills Ex.P-5,  and property tax receipt  Ex.p-6. As
the respondent No. 2 has already conceded claim of
the appellant through  written  statement, the learned
counsel representing  the said respondent opted not
to  cross-examine the special attorney of  the
appellant.

I

R.F.A  No  95  of  2O2O

-3-

On the next date of hearing i.e. Og.1O.2O1g,
learned counsel for respondent No 3/c.D.A  recorded
statement,  whereby she has waived  her right of
cross-examination  upon pw-1 and relied upon the
written statement  already tendered, white on the
same date, learned counse! for respondent  No z
tendered  special  Power  of Attorney Ex. D-211 sworn
in favour of Ms Rehana umer. The tearned counsel for
the respondent  No z also made statement to the
effect that the respondent No 2 had surrendered  his
right against the appellant in the suit property  and
has no objection if the suit of the appellant  is
decreed.  The learned rrial court after hearing  the
arguments advanced by learned  counset for the
appellant,  dismissed the suit vide judgment and
decree dated  10.02.2020,  being  assailed  through the
instant  appeal.
5. 
Learned counsel  for the appellant argued
that not only from the plaint  but the statement  of pw-1
coupled with the documentary evidence,  it  is
established that the late was owner of the suit
property and that the appellant and respondent No 2
are legal heirs of the late, while in absence  of any
other legal heir there was no justification  to dismiss
the suit; that the objection with regard  to having one
and same attorney  of the appeltant and that of
respondent  No 2 is devoid of force because not only
the respondent  No 2 had been represented  by a
counsel who made statement in favour of the
appellant  but the attorney,  too, had no adverse
interest against the appellant; that in case of any
discrepancy, the appellant  could be directed  to make
good the same but cannot be non-suited when  there
was no riva! claimant. lt is further averred that the
evidence on record amply proved the case of the
appellant regarding  heir-ship  and ownership of the

R.F.A  No  95  of 2020

-4-

Heard the learned counsels for the parties

property of the late, therefore,  impugned judgment
and decree  are liable  to be set aside.
6. 
Learned counsel for respondent No 2
supported  the above submissions,  while learned
counsel for  respondent No g/c.D.A testified
ownership  of the late regarding  the suit property.
7. 
and examined  the record with their abte assistance.
8. 
lt  is setiled principle that appeal is
considered  continuation of trial where reappraisal
and scrutiny of the evidence is mandatory. At the
same time, it is also to be kept in view that the person
who asserts claim has to discharge  its onus.
Likewise,  it is not a set rule to accept the claim of the
plaintiff  as prayed for when there is nothing availabte
against  or where the claim is recognized by the other
side. Even in ex-parte matter, the court is under  an
obligation to apply its independent judicia!  mind while
evaluating the evidence for  ascertaining  the
entitlement  of the plaintiff against the property.
9. 
On examination  of record, it transpired
that the learned  rrial court decrined to grant decree
as prayed for on the grounds  that there ls an lnherent
defect ln the pleadlngs  as the sutt ts betng purcued by the
attorney who is also attorney of the respondent No 2, the
other legal haln whlch ts not wananted  under the lat4
that the appellant  and the late are though daughters  of
sufl tluhammad Yousaf but from dtfferent  wlves,  that the
appellant  dld not bother to menilon that whether hts
father was allve or notand  that rhe respondent No.2 has
also not explalned  hls relailonshtp wtth the tate.
10. 
lt was emphasized  that there is no other
legal heir of the late and that the appellant had
discharged burden to prove by effecting service  upon
the lega! heirs, if any, by arraying public-at-large  as
respondent No 1 but the record  speaks otherwise, as

R.F.A  No  95 of 2020

-5-

during pendency of the suit one Ms Noreen  Talha wife
of ralha saeed, emerged as claimant of the suit
property, by filing an application  under  Order I Rule
10 cPc for becoming  party on the ground that she is
also owner of the suit property and the appettant
deliberately omitted to implead  her as party to the
suit. The said application was filed on 10.01 .2020  and
was ordered to be produced along with main case on
the date fixed i.e.2r.oz.2o2o. The case was taken  up
earlier than the date fixed on 21.01.2020,  as
application  for early hearing filed by the respondent
No 2 was allowed and on that very date,  arguments of
learned  counsel for the appeltant and respondent  No.
2 were heard. The case was then fixed for 29.01.2020
for arguments  on behalf of counsel for respondent  No
3/c.D.A but no one turned  up on behalf of the said
respondent and the matter was then set for
08.02.2020  but the position remained the same and
ultimately, right of respondent  No 3/c.D.A to advance
arguments was closed and lasUy on 1o.o2.2o20,  suit
was dismissed vide impugned  judgment and decree.
11. 
The above proceedings  ctearly  show that
though application under Order I Rule 10 CpC was
made part of the file but no proceedings were
conducted  on the said application,  as neither the
appellant  was put under notice nor was directed to
file reply thereto, which is a glaring jurisdictionat
defect  and cannot be overlooked as it would amount
to condemn  a litigant  unheard  and, therefore,  on this
score alone, the impugned judgment  and decree are
not sustainable  in the eye of !aw.
12. 
As the impugned judgment and decree
are held to be suffered  from jurisdictional  defect,
there left no need to dilate upon the assertions made
basis to counter the impugned judgment  and decree

R.F.A No 95 of 2020

-5-

particularly  when the appellant  will have a right to
advance additional  evidence,  if so desires.
13. 
ln view of above, the instant R.F.A is
allowed. impugned judgment  and decree  dated
10.o2.202o are set aside and the case is remanded to
the learned rrial court for decision afresh after the
disposal of application, referred to above (teft
unattended for reasons unknownl.  The appeilant shall
have a right to advance  any additional evidence if so
desires,  with right of rebuttat to the other side. The
learned rrial court shall make  every endeavour  to
conclude the trial within shortest possibte  time
preferably  within a period of two months from the
receipt of this judgment. No orders as to costs.

rA. R.Ansari*

(FIAZ AH MAD ANJ U M JAN DRAN)
JUDGE

28 09.2 020.

