ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.4929/2018 
Syed Zeeshan Muthar 

VS          

Mst. Hafiza Farah and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 

Amicus Curiae: 

03.12.2019  
Syed Rashid Ali Shah, Advocate 
Rana Ali Akbar, Advocate, for respondents 
No.1 to 3 
Hafiz  Arfat  Ahmed  Chaudhry  and  Ms. 
Kashifa Niaz Awan, Advocates 

___________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-    Through  the  instant  writ 

petition, the petitioner, Syed Zeeshan Muthar, impugns the judgment 

and  decree  dated  11.10.2018  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned 

District  and  Sessions  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  whereby  his  appeal 

against  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  28.02.2018  passed  by  the 

Court  of  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad  was  dismissed 

with costs. Vide the said judgment and decree dated 28.02.2018, the 

learned  Family  Court  partially  decreed  the  suit  for  recovery  of 

maintenance  allowance,  dowry  articles  and  gold  ornaments, 

instituted by respondents No.1 to 3. 

2. 

The  facts  relevant  for  disposal  of  the  petition  are  that  the 

petitioner  and  respondent  No.1  got  married  on  26.01.2012. 

According  to  columns  No.  13  and  14  of  the  Nikahnama,  dower  of 

Rs.5,000/- was paid promptly at the time of Nikah whereas five tolas 

gold  were  fixed  as  deferred  dower.  It  is  apposite  to  mention  that  in 

the  Nikahnama,  no  condition  or  time  period  was  specified  for  the 

payment  of  deferred  dower.  The  couple  was  blessed  with  two 

children  namely  Syed  Muhammad  Ali  (respondent  No.  2)  and  Syeda 

Amna,  (respondent  No.3)  born  on  07.01.2013  and  19.07.2014, 

respectively. 

3. 

After the relations between the petitioner and respondent No.1 

turned  sour,  the  latter  moved  to  her  parents’  house.  On  27.05.2015, 

respondent  No.  1  instituted  a  suit  for  recovery  of  past  and  future 

maintenance for her iddat period at the rate of Rs.10,000/- per month 

since  March  2014  and  for  the  minors  at  the  rate  of  Rs.8,000/-  per 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P.No.4929/2018 

month  for  each  minor.  In  her  suit,  she  further  claimed  recovery  of 

dowry  articles  as  per  list  attached  with  the  plaint  and  recovery  of 

deferred  dower  consisting  of  gold  ornaments  weighing  five tolas as 

well as the cost of litigation. The petitioner contested the suit by filing 

written  statement.  Out  of  divergent  pleadings,  learned  Family  Court 

framed the following issues:- 

“1.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled for recovery of    
  maintenance till completion of iddat period @ Rs.10,000/-  

per month since March 2014? OPP 

2.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled for recovery of past and  future 
  maintenance of the plaintiff No.2 & 3 @ Rs.8,000/- each since 

March 2014? OPP 

3.  Whether  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  recover  the  dowry 

articles or alternate value? OPP 

4.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recover the 5 tolas of  gold 

ornaments? OPP 

5.  Whether the suit of plaintiff is not maintainable? OPD 
6.  Whether the plaintiff has concealed the material facts? OPD 
7.  Relief”   

4. 

During  the  plaintiff’s  evidence,  respondent  No.1  herself 

appeared as PW-1 and produced her affidavit as Exh.P/1. Respondent 

No.1  also  produced  her  father  Muhammad  Afzal  Aasi  as  PW-2.  The 

said witnesses produced his affidavit as Exh.P/2. Both the witnesses 

were  cross-examined  by  the  defendant/petitioner.  In  documentary 

evidence, she produced copy of Nikahnama  as Mark-A,  list of dowry 

articles as Mark-B, receipts of jewelry items as Exh.P/3  and Exh.P/4, 

receipts of furniture as Exh.P/5 and Exh.P/6. 

5. 

The  case  was  at  the  stage  of  the  petitioner/defendant’s 

evidence  when  due  to  default  in  appearance  he  was  proceeded 

against  ex parte  and  ensuing  proceedings  lead  to  the  ex parte 

judgment and decree dated 01.11.2016. However, on the petitioner’s 

application the said ex-parte judgment and decree was set aside vide 

order dated 13.04.2017 passed by learned Family Court.  Thereafter, 

the  petitioner  appeared  as  DW-1  and  submitted  his  affidavit  as 

Exh.D/1. The petitioner produced his sister Dr. Syeda Asma Bano as 

DW-2,  she  submitted  her  affidavit  as  Exh.D/2.  Both  the  witnesses 

were  cross-examined.  The  said  witnesses  produced  purchased 

receipts of gold ornaments Exh.D/3 and Exh.D/4, copy of student card 

Exh.D/5 and HBL receipt as Mark-C. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

W.P.No.4929/2018 

6. 

The  learned  Family  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

28.02.2018 partially decreed the suit of respondents No.1 to 3 to the 

following extent:- 

"(i)   Maintenance: 
(a)  Respondent  No.1  (wife)  was  held  entitled  to  recover 

maintenance @ 8000 per month for the period of iddat only; 

(b)  Respondents No.2 and 3 (minors) were held entitled to the 
recover maintenance @ Rs. 5000/- each since March, 2014 till 
their legal entitlement; 

(ii)  Dowry articles: 

Respondent  No.1  was  held  entitled  to  recover  Items 
  mentioned  at  serial  No.  2-9  of  list  (Mark-B)  and  gold 
ornaments (weighing 33 grams and 150 milligrams as per 
Exh.P/4) or their market value in the alternate; 

(iii)  Dower: 

Respondent No.1 was held entitled to recover 5 tolas of 
gold ornaments or their market value in the alternate;" 

7.  As  mentioned  above,  the  petitioner  preferred  appeal  against 

the judgment and decree passed by learned Family Court, which was 

dismissed  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  11.10.2018  passed  by 

learned  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad.  The  said  judgment  and 

decree has been assailed in the present petition.  

8. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the impugned 

judgment  is  illegal  being  based  on  surmises  and  conjectures;  that 

the petitioner had not divorced respondent No.1, as such she is still 

his  legally  wedded  wife  and  no  question  of  maintenance  for  iddat 

period  arises;  that  since  marriage  between  the  parties  is  still  intact 

respondent  No.1 

is  not  entitled  for  deferred  dower;  that  the 

petitioner is an unemployed student but while awarding maintenance 

for minors his financial resources have not been shown into account; 

that the petitioner can afford to pay maintenance to the minors at the 

rate of Rs.2000/ each; that respondent No.1 is a disobedient wife and 

left  the  matrimonial  abode  on  her  own;  and  that  at  the  time  of 

desertion, respondent No.1 stole 3 gold sets of the petitioner’s sister 

weighing approximately 08 tolas; and that the learned Courts below 

while  awarding  the  maintenance  did  not  pass  any  order  regarding 

meeting  of  the  petitioner  with  the  minors.  Learned  counsel  prayed 

for  the  petition  to  be  allowed  and  for  the  impugned  judgments  and 

decrees to be modified as prayed for. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

W.P.No.4929/2018 

9.  On the other  hand, learned counsel for  respondents No. 1 to 3 

opposed the writ petition by stating that on 17.08.2014, the petitioner 

telephonically  pronounced  one  divorce  on  respondent  No.1  and 

thereafter did not contact her to reconcile with her or to revoke the 

divorce;  that  the  petitioner  did  not  pay  any  maintenance  to 

respondents  No.  1  to  3  and  all  their  expenses  are  being  borne  by 

respondent  No.1’s  parents;  that  the  petitioner  is  a  man  of  means 

having  valuable  rent  bearing  properties  and  business;  that  the 

petitioner  raised  false  defenses  to  deprive  of  the  respondents  from 

maintenance and dowry; that the petitioner has remarried and has a 

son from the second marriage; and the petitioner can easily pay the 

maintenance awarded by the learned Courts below. Learned counsel 

for respondents No. 1 to 3 prayed for the petition to be dismissed. 

10.  This  Court  appointed  Ms.  Kashifa  Niaz  Awan  Advocate  as 

amicus curiae, who assisted the Court by placing following case law 

on record Allah Dad VS Mukhar etc (1992 SCMR 1273), Mst. Kaneez 

Fatima VS Wali Muhammad etc (PLD 1993 SC 901), Zahida Shaheen 

etc VS The State (1994 SCMR 2098), Muhammad Boota VS ADJ etc 

(2002  SCMR  1275),  Mst.  Farah  Naz  VS  Judge  Family  Court  Sahiwal 

(PLD  2006  Sc  457),  Fawad  Ahsan  etc  VS  Chairman  Arbitration 

Council  Islamabad  etc  (PLD  2017  Islamabad  364),  Mrs.  Parveen 

Chaudhry VS VIth Senior Civil Judge etc (PLD 1976 Karachi 416), Lal 

Din  VS  Mst.  Zeenat Bibi  etc (1987 CLC  587),  Mirza Qamar  Raza  VS 

Tahira  Begum  etc  (PLD  1988  Karachi  169),  Fida  Hussain  VS  Mst. 

Najma  etc  (PLD  2000  Quetta  46),  Sohail  Majeed  Kareem  VS  IInd 

Family  Judge  Karachi  etc  (PLD  2004  Karachi  498)  and  Roheela 

Yasmeen VS Neelopher Hassan etc (2014 YLR 2315). 

11. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting parties as well as learned amicus curiae, and perused the 

record with their able assistance.  

12.  The  claim  of  respondent  No.1  about  maintenance  for  the iddat 

period  and  deferred  dower  is  pegged  with  the  question  as  to 

whether  or  not  the  marriage  between  the  couple  has  been 

dissolved?  In  this  regard,  respondent  No.1’s  stance  is  that  the 

petitioner  pronounced  single  divorce  on  her  during  their  telephonic 

conversation on 17.08.2014. She maintained this stance in the plaint 

5 

W.P.No.4929/2018 

as well as in the affidavit submitted as Exh.P/1 before learned Family 

Court. During respondent No.1’s cross-examination, she stated  that 

the  petitioner  also  called  respondent  No.1’s  mother  and  informed 

her  about  pronouncement  of  divorce  on  respondent  No.1.  It  is 

pertinent  to  mention  that  respondent  No.1’s  mother  did  not  appear 

before  the  learned  Family  Court  to  record  evidence  in  support  of 

respondent  No.1’s  version.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  petitioner’s 

written statement and evidence as DW-1, he denied pronouncement 

of divorce on respondent No.1 and claimed that she is still his legally 

wedded wife. However, during respondent No.1’s cross-examination 

no  suggestion  was  put 

to  negate  her  claim 

regarding 

pronouncement of divorce.  

13.  Be that as it may, it appears that despite significant divergence 

in the pleadings of the parties, learned Courts below did not frame a 

specific  issue  regarding  pronouncement  of  divorce  between  the 

petitioner  and  respondent  No.1.  This  is  despite  the  fact  that  in  his 

written statement filed on 18.03.2016, at paragraph 11 the petitioner 

claimed  that  he  filed  a  suit  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  against 

respondent  No.1  which  is  sub-judice  before  the  learned  Family 

Court,  Rawalpindi.  Respondent  No.1,  in  her  cross-examination, 

admitted  that  the  said  suit  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  was 

decreed by the learned Family Court, Rawalpindi.  

14.  Now,  the  learned  Family  Court  and  learned  Appellate  Court  at 

Islamabad  while  deciding  respondent  No.1  to  3's  suit  and  the 

petitioner's  appeal  did  not  record  any  findings  on this  aspect  of  the 

case. So much so that in the impugned judgments and decrees there 

is no express finding or declaration on the collateral question about 

existence of matrimonial relationship between the parties.  

15. 

In column 14 of the Nikahnama, five tolas gold is mentioned as 

deferred  dower  (mehr ghair muajjal) and  it  has  not  been mentioned 

to  be  payable  on  demand  (indal talab)  even  no  condition  has  been 

mentioned  for  the  same  becoming  payable  therefore  it  becomes 

recoverable  on  dissolution  of  marriage  by  divorce  or  death.  The 

Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Saadia Usman VS Muhammad 

Usman Iqbal Jadoon (2009 SCMR 1458) held that “Where no time was 

stipulated, deferred dower did not become "prompt" merely because wife 

6 

W.P.No.4929/2018 

had  demanded  the  same…  As  no  time  was  fixed  for  payment 

of deferred dower of Rs.5,00,000 it would be payable in eventuality of 

dissolution of marriage either by death or divorce or death”. 

16.  Now, since the termination of a marriage is a precondition for (i) 

the  deferred  dower 

to  become  due  and  payable  and 

(ii) 

commencement of iddat period, the learned Courts  below could not 

have  granted  deferred  dower  and  maintenance  for  iddat  period  to 

respondent  No.1,  without  first  deciding  as  to  whether  divorce 

between the parties had taken place or not ? Mere reliance on failure 

of  the  petitioner/defendant  to  put  a  negative  suggestion  regarding 

this material aspect of the case would not be sufficient to decide the 

controversy.  Admittedly,  notice  of  divorce  under  Section  7  of  the 

Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 was not given to the Arbitration 

Council  and  the  factum  about  pronouncement  of  divorce  was 

specifically  denied  by  the petitioner/  defendant.  Learned  Courts  did 

not  take  into  account  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 

Court in case of “Mst. Kaneez Fatima VS Wali Muhammad (PLD 1998 

SC  901)  wherein  it  was  held  that Muslim Family Laws Ordinance is an 

existing law which has not so far been declared by the Federal Shariat 

Court or by the Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court in conflict 

with the provisions of Islamic Injunctions.  Relying  upon  the  earlier 

judgment  in  case  of  “Muhammad  Salahuddin  VS  Muhammad  Nazir 

Siddiqui” (1984 SCMR 583) it was further held that “the statute takes 

over where the parties by settlement arrive at dissolution” Section 7 

was held to be observed even in such circumstances. “ 

17.  The  petitioner/husband  denied 

issuance  of  divorce 

in  no 

uncertain  terms.  A  suit  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  before 

learned Family Court, Rawalpindi was said to be pending at the time 

of  filing  written  statement  (which  according  to  the  statement  of 

respondent  No.1  stood  decreed).  Notice  of divorce under  Section  7 

of  the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  was  never  issued.  In 

such  circumstances,  question  as  to  whether  marriage  has  been 

dissolved  is  of  paramount  importance,  being  precondition  for  the 

entitlement  for  deferred  dower  and  maintenance  for  iddat  period.  

Due  to  this  significant  omission  an  error  of  law  has  crept  in  the 

finding  of 

learned  Courts  below  as  regards  the  question  of 

7 

W.P.No.4929/2018 

respondent  No.1’s  entitlement  for  maintenance  during  the  iddat 

period  and  deferred  dower.  As  such  to  this  extent  the  impugned 

judgments and decrees, being non sustainable, are set aside. 

18.  So far as the dowry articles are  concerned, the petitioner  only 

challenged  the  judgment  and  decree  of  learned  Family  Court  to  the 

extent  of  gold  ornaments  decreed  according  to  Exh.P/4.  During 

cross-examination, the petitioner (DW-1) had admitted that one chain 

with  locket  and  two  earrings  of  respondent  No.1  are  lying  at  his 

house,  the  said  description  is  undisputedly  according  to  Exh.P/4 

therefore  finding  of  the  Courts  below  on  this  aspect  do  not  warrant 

interference.  

19.  Furthermore,  contentions  of  the  petitioner  that  quantum  of 

maintenance  for  minors  at  the  rate  of  Rs.5,000/-  each  is  excessive 

does not merit consideration because the same is even less than the 

expenditure ordinarily incurred on growing up children. 

20. 

In  view  of  above,  present  petition  is  partially  accepted.  The 

impugned  judgment  and  decrees  are  set  aside  to  the  extent  of 

maintenance  for  iddat  period  and  deferred  dower  awarded  to 

respondent  No.1.  To  this  extent,  the  matter  is  remanded  to  learned 

Family  Court  for  decision  afresh  by  framing  an  issue  as  to  whether 

the  petitioner  had  divorced  respondent  No.1  through  a  telephonic 

call  on  17.08.2014?  Thereafter,  the  learned  Family  Court  should 

decide  issues  No.  1  and  4  afresh  on  the  basis  of  decision  given  on 

the  additional  issue.  To  the  remaining  extent  the  present  petition  is 

dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.    

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2019 

Qamar Khan*  

                                                    (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
