ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 4516 OF 2022 

MST. NARGIS NAUREEN AND OTHERS. 
VS    
ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE (MCAC)-WEST, ISLAMABAD, ETC. 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

Date of Hearing 

: 

: 

: 

Mr. M. Saeed Khan Niazi, Advocate. 

M/s Tufail Shahzad and Sabir Shahzad, 
Advocates for Respondent No.3. 

15.02.2023. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:-    

1. 

Through the instant Writ Petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution 

of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  the  Petitioners  No.  1  [Mst.  Nargis 

Naureen]  and  Petitioners  No.  2  &  3  [Muhammad  Ayan  Shakir  and  Mah  Jabeen 

Zara]  (“Minors”)  seek  the  setting  aside  of  the  Judgments  and  Decrees  dated 

21.09.2021  (“Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I)  and  11.11.2021  (“Impugned 

Judgment    and  Decree  II”)  passed  by  the  Respondent  No.2  [learned  Judge 

Family/Guardian  Judge]  (“Trial  Court”)  and  Respondent  No.1  [learned 

Additional  District  Judge  (MCAC),  West-Islamabad]  (“Appellate  Court”), 

respectively and enhancement in their maintenance allowance.  

2. 

Briefly  stated,  the  facts  as  per  the  Memo  of  Petition  are  that  the  marriage 

between  the  Petitioner  No.1  and  the  Respondent  No.3  [Abdul  Aziz  Shakir]  was 

solemnized  and  they  were  blessed  with  the  Minors.    After  that  the  Respondent 

No.3  expelled  the  Petitioner  No.1  from  the  matrimonial  abode  due  to  family 

pressure and honour on the pretext that the Petitioner No.1’s brother expelled the 

Respondent  No.3’s  sister.    After  desertion  the  Petitioner  No.1  was  left  with  no 

other option but to file a Suit for Recovery of Maintenance Allowance for herself 

and the Minors (“Subject Suit”), which was decreed vide the Impugned Judgment 

and  Decree  I,  whereby  the  Minors  were  granted  maintenance  allowance  of  Rs. 

3,000/- per month since August, 2019 till September, 2021 without annual increase 

 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 4516/2021 

and Rs. 5,000/- each per month from October, 2021 till their legal entitlement with 

10% annual increase.  Whereas, the Petitioner No.1was held disentitled to any past 

maintenance  and  was  allowed  maintenance  allowance  of  Rs.  5,000/-  per  month 

only  subject  to  joining  the  Respondent  No.3  as  wife.    The  Petitioners,  being 

aggrieved, assailed the Impugned Judgment and Decree I through filing of Appeal, 

which  was dismissed  vide  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II, hence,  the  present 

Petition.   

3. 

The learned counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the proof of financial 

strength of the Respondent No.3 is apparent from the payments made by him of the 

interim  maintenance  fixed  by 

the  Respondent  No.2  and  even  otherwise 

maintenance of the Minors is the father’s responsibility irrespective of whether he 

works or not.    With regard to C.M.  No. 1132/2022  he submitted that it has been 

filed by way of abundant caution.  The amendment sought for is to  challenge the 

Impugned Judgments and Decrees I and II in respect of the Petitioner No.1 as well 

to the extent that she has not been given past maintenance on the ground that she 

was unable to prove desertion.  In this regard he relied upon the statement made by 

the  Petitioner  No.1  in  her  Affidavit-in-Evidence  that  she  was  forced  to  leave 

because of the intolerable behavior of the Respondent No.3 towards the Petitioner 

No.1  in  response  to  which  no  cross  examination  was  conducted  on  behalf  of  the 

Respondent  No.3.    He  also  referred  to  the  explanation  given  by  the  Respondent 

No.  3  in  paragraph  5  of  his  Written  Reply  to  the  Subject  Suit  filed  by  the 

Petitioners,  whereby  it  has  been  stated  that  in  the  month  of  October,  2019  the 

parents  of  the  Petitioner  No.1  came  to  the  Respondent  No.3’s  house  to  see  the 

Respondent No. 3’s ailing sister whereupon harsh words were exchanged between 

the Respondent No.3’s father and Petitioner No.1’s mother and siblings due to the 

reason  that  the  Petitioner  No.1’s  parents  started  manhandling  and  mentally 

torturing  the  Respondent  No.  3’s  ailing  sister  and  due  to  this  altercation  the 

Petitioner  No.1’s  parents  forcefully  took  the  Petitioners  with  them  and  asked  the 

Respondent No.3 to divorce the Petitioner No.1.  The learned counsel also showed 

various documents which according to him reflect that the Respondent No. 3 was 

involved  with  the  divorce  proceedings  instituted by  the  Respondent  No.3’s  sister 

P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 4516/2021 

against the Petitioner No.1’s brother notwithstanding Respondent No.3’s denial in 

cross-examination that he had nothing to do with the said divorce proceedings.  He 

argued that all the foregoing points indicate that the Petitioner No.1 was compelled 

to leave because of the circumstances created by the Respondent  No.1 due to the 

relations between his sister and the Petitioner No.1’s brother as such she is entitled 

to be maintained since desertion i.e. 28.08.2019.  The learned counsel in support of 

his contentions placed reliance on Marriam Bibi and others VSAzhar Iqbal and 

others, PLD 2022 Lahore 840, Mumtaz Hussain and others VSPublic Service 

Commissioner of Azad Jammu and Kashmir and others, PLD 2020 SC (AJ&K) 1, 

Dr.  Aqueel  Waris  VS Ibrahim  Aqueel  Waris,  2020  CLC  131  [Islamabad], 

Muhammad Asim and others VSMst. Samro Begum and others, PLD 2018 SC 

819, Syed Nobahar Shah VSMst. Salma Bibi and others,  PLJ 2016 Peshawar 

69, Asif Rafique VSMst. Quratullain and others, 2016 MLD 425 [Sindh], Mst. 

Farmidah  VS Additional  District  Judge,  Karor,  District  Layyah  and  others, 

2010 CLC 110 [Lahore], Muhammad Aslam VSMuhammad Usman and others, 

2004  CLC  473  [Lahore],  M.  Saleem  Ahmad  Siddiqui  VS Mst.  Sabira  Begum 

and  others,  2001  YLR  2329,  and  an  unreported  Judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court 

passed in Dastagir Khaliq VSAdditional District Judge, etc. (C.P. 5822/2021).  

4. 

On the other hand the learned counsel for the Respondent No.3 argued that 

the Respondent No.3 is an Imam at a local Mosque and as such does not have any 

regular income and is only dependent on donations made to him from time to time, 

therefore, he is not a man of means and the Petitioner No.1 was unable to prove the 

allegation  that  he  earns  Rs.  150,000/-  per  month  as  such  according  to  him  the 

Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  I  and  II  do  not  warrant  interference  by  this 

Court.  With regard to desertion of the Petitioner No.1 he argued that the fact that 

the Respondent No.3 filed  Suit for Restitution of Conjugal Rights  in itself shows 

that he  did  not  want desertion of the  Petitioner  No.1  and  her  refusal to  live  with 

him reflects that she is who deserted the Respondent No.3.  

5. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  have  also  perused  the 

available record with their able assistance.  

 
P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 4516/2021 

C.M.NO. 1132/2022: 

6. 

The  instant  C.M.  is  preferred  seeking  amendment  in  the  Writ  Petition  by 

adding  the  following  paragraph  as  paragraph  ‘h’  under  Grounds  in  the  memo  of 

Petition: 

“h. 
That the learned Lower Courts have ignored the important fact that 
the  Petitioner  No.1  who  was  legally  wedded  wife  of  the  Respondent  No.3 
before seeking Khulla was compelled to leave the house of the Respondent 
No.3 and is entitled for the maintenance @ Rs. 15,000/- per month for the 
period  of  desertion  till  the  date  of  iddat  which  was  not  granted  and  the 
same is an illegality and is amendable in the judicial review may kindly be 
allowed.  Copy of suit for dissolution of marriage is annexed. 

It has been held that even if the wife left the house of husband due to rash 
behavior  with  her  free  will  even  then  she  is  entitled  for  maintenance 
allowance.  

Reliance is placed on PLJ 2016 Pesh. 69 DB.” 

7. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  No.3  has  not  objected  to  such 

amendment as such the same is allowed.  

Maintenance of Petitioner No.1: 

8. 

The alleged reason for expulsion of the Petitioners by the Respondent No.3 

as per the  Memo  of Petition  and the arguments submitted by the learned counsel 

for  the  Petitioner  was  the  expulsion  of  the  Respondent  No.3’s  sister  by  the 

Petitioner No.1’s brother who were married to each other.  However, perusal of the 

Plaint  filed  by  the  Petitioners  in  the  Subject  Suit  as  well  as  the  Affidavit-in-

Evidence shows that no such allegation was made therein.  Therefore, this ground 

is clearly an afterthought.   

9. 

Even otherwise this ground is only relevant for purposes of Petitioner No.1’s 

claim  for  past  maintenance  from  the  date  of  alleged  desertion  whereas  no  such 

prayer  has  been  made  in  the Memo  of  Petition  which  is  restricted  to  challenging 

the Impugned Judgments and Decrees I and II to the extent that enhancement has 

been  prayed for  in the  maintenance  of the Minors from Rs. 3,000/-  per month to 

Rs. 15,000/- with 10% increase and in the future maintenance at the same rate.   

 
P a g e  | 5 
W.P.No. 4516/2021 

10.  During  the  hearing,  however,  the  learned  counsel  submitted  arguments 

regarding past maintenance of the Petitioner No.1 and sought to amend the Memo 

of  Petition.    In  this  regard  C.M.No.1132/2022  was  filed  seeking  addition  of  a 

paragraph,  which  has  been  allowed  by  consent.    However,  addition  of  such 

paragraph will not change the prayer.   

11. 

In  any  event,  perusal  of  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II  shows that 

neither this prayer nor arguments in support thereof as submitted before this Court 

had  been  made  by  the  Petitioner  No.1  before  the  learned  Appellate  Court, 

therefore,  the  Petitioner  No.1  cannot  be  allowed  to  challenge  the  Impugned 

Judgment and Decree I to the extent that it was not challenged before the  learned 

Appellate Court. 

Maintenance of Minors: 

12.  The  Petitioners  vide  the  Plaint  filed  in  the  Subject  Suit  claimed  that  the 

Respondent  No.3  is a  man  of  means  who  apart  from  being  an  Imam  Masjid  is  a 

Teacher and also has a Stationary Shop.  On the other hand, the Respondent No.3 

denied that he had any occupation other than being Imam Masjid for which he does 

not  receive  any  regular  salary  and his only  livelihood is  through donations.    The 

learned both the Courts below have accepted this plea and fixed the maintenance of 

the  Minors  accordingly  while  also  observing  that  the  Petitioners  were  unable  to 

prove their allegation that the Respondent No.1 earns approximately Rs. 150,000/- 

per month. 

13.  However, by now it is well settled that a wife cannot be expected to have the 

means to produce evidence with regard to the husband’s income especially when she 

is no longer living with him.  Therefore, the onus to prove the  monthly income is 

upon the husband.  No evidence was produced by the Respondent No.3 to establish 

his  income.    Moreover,  the  learned  Family  Court  is  itself  empowered  to  call  for 

relevant documents for the purpose of establishing the salary of the father.  Reliance 

is  placed  on  Nazia  Bibi  VS  Additional  District  Judge,  Ferozewala,  PLD  2018 

Lahore 916 in this regard, however, no such effort has been made in this case.   

P a g e  | 6 
W.P.No. 4516/2021 

14. 

I am also not impressed with the submission that as Imam Masjid he does not 

get  a  regular  salary.    There  is  no  bar  restraining  the  Respondent  No.1  from 

supplementing his income by engaging in additional employment.  Maintenance of 

the  children  is  the  responsibility  of  the  father  and  not  being  gainfully  employed 

despite being able bodied is not an acceptable reason not to sufficiently provide for 

the children.   

15.  According  to  the  evidence produced  by    the  Petitioners,  the  monthly  school 

fees  of  both  the  Minors  in  the  month  of  April,  2021  was  a  total  of  Rs.  3,200/-, 

whereas an amount of Rs. 17,600/- was spent on just their books in such month and 

Rs.  3,980/-  was  spent  on  their  uniforms  in  October,  2020.    However,  the  learned 

Family Court has failed to consider such evidence and give a finding as to whether 

the expenses of the Minors can be covered by the amount of maintenance granted to 

them nor has the learned Appellate Court adverted to its sufficiency.   

16. 

In view of the foregoing, the instant petition is  partly allowed to the extent 

that  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  are  hereby  set  aside  and  the  matter  is 

remanded to the learned Family Court to consider the sufficiency of the maintenance 

allowance of the Minors and to decide the same afresh.  

Announced in open Court on this 13th day of April, 2023. 

(SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

adnan 

         JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
