ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 
Chaudhry Muhammad Jamil 

VS          

Chaudhary Muhammad Ramzan and others  

Dates of Hearing: 
Appellant by: 

Respondents by: 

06.11.2018, 07.11.2018 and 09.11.2018 
M/s. Muhammad Akram Sheikh and  
Natalya Kamal, Advocates. 
Mr. Khurram Mehmood Qureshi, Advocate 
for respondent No.1, 
Sheikh  Muhammad  Khizar-ur-Rasheed, 
Advocate for respondent No.4,  
Mr. Muhammad Ilyas Sheikh, Advocate for 
respondents No.5,  
Mr.  Abdur  Rasheed  Awan,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.6,  
Mr.  Haseeb  Zahid,  Advocate 
respondents No.2, 7 and 8, 
Mr.  Javed  Iqbal  Wains,  Advocate  for  the 
respondent No.9. 

for 

________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

appeal,  the  appellant,  Chaudhry  Muhammad  Jamil,  impugns  the 

order dated 06.10.2018, passed by the Court of the learned Civil 

Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  appellant’s  application  under 

Order  XXXIX,  Rules  1  and  2  C.P.C.  filed  along  with  his  suit  for 

“declaration,  cancellation,  recovery,  rendition  of  accounts, 

mandatory and permanent injunction”, was dismissed.    

FACTUAL BACKGROUND:- 

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  the  instant  appeal 

are  that  the  appellant,  respondent  No.1  (Chaudhry  Muhammad 

Ramzan  Tahir),  and  respondent  No.2  (Chaudhry  Muhammad 

Ishaq)  are  brothers.  These  brothers  jointly  owned  several 

properties.  On  22.07.2011,  these  brothers  executed  a  family 

settlement agreement whereby 23 properties mentioned therein 

were  divided  inter-se.  The  first  13  properties  in  the  list  fell  in 

respondent No.1’s share, whereas the remaining 10 properties in 

the list were to be jointly owned by the appellant and respondent 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

No.2.  It was  explicitly  agreed  that  the  appellant  and  respondent 

No.2 would have no concern, whatsoever, with the 13 properties 

to  be  exclusively  owned  by  respondent  No.1,  whereas 

respondent  No.1  would  have  no  concern  with  the  10  properties 

to be jointly owned by the appellant and respondent No.2. It was 

also  agreed  that  the  appellant  and  respondent  No.2  would 

transfer their respective shares in the 13 properties in favour of 

respondent  No.1,  whereas  respondent  No.1  would  transfer  his 

share  in  the  10  properties  in  favour  of  the  appellant  and 

respondent No.2. This family settlement was to be honoured not 

just by its executants, but also their successors. The execution of 

the said family settlement is not in dispute.  

3. 

On  27.07.2011,  another  family  settlement  agreement  was 

executed  by  and  between  the  three  brothers.  This  agreement 

was  stated  to  be  in  continuation  of  the  earlier  family  settlement 

agreement  dated  22.07.2011.  Through  the  second 

family 

settlement  agreement,  the  parties  thereto  acknowledged  the 

execution  of  the  earlier  settlement  agreement,  and  further 

agreed  that  until  31.12.2011,  the  factory  called  Triways  Food 

Industries  would  be  run  by  respondent  No.1,  whereas  after 

01.01.2012, the said factory would be run jointly by the appellant 

and respondent No.2. Furthermore, it was agreed that the profit 

earned  by  the  said  factory  between  01.08.2011  and  31.12.2011 

would  be equally  distributed  amongst  the three brothers.  It  was 

also agreed that the rent from the properties listed in paragraph 

4  of  the  said  agreement  would  also  be  distributed  equally 

amongst  the  three  brothers.  Possession  of  the  said  factory  was 

agreed  to  be  handed  over  by  respondent  No.1  to  the  appellant 

and respondent No.2.  

4. 

On 27.09.2011, the three brothers executed a deed for the 

dissolution of partnership. The preamble of the said deed shows 

that  the  three  brothers  had  established  a  bakery  business  with 

the name of “M/s. Triways Bakery” having its office at Gol Market, 

F-7/3,  Islamabad,  through  partnership  deed  dated  10.05.1993. 

The three brothers are also stated to  have established a bakery 

 
3 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

industry at Plot No.20, Street No.3, Industrial Area, Sector I-10/3, 

Islamabad.  By  virtue  of  the  said  deed  dated  27.09.2011, 

respondent No.1 retired from the partnership by transferring his 

total share of the capital investment, interest, profits and assets, 

including  the  above-mentioned  plot  No.20  in  favour  of  the 

appellant  and  respondent  No.2.  On  account  of  the  execution  of 

the  said  deed,  the  appellant  and  respondent  No.2  became  the 

absolute  and  joint  owners  of  the  entire  business  of  the  said 

partnership as well as plot No.20 and the building etc., thereon.  

5. 

Through 

agreement/iqrarnama 

dated 

27.12.2011, 

respondent  No.1  divested  himself  of  his  ownership  and  interest 

in  M/s.  Triways  Bakery.  It  is  an  admitted  position  that  on 

31.12.2011,  respondent  No.1  handed  over  possession  of  the 

bakery and business to the appellant and respondent No.2. This 

agreement/iqrarnama  also  bears  the  thumb 

impression  of 

Chaudhry  Ameer-ud-Din  who  is  the  appellant  and  respondents 

No.1 and 2’s father.  

6. 

On  27.02.2012,  another  agreement/iqrarnama  was 

executed  between  the  appellant  and  respondent  No.2.  Some 

properties  (moveable  and  immovable)  which  were  jointly  owned 

by  the  appellant  and  respondent  No.2  were  valued  at  Rs. 

11,95,00,000/-, and a mechanism was agreed upon as to how the 

payment was to be made by the parties to whom these properties 

were  transferred.  These  properties  were  the  ones  which  had 

fallen  in  the  appellant  and  respondent  No.2’s  share  under  the 

family settlement agreements.  

7. 

On  12.09.2012,  respondent  No.2  had  instituted  a  civil  suit 

against the appellant before the Court of the learned Civil Judge, 

Islamabad. In this suit, the plaintiff (i.e., respondent No.2 herein) 

had  acknowledged  the  execution  of  the  family  settlement 

agreements  dated  22.07.2011,  27.07.2011  and  the  deed  for  the 

dissolution of partnership dated 27.09.2011. Apparently, this suit 

is not pending anymore.  

8. 

It 

is  an  admitted  position  that  the  family  settlement 

agreements  dated  22.07.2011  and  27.11.2011  have  been  acted 

 
4 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

upon  and 

the  properties  mentioned 

therein  have  been 

transferred  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 

said  agreements.  Consequently,  respondent  No.1  became  the 

exclusive  owner  of  the  13  properties  mentioned  in  the  family 

settlement  agreement  dated  22.07.2011,  whereas  the  appellant 

and  respondent  No.2  became  the  joint  owners  of  the  10  other 

properties mentioned therein.    

9. 

On  11.12.2013,  the  appellant  filed  a  civil  suit  before  this 

Court  against  the  respondents.  The  position  taken  by  the 

appellant  in  the  said  suit  was  that  respondents  No.1  and  2  had 

not disclosed certain properties which they had bought from the 

proceeds  of  the  business  of  M/s.  Triways  Food  Industries. 

Paragraph  16(b)  of  the  said  suit  contains  the  list  of  properties 

which  were  alleged  not  to  have  been  disclosed  by  respondent 

No.1,  whereas  paragraph  16(c)  contains  the 

list  of  three 

properties  which  respondent  No.2 

is  alleged  not  to  have 

disclosed.  In  the  said  suit,  the  appellant  had  prayed  for  the 

following relief:- 

1.  The Agreement for Family Settlement dated July 22, 
2011 may kindly be declared null and void, cancelled 
being based on Fraud and misrepresentation; 

2.  Defendant  Nos.  1  to  8  may  be  directed  to 
declare/disclose all their assets and properties till 
date;  

3.  Declaration  that  the  income,  profits  or  assets 
received or gained by defendant Nos. 1 to 8 from Tri 
ways Food Industries are owned by the plaintiff; 
4.  All the deeds, agreements made subsequent to the 
Agreement for Family Settlement should be cancelled 
and/or rescinded; 

5.  the Defendants may permanently be restrained from 
selling off or misappropriating the property that has 
been  wrongfully  acquired  by  them  under  the 
Agreement; 

6.  CDA be directed to provide the details of all the 
assets/properties owned by Defendant Nos. 1 to 8; 
7.  CDA may also be directed to provide the record of all 
transactions  pertaining  to  assets/properties  since 
2000 till date between Defendant Nos. 1 to 8 with third 
parties; 

8.  the  Defendants 

from 
be 
alienating/disposing off settlement assets to anyone 
and be ordered/directed to deposit the proceeds of 
properties  already  disposed  off/alienated  and  all 
these properties should be returned to their original 

restrained 

 
5 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

position  as  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  Family 
settlement so that appropriate distribution may take 
place; 
 A decree for rendition of accounts of Defendant Nos. 
1 to 8 income, assets, suit properties and Tri star 
Food Industries; 

9. 

10.  A decree that all the properties that were acquired 
from  the  Factory  income/proceeds  shall  be 
partitioned/divided and assets distributed amongst 
the Plaintiff and Defendant Nos. 1 to 2 according to 
their share in the Factory, which is 33.3% each; 
11.  Any other relief that this Honourable Court deems fit 
and appropriate may also be granted in favour of the 
Plaintiff and against the Defendants.” 

10.  Along  with  the  said  suit,  the  appellant  had  also  filed  an 

application  for  interim  injunction.  Vide  ad-interim  order  dated 

12.12.2013, this Court directed status-quo to be maintained with 

regard to the properties. Vide order dated 19.03.2014, this Court 

dismissed  an  application  filed  by  the  intervener  (Muhammad 

Ibrahim, who claimed to be the bonafide purchaser of plot No.50-

O,  Sector  E-12/4,  Islamabad)  for  the  vacation  of  the  injunctive 

order dated 12.12.2013.  

11.  Due  to  an  amendment  in  the  Islamabad  High  Court  Act, 

2010  (XVII  of  2010),  the  said  suit  became  triable  by  the  Civil 

Court.  Vide  order  dated  06.10.2018,  the  learned  Civil  Court 

dismissed  the  appellant’s  application  for  interim  injunction.  The 

said  order  dated  06.10.2018  has  been  assailed  by  the  appellant 

in the said appeal.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUSNEL  FOR  THE 
APPELLANT:- 

12.  Mr.  Muhammad  Akram  Sheikh,  Senior  Advocate,  and  Ms. 

Natalya  Kamal,  Advocate,  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant, 

after narrating the facts leading to the filing of the instant appeal, 

submitted  that  the  ad-interim  injunctive  relief  granted  by  this 

Court ought not to have been vacated by the learned Civil Court; 

that  this  Court  had,  vide  order  dated  19.03.2014,  dismissed  an 

intervener’s application for the vacation of the interim relief; that 

the injunctive order had remained in the field from 12.12.2013 to 

06.10.2018;  that  the  learned  Civil  Court  ought  not  to  have 

dismissed  the appellant’s  application  for  interim  injunction  after 

 
  
 
6 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

observing that the appellant had “cogently adverted the fact that 

respondent No.1 & 2 had no independent source of income 

before joining him in [the] factory business but  they made 

various properties from the profit of [the] factory in the name of 

their off spring and spouses by keeping the [appellant] in dark 

regarding all connected facts hence, it is appreciated that this 

contention is also reflecting the existence of an ascertainable 

factual controversy”.  

13.  Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that it 

is  well  settled  that  the  family  settlements  were  liable  to  be 

declared  null  and  void  on  account  of 

the 

fraud  and 

misrepresentation  on  the part  of respondent No.1;  that  it is  well 

settled  that  fraud  unravels  every  time;  that  the  business  of  M/s. 

Triway Food Industries was established by the appellant’s sheer 

hard work; that the appellant had brought respondents No.1 and 

2  from  their  village  and  introduced  them  to  his  business;  that 

several 

immovable  properties  were  purchased 

from 

the 

proceeds  and  earnings  of  the  said  business;  that  the  appellant 

purchased several properties in respondents No.1 and 2’s name 

at  the  time  when  they  had  no  source  of  income;  that  out  of 

compassion,  the  appellant  made  respondents  No.1  and  2  equal 

partners  in  the  said  business;  that  respondents  No.1  and  2 

concealed from the appellant the actual profits being made from 

the  said  business;  that  the  trust  and  confidence  reposed  by  the 

appellant  in  his  brothers  had  been  betrayed;  that  in  July  2011, 

the appellant and respondents No.1 and 2 agreed to disclose all 

their  properties  and  assets  so  that  they  were  divided  in  three 

equal  parts;  that  although  some  disclosure  was  made  by 

respondents  No.1  and  2  but  a  number  of  properties  which  had 

been acquired by them from the earnings of the business that the 

appellant  had  established,  were  not  disclosed;  that 

this 

concealment  amounted  to  fraud  and  had  rendered  the  earlier 

settlement  agreements  void  and  liable  to  cancellation;  and  that 

on account of these facts, the appellant had a very strong prima-

facie case for the grant of interim injunction.  

 
7 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

CONTENTIONS  OF 
THE 
RESPONDENTS NO.1 AND 6:- 

LEARNED  COUSNEL 

FOR 

14.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Khurram  Mehmood  Qureshi, 

Advocate,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1,  and  Mr.  Abdur 

Rasheed Awan, learned counsel for respondent No.6, submitted 

that  the  impugned  order  dated  06.10.2018  does  not  suffer  from 

any 

legal 

infirmity;  that  the  settlement  agreements  were 

voluntarily  executed  by  the  parties  thereto;  that  the  said 

agreements  were only  with respect to  the properties  mentioned 

therein;  that  the  properties  listed  in  paragraph  16(b)  of  the  suit 

were  acquired  by  respondent  No.1 with  his  own resources,  and 

the appellant was well aware of this fact; that after executing the 

said  settlement  agreements,  the  appellant  wants  to  go  back  on 

his  footsteps  and  do  well  what  he  had  done  ill;  that  in  essence, 

the appellant in his suit is seeking a declaration to the effect that 

he 

is  the  real  owner,  whereas  respondent  No.1 

is  the 

ostensible/benami  owner  of  the  properties  listed  in  paragraph 

16(b) of the suit; that sanctity and finality is to be attached to the 

family  settlement  agreements  executed  by  the  three  brothers; 

that after the execution of the said agreements, the 13 properties 

that  fell  in  respondent  No.1’s  share  were  transferred  in  his 

favour,  whereas  the  10  properties  that  fell  in  the  appellant  and 

respondent  No.2’s  share  were  transferred  in  their  favour;  that 

the  execution  of  the  said  agreements  was  acknowledged  by 

respondent  No.2  in  the  civil  suit  instituted  by  him  against  the 

appellant; that it will be for the appellant to prove through cogent 

evidence  during  the  trial  that  the  properties  listed  in  paragraph 

16(b) of the suit were purchased in respondent No.1’s name with 

the  funds  provided  by  the  appellant;  that  the  appellant  will  also 

have  to  prove  the  existence  of  an  agreement  that  all  properties 

owned by respondent No.1, including the ones purchased by him 

from  his  own  resources,  were  to  be  made  a  part  of  the  family 

settlement  agreements;  that  until  the  appellant  proves  the 

existence  of  all  the 

ingredients  for  a  benami  transaction, 

respondent  No.1  cannot  be  restrained  from  selling  or  dealing 

 
 
8 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

with the properties that fell in his share under the said settlement 

agreements  and  the  properties  listed  in  paragraph  16(b)  of  the 

suit  which  were  acquired  by  respondent  No.1  with  his  own 

resources.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  prayed  for  the 

appeal to be dismissed.  

CONTENTIONS  OF 
RESPONDENTS NO.2, 7 AND 8:- 

THE 

LEARNED  COUSNEL 

FOR 

15.  Mr.  Haseeb  Zahid,  Advocate, 

learned  counsel 

for 

respondents  No.2,  7  and  8,  submitted  that  he  was  under 

instructions  to  submit  that  the  said  respondents  would  have  no 

objection if the appeal is allowed.   

16. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

contesting  parties,  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  appeal 

are  set  out  in  sufficient  detail  in  paragraphs  No.2  to  10  above, 

and need not be recapitulated.   

17.  The  appellant  does  not  deny  the  execution  of  the  family 

settlement  agreements  dated  22.07.2011  and  27.07.2011.  The 

execution  of  the  deed  dated  27.09.2011  for  the  dissolution  of 

partnership  is  also  not  denied.  This  is  also  true  as  regards  the 

iqrarnama  acknowledging  possession  of  the  above-named 

factory being handed over  on 31.12.2011 by respondent No.1 to 

the  appellant  and  respondent  No.2.  The  transfer  of  the 

properties  (mentioned  in  the  said  agreements)  in  accordance 

with the terms of the said agreements is also admitted.  

18.  The  said  family  settlement  agreements  were  obviously 

entered into between the appellant and respondents No.1 and 2 

in  order  to  preserve  the  peace  and  honour  of  the  family  and  to 

avoid  disputes  and  litigation.  Halsbury's  Laws  of  England,  2nd 

Edition (Volume XV, page 2) has defined a family arrangement as 

“a transaction between members of the same family which is for 

the benefit of the family generally, as, for example, one which 

tends to the preservation of the family property, to the peace and 

security of the family and the avoiding of family disputes and 

litigation or to the saving of the honour of the family.”  

 
 
9 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

19. 

In  the  suit  filed  by  the  appellant,  the  family  settlement 

agreement dated 22.07.2011 has been impeached on the ground 

that  respondents  No.1  and  2  had  committed  fraud  by  not 

disclosing the properties mentioned in paragraphs 16(b) and (c) 

of the suit so that  they  could  have  also been  made a part of the 

settlement.  This  suit  is  premised  on  an  alleged  understanding 

between  the  three  brothers  that  all  the  properties  acquired  by 

either  of  them  from  the  profits  earned  by  the  partnership 

business  were  to  be  divided  between  the  three  brothers. 

Respondents  No.1  and  2  have  filed  a  joint  written  statement  in 

which  they  have  taken  the  position  hat  respondents  No.1  and  2 

were  financially  sound  and  had  purchased  the  properties 

mentioned  in  paragraphs  16(b)  and  (c)  from  their  own  sources 

and not from the proceeds of the partnership business.  

20. 

It is for the appellant to prove through cogent evidence that 

the  properties  mentioned  in  paragraph  16(b)  and  (c)  of  the  suit 

were purchased by respondents No.1 and 2 either with the funds 

provided by the appellant  or from the profits earned by the joint 

partnership business. There is presently nothing on the record to 

suggest  that  respondents  No.1  and  2  were  financially  destitute 

and not in a position to purchase any property or that there was 

an  understanding  between  the  three  brothers  to  make  a 

disclosure  as  to  all  the  properties  acquired  by  them  (whether 

with  the  profits  earned  from  the  partnership  business  or 

otherwise) so that such properties were made a part of the family 

settlement  agreements.  Until  the  appellant  is  able  to  prove  all 

this  during  the  course  of  the  trial,  the  properties  mentioned  in 

paragraph  16  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  suit  as  well  as  the  properties 

which  were  the  subject  matter  of  the 

family  settlement 

agreements cannot be subjected to an injunctive order. 

21.  There is no cavil against the proposition that fraud vitiates 

all solemn acts and unravels everything. However, a question of 

fraud  is  never purely  a question  of law,  and  the burden  of proof 

lies  on  the  party  who  alleges  the  commission  of  fraud.  It  is  well 

settled that Courts have to be very careful in coming to a finding 

 
10 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

of  fraud  and  should  satisfy  themselves  that  the  finding  is  based 

on  cogent,  unimpeachable  and  confidence-inspiring  evidence. 

Mere  allegations  of  fraud  cannot  partake  proof  required  under 

the  law.  Fraud  cannot  be  presumed,  rather  the  same  must  be 

proved  as  a  positive  fact.  At  this  stage  of  the  case  at  hand,  the 

fraud  alleged  by  the  appellant  to  have  been  committed  by 

respondents No.1 and 2 are simple allegations and nothing more. 

It remains to be seen whether during  the course of the trial, the 

appellant 

is  able  to  prove  the  commission  of 

fraud  by 

respondents  No.1  and  2.  In  the  case  of  Punjab  National  Bank 

Limited VS Dr. A.B. Arora and others (A.I.R. 1933 Lahore 1024), 

it  had  been  held inter-alia  that  if  a  person  charges  another  with 

fraud  or  misrepresentation, 

it 

is 

incumbent  upon  him  to 

substantiate his allegation by making a statement on oath and by 

giving  the  other  party  an  opportunity  of  cross-examining  him. 

This stage in the case at hand is yet to come.   

22. 

It  is  also  well  settled  that  an  agreement  entered  into  by 

fraud  is  voidable,  and  not  void.  A  person  seeking  to  avoid  an 

agreement  on  the  ground  of  fraud  has  to  be  prompt  in  seeking 

redress.  An  agreement  alleged  to  have  been  entered  into  by 

fraud remains operative as long as it is not set-aside, rescinded 

or  recalled  by  a  competent  authority  in  proper  proceedings.  As 

regards  the  case  at  hand,  the  family  settlement  agreements 

which is alleged by the appellant to have been “based on fraud” 

would remain operative until the learned Civil Court, after a trial, 

holds or declares that the said agreements were void on account 

of  having  been  executed  on  the  basis  of  fraud  committed  by 

respondent No.1 or 2. Until such a declaration is given, the family 

settlement agreements would continue to operate. Therefore, in 

my view, at this stage, the appellant does not have a prima-facie 

case for the grant of an interim injunction.         

23. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  case  of  Begum  Shams-un-

Nisa  VS  Said  Akbar  Abbasi  (PLJ  1982  S.C.  714)  or  (PLD  1982 

S.C.  413),  Justice  Dr.  Nasim  Hassan  Shah  (as  he  then  was)  had 

the occasion to observe that it had become fashionable to make 

 
11 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

reckless allegations of fraud against respectable people in order 

to obtain an unjust advantage. Furthermore, it was observed that 

such  a  practice  deserves 

to  be  noticed  seriously  and 

discouraged  by  the  Courts.  This  enunciation  does  not  seem  to 

have been taken heed of by the litigants. I am of the view that it is 

obligatory  upon  the  Court  to  impose  heavy  exemplary  costs  in 

addition  to  actual  costs  on  a  party  who  makes  such  reckless 

allegations of fraud against a party to a lis but fails to  prove the 

same. The imposition of such costs in such circumstances would 

ensure  observance  with  the  said  enunciation  of  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme Court.     

24.  Proceeding  on  hypothesis,  even  if  it  is  assumed  that 

respondents  No.1  and  2  were  under  some  sort  of  obligation  to 

include  the  properties  mentioned  in  paragraph  16(b)  and  (c)  of 

the suit to be made a part of the family settlement agreements, at 

best,  the  appellant’s  case  would  be  to divide  such properties  in 

three  ways,  but  it  would  not,  in  my  view,  give  the  appellant  a 

cause  to  undo  the  family  settlement  agreements  totally.  In  any 

case,  the  appellant  would  have  to  prove  that  respondents  No.1 

and  2  had  betrayed  the  appellant’s  trust  by  fraudulently 

siphoning  off  funds  from  the  joint  partnership  business  and 

purchasing  properties  in  their  own  names  or  their  spouses  and 

offspring,  and  keeping  the  appellant  in  the  dark  about  all  this. 

Until  all  this  is  proved,  sanctity  is  to  be  attached  to  the  family 

settlement agreements admittedly executed by and between the 

appellant  and  respondents  No.1  and  2.  In  holding  so,  I  derive 

guidance from the law laid down in the following judgments:- 

i) 

In  the  case  of  Ms.  Alia  Khalid  VS  Nazeer  Ahmed 

(2005  SCMR  1273),  a  private  partition  had  taken 

place  prior  to  the  grant  of  proprietary  rights  of  the 

land  which  had  been  so  partitioned.  After  the 

conferment  of  the  proprietary  rights,  the  parties 

remained  in  possession  of  their  respective  shares. 

The  plaintiff  sought  a  declaration  and  possession  on 

the  basis  of  the  private  partition.  The  defendant 

 
12 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

admitted  the  fact  as  the  factum  of  the  private 

partition but assailed on the ground that it had taken 

place prior to the conferment of the proprietary rights 

with  respect  to  the  land.  When  the  parties  became 

absolute  owners  after 

the  conferment  of 

the 

proprietary rights, they had continued to act upon the 

private  partition.  Therefore,  it  was  held  that  the 

private  partition  had  become  valid,  justified  and 

ratified.  

ii) 

In  the  case  of  Allah  Dad  VS  Dhuman  Khan  (2005 

SCMR 564), it has inter-alia been held as follows:- 

“It is to be seen that the object behind the family 
settlement is always to settle existing or future dispute 
of the property amongst the members of family and to 
create goodwill and avoid future disputes between the 
successors-in-interest. The bona fide transaction of 
family settlement would be binding on the parties and if 
the settlement by conduct of parties, is capable of 
receiving constant recognition for a long time, the right 
to  assert  under  the  agreement  must  not  be 
subsequently allowed to be impeached and Courts may 
not reject the family settlement on technical grounds.” 

iii) 

In  the  case  of  Irshad  alias  Abdul  Rahim  VS  Ashiq 

Hussain  (PLD  2007  Karachi  421),  the  Hon'ble  Mr. 

Justice Faisal Arab, held as follows:- 

“It is not unusual in our society that properties held in 
common at times are privately partitioned between the 
co-sharers without taking recourse to any legal forum, 
be it revenue or civil Court. The private arrangement or 
partition  so  arrived  at  between  the  co-sharers  is 
honoured by them and acted upon for years together. 
Individual holding of a particular co-sharer is respected 
and recognized by the other co-sharers as his exclusive 
share in the joint properties. Such private arrangement 
or partition if acted upon by the co-owners has to be 
recognized as lawful partition. In such eventuality the 
co-sharers  who  have  recognized  the  private 
arrangement or partition and have also acted thereon 
for years together cannot then turn around and question 
the same by seeking fresh partition before any revenue 
or other appropriate judicial forum on the ground that no 
formal partition from a Court of law has been obtained. 
The private arrangement and partition deserves the 
same sanctity which a lawful contract deserves and 
should not be interfered with in any legal proceedings 
unless the private arrangement or partition is otherwise 

 
 
13 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

not  legally  permissible. Where  a  co-sharer  of  such 
private arrangement or partition of joint properties had 
disposed of his individual share to a third person, then 
such  disposition  is  also  to  be  given  legal  validity. 
Certainly any one or all of the other co-sharer may 
choose to exercise right of pre-emption if available in 
law  but  it  does  not  mean  that  the  co-sharers  can 
question  the  right  of  a  co-sharer  to  deal  with  his 
specifically assigned share in any manner he likes. Any 
disposition of a share in a joint property, which was 
assigned to a co-sharer under a private arrangement or 
partition cannot be questioned for want of formal decree 
of partition of a competent court of law. 

Under a private arrangement or partition one may not 
rule out the possibility that it is so divided among the co-
sharers which may not reflect one's true percentage of 
share which he owns in the joint properties. An apparent 
disproportionate  distribution  may  have  taken  place 
keeping in view various other factors prevalent at the 
time of distribution. A co-sharer may have been given a 
smaller or bigger share in a particular property to be 
owned and enjoyed by him towards his share on account 
of its location or monetary value, built up area or quality 
of land in comparison to other joint properties. Once 
distribution is carried out and acted upon by the co-
sharers then any subsequent variation in their value 
would not warrant de novo distribution of shares. A 
particular business given to one co-sharer as his share 
may grow by geometrical proportions or value of a 
particular immovable property may enhance manifold 
than the value of properties belonging to other co-
sharers. In such like events, a co-sharer may be tempted 
to retract from the private arrangement or partition 
arrived at earlier and seek de novo partitioning before a 
Court of law. Such redistribution of joint properties 
cannot be allowed on the ground that earlier private 
distribution was not carried out by taking recourse to a 
Court of law or is disproportionate to the actual share of 
a co-sharer. 

It may be mentioned that before a private arrangement 
or private partition is legally recognized it is to be seen 
whether there is sufficient evidence on record to give 
legal validity to such private arrangement or partition. A 
written  private  arrangement  or  partition  poses  no 
difficulty  and  is  to  be  given  effect  straight  away. 
However, where there is nothing in writing about private 
arrangement or partition but has been carried out and 
acted upon for years together by all the co-sharers and 
the individual holder of a particular share in the joint 
property exclusively enjoyed the property falling to his 
share to the exclusion of all other co-sharers with the 
right  to  dispose  it  of,  then  such  arrangement  and 
partition, if established by conduct of the parties, has 
also to be given legal validity.”  

 
 
 
 
 
14 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

The  author  of  the  said  judgment  rose  to  grace  the 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  therefore,  the  said 

judgment is to be revered and respected.  

iv) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Munawar  Bajwa  VS  Mst. 

Zubera  Shaheen  (2004  CLC  441),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore 

High Court quoted with approval  the following passage 

from  “Principles  and  Digest  of  the  Law  of  Evidence” 

authored  by  Justice  Munir  former  Chief  Justice  of 

Pakistan:- 

“Family arrangements are arrangements between the 
members of a family for the preservation of its piece of 
property. The principles upon which such arrangements 
are enforced in England are stated in the case of Williams 
v. Williams. Such arrangements are constantly entered 
into in this country, and, where they have been acted 
upon and acquiesced, the Court will not look so much to 
the adequacy of the consideration as to the motives and 
conduct of the parties. In a settlement of a doubtful right 
truth may be on either side, but the essential effect of the 
settlement is that further trouble or investigation is put to 
an end and a settlement is concluded to restore harmony. 
The consideration for such a settlement is the mutual 
promise made, or forbearance shown, by one party to the 
other. In the absence of fraud or undue influence, it is 
not, therefore, open to either party to resile from it 
afterwards and the settlement is binding not only on the 
parties but on their sons and descendants. A family 
settlement is binding, even though a limited owner is a 
party to it. Where parties settle a family dispute amicably, 
take a share of the property, enter into possession, and 
subsequently sell or mortgage the items allotted to them, 
they are estopped from questioning the settlement”. 

25.  The mere fact that respondent No.2, after taking a position 

consistent with the one taken by respondent No.1 in their written 

statement,  has  switched  sides  and  has  partnered  up  with  the 

appellant, cannot operate to respondent No.1’s disadvantage.  It 

would  be for  the  Trial Court  to  determine whether to  attach any 

weight to respondent No.2’s testimony which is inconsistent with 

his pleadings in the written statement.  

26.  For the present purposes, I am of the view that the learned 

Civil  Court  did  not  exercise  its  discretion  in  an  unlawful  and 

arbitrary manner while dismissing the appellant’s application for 

interim  injunction.  It  goes  without  saying  that the principle of lis 

 
   
  
 
 
15 

F.A.O.No.115/2018 

pendens  would  apply  to  the pendente lite  sale  of  the  properties 

which  are  the  subject  matter  of  the  suit.    Since  the  contesting 

parties  in  the  suit  belong  to  one  family,  and  since  the  suit  has 

been  pending  since  the  past  five  years,  it  is  expected  that  the 

learned  Civil  Court  would  decide  the  suit  expeditiously  and 

preferably  within  a  period  of  six  months.  For  the  reasons 

mentioned  above,  the  instant  appeal  is  dismissed  with  no  order 

as to costs. Nothing observed herein shall influence the learned 

Civil Court while deciding the appellant's civil suit.      

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2018. 

Qamar Khan* 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                                    (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
