Judgment  Sheet

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAI)

W.P.  No. 767t2013

Mst. Maham  Shabbir

VS
Salman Haider & another

Petitioner  by: - 

Ms. Jamila  Jahanoor Aslam. Advocate.
Petitioner,  in person.

Respondent  No.l  by: -  Sardar  Asmat Ullah Khan Advocate .

Date  of hearine: - 

Respodent  No. 1, in person.
09-10-2013

Riaz Ahmad Khan J: - This judgment  is directed to dispose  of W.P. No.

3767 of20l3

2.  Brief facts of the case  are that the petitioner Mst. Maham  Shabbir
was mamied to respondent Salman Haider in the year 2001. Out of the

wedlock,  two children  namely Ryna Salman and Ibrahim Salman were born

in the year 2005  and 2009  respectively.  Unfortunately,  the relations between
the spouses got strained  and allegedly the petitioner,  wife,  was turned  out of

the house by her husband. At that  time,  the spouses were living  in Karachi,

so the petitioner/wife filed petition  under  Section 491  Cr.P.C.  before  learned
District  & Sessions  Judge, Karachi  (South) and vide  order  dated 16-10-
2010, the custody of the two minors  was handed over to the petitioner.
Marriage  between  the parties was  dissolved on 24-09-2011 on the basis of

Khula. The petitioner  then  moved  to Islamabad  where  her parents had been

residing. On 3l-03-2012,the  petitioner/wife  entered  into  a marriage  contract

with one  Farooq Manan Khawaja.  According  to petitioner/wife  her second

husband is owner of an advertising agency situated  in Karachi,  however, he

visits Islamabad  once  or twice in month. It has further  been submitted that
the petitioner/wife resides in Islamabad,  however,  because of the new

development  of second  marriage  of petitioner/wife,  respondent father filed  a
petition for custody  of minors  before the Guardian  Judge, Islamabad.
Alongwith the said petition,  another application, under Section 12 of the
Guardian & Wards Act, for interim  custody of the minors,  was also filed.

Arguments  on the said application  were addressed  and  thereafter  vide  order

W.P. No.  J767l201J

2

dated 30-09-2013, learned  Guardian  Judge-West,  Islamabad  granted interim

custody  to the father/respondent.  Feeling  aggrieved  of the  sulme,  present  writ

petition  was filed.

3. 
Learned  counsel  for the petitioner/wife  submitted  that the second
marriage  of petitioner/wife could not be considered  as a aground for
allowing custody  of the minors. It was flrther submitted  that the leamed

hial Court erred  while deciding  the application  regarding interim  relief,  as

the whole case was  decided.  The character of petitioner  wife was discussed
and elroneous conclusions  were  made on the basis of whims and
conjectures.  Minors had been  living with  the mother since their birth  and at
this stage,  their  custody  could  not be given to the father. It was fi.rther

submitted  that the welfare of the minors was not kept in view by the leamed

Guardian  Judge.

4.  On the other  hand, learned counsel for respondent  submitted  that  the
writ was not maintainable  for the reason that under  Section  14 of Family

Court Act read  with Section 12 of the Guardian  & Wards Act, no writ could

be filed against the interim  order. It was further  submitted  that  the impugned

order had been passed after appreciating different  aspects and after  taking

into consideration  welfare  of the minors. According  to the learned  counsel,

the petitioner  herself  had agreed to give up her rights regarding  children,  she

had contracted  second  marriage  and was living in Islamabad.  She had given

an undertaking  before the learned Guardian Court  that she would not

remove the children  from the jurisdiction  of Court at Karachi;  even  then,  she
brought  children to Islamabad,  as she intended to contract marriage at

Islamabad.  It was  further submitted  that  the stepfather would not be able to

provide required  love and  affection  to the minor  children  and it would not

be in the interest ofjustice  to handover the custody  of minor  to the petitioner

wife and  the stepfather  of the minors. According  to the leamed  counsel,  the

petitioner  as well as respondent No.1/ex-husband  of the petitioner  had filed
criminal  cases  against each  other  and in such a situation,  it cannot  be
expected  from the second husband of the petitioner  that  he would  pay for

the education  and brought up of minors.
5. 
the record.

I have heard learned  counsel for the parties and have also perused

W.P. No.3767i2013

3

6. 
The first question requiring determination is as to whether  writ
against an interim order is maintainable  or not? Sub-section  I of West
Pakistan Family Court Act,1964  provides  as under:-

(1) Notwithstanding  anything  provided in any other  law for the time
being in force,  a decision given or a decree  passed  by a Family
Court  shall be appealable-

a.

Sub-section  3 of section 14 of the said Act provides as under:-

"No appeal or revision  shall lie against  an interim order passed by
a Family Court."

One interpretation  is that the word  decision  given and decree passed used  in

sub-section 14 are two different  words.  Decree  passed  means formal

expression adjudicating  a fact or law, a controversy  or an issue. In other

words,  the decree is the final outcome of the adjudication  and  against  that

decision can be any decision given by the Judge Family  Court. Following

this interpretation,  any interlocutory order  passed  under Section  12 of the

Guardian & Wards Act becomes appealable  under  Section  la(lXa)  of the

West Pakistan  Family  Courts Act,  1964. This view was  taken in judgment

reoorted  as PLD 1989 Lah 38 and PLD 1999  Lah 33.
7.  On the other  hand in many  other  judgments, it was held  that  the way
the word  decree and  decision have  been used in section  14 shows  that the

word  decision should  be read  as ejusdem generis (of the same kind or class)

to the word decree. In other  words, the decision as well as decree are both

outcome  of the final  adjudication. Decision itself  means judgment  as well  as

act of deciding  determination  of point under deliberation  or discussion.  By

adopting this definition  it becomes  clear that any final  judgment  or decision

would be appealable as provided  in section 14 of the West  Pakistan  Family

Courts Act, 1964, but if the judgment  or decision is not a final adjudication

the same would not be appealable.  This  view was followed in judgments

reported  as 1986 CLC 620, PLD 1976 Lahore  1015,  1979 CLC  754 and

1989  ALD  506 (1t.
8. 
be taken as ejusdem  generis.  In other words,  appeal  lies only against  final

In my humble  view,  the words decision  given or decree passed are to

judgment  and not against any interlocutory  order.
9.  However, it has to be kept in view that  whether  the Court  while
arriving  at a finding even on a question  of fact, had omitted  from

consideration or misread  evidence,  its findings  would be open to correction

W.P. No.37671201J

4

by High  Court in exercise  of its power of judicial review. High  Court in
exercise of its writ jurisdiction  is not sitting  as a Court of appeal, or court of
revision.  Its jurisdiction to interfere on the point of fact is limited.
Interlocutory order if does  not suffer from  any illegality, malafide  or is not
in excess  of jurisdiction or lack of exercise  of jurisdiction or not based  on

misreading,  misconstruing  or discarding  of the evidence  and material on

record cannot  be challenged  in constitutional jurisdiction.  Nevertheless,  the

facts of each  case  are to be considered  separately  and no uniform  principle

can be determined  for exercising  the writ jurisdiction.
10.. Coming  to the facts of the present  case,  learned lower Court while
deciding  the application regarding  interim custody has discussed  the
dissolution  of marriage  on the basis of Khulah  and has held that the
petitioner husband  was an innocent party.  It has further been held that the

petitioner  wife is on the family way, which fact has strongly been denied by

the petitioner  wife. Then it has  been  held that the husband of the petitioner
wife is working in showbiz.  This fact again  has been  denied  by the
petitioner  wife. Even  otherwise, if a person  is working  in showbiz,  it does

not mean that he must  be a bad person. Because  of the above  stated  reason,

the custody  of the minors was given to the father.
11.  Section  12 of the Guardian  and  Wards  Act empowers  the Courts  to
direct  a person to produce  a person before  the Court and then the Court  can

pass order for the temporary custody  of the minor. It has to be kept in view

that this Order is only regarding  temporary custody,  which is usually passed

at the time when the evidence  is not produced  before the Court.  This order

must be passed  keeping  in view the welfare of the minor, but at the same

time  complete  judgment without  recording  evidence  must  be avoided. For

example,  a suckling  baby has to be given  to his or her mother. Even  without

passing any final judgment  regarding  custody  of the minor. Order under
Section  12 of the Guardian  & Wards Act should not become the order
passed  under  Section 25 determining  the rights of the parties in respect of

the custody  of minor. Difference  between  order  under Section 12 as well as

section 25 of the Guardian  & Wards Act must be kept  in view.
12.  The minors  in the present case,  are with the mother since their  birth.
The  mother had been separated  from  her first  husband in 2010 and  the

marriage  was dissolved  in the year 2011. In other words, since 2010  the

minors have been  living with  the mother. On the other  hand, the mother  has

W.P, No.  J767l2013

5

conhacted  second  marriage  and now it is to be determined  as to what would

be the effect  of second  marriage  on the welfare  of the minors.  The question

as to whether  the mother  would  be in a position to maintain the children  and
would be in a position  to provide  love and affection  to the minors,  are
questions which would require evidence. Only in final  adjudication  after

recording  of evidence,  these  questions  can be decided.  Presently  only  issue
is as to who is entitled  to the temporary custody of the minors till decision

of the main case.
13.  Since the learned Trial Court  has  stepped  into the merits of the  case
and that too without recording  of evidence, therefore,  the judgment  is in
excess of jurisdiction. I therefore,  set aside  the impugned judgment. The
case  is remanded  back to the learned  trial Court for deciding the application

afresh in accordance  with law. It is also to be kept  in view that U/S 12 of the

Guardian  and  Wards  Act, 1890  as amended  vide Amendment Act, 2008, the

application U/S 12 of the Guardian  and  Wards  Act is required  to be decided
on the first date. Since,  the main case  is also at the stage of recording  of
evidence,  so it would be in the interest  of justice  to decide the main  case at

the earliest  but not later than three months.  Accordingly, instant writ petition

stands disposed of.

,)f[rrr."t fu nfty

Judge

lVajid

ti E.

