IUDGMENT  SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT.ISLAMABAD,
IUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.357l2019

Muhammad  Yar
VS
Additional District  )udge,  Islamabad  & another

Petitioner by: 
Respondent  No.2 by:  Mr. Muhammad Sadiq Khan, Advocate.

Syed  Wusat-ul-Hassan Shah,  Advocate.

Date of Hearing:  77.11.2019.

MOHSIN  AI(HTAR KAYANI, I:  Through this writ petition,  the

petitioner has assailed concurrent findings  of learned Rent Controller (West),

Islamabad  and learned Additional District ]udge-X  (West), Islamabad,  passed

vide impugned order dated 20.07.2078  and impugned  judgment  dated

26.10 .2018, res  p ectiv ely

2.  Brief facts referred  in the instant writ petition are that Ghulam

Murtazaf  Respondent No.2 filed eviction  petition  against  the petitioner

regarding Shops No.L, 2, 3, 4, 7 &. 8, situated at Plot No.119, I&T Centre,

Sector  G-9/7,  Islamabad  on the grounds of personal  bonafide need, expiry of

lease and for the purpose  of reconstruction,  which was allowed  by the learned

Rent Controller (West), Islamabad  on 21,.01,.2073.  The petitioner feeling aggrieved

thereof preferred  an appeal,  which was dismissed  by the learned  Additional

District judge  (West),  Islamabad  vide judgment dated  02.12.2013  with the

observations that respondent  No.2 will demolish the demised  premises within

four (04) months.  However,  respondent  No.2 failed to comply with such

directions, which constrained the petitioner to file application under  Section

17(7)  of the Islamabad  Rent Restriction Ordinance,  2007 (hereinafter referred to as

'IKRO, 2007'), which was adjudicated upon by learned Rent Controller and

pursuant  to proper trial respondent No.2 was burdened  with fine of Rs.10,000/-

W.P.  No.357/2019

Pase | 2

as punishment  vide order dated 27.77.201,6.  Subsequently,  the petitioner filed

petition under  Section 17(6) of the IRRO, 2001 for re-possession of the suit shops,

which  was dismissed  by the learned  Rent  Controller,Islamabad vide order dated

79.09.2017.  Feeling  aggrieved  thereof,  the petitioner  preferred an appeal under

Section  21, of. the IRRO,  200'J., whereby the order of 79.09.2017 was set-aside by

learned Additional District Judge (West),  Islamabad  vide judgment  dated

21,.11,.2017 and the case was remanded to the learned  Rent Controller for decision

afrestu  whereafter  the matter  was dismissed  vide impugned order dated

20.07.2078.  On passing  of said order,  the petitioner preferred  yet another appeal

under Section 2'1, of the IRRO, 200L,  which  was dismissed by the learned

Additional District ]udge (West),  Islamabad vide impugned judgment  dated

26.10.2078. Hence, the instant writ petition.

3. 

Learned counsel for petitioner contended  that the Courts below in

violation  of settled principles  of the apex Court and view  rendered by this Court

in earlier round of proceedings  have passed  the impugned order  and judgmen!

that respondent  No.2 was bound to hand over the possession back to the

petitioner as he neither  demolished  the suit premises  nor using the same for his

personal  need; that the impugned  order and judgment  are based  on surmises

and conjecfures and have  been passed merely on assumptions  and in violation  of

law consistently laid down by the superior  Courts,  therefore, the same may

kindly be set-aside.

4.  Conversely,  learned counsel for respondent  No.2 while supporting the

impugned order and judgment  contended that the learned  Rent  Controller  had

accepted  the eviction petition  in accordance  with law, while appeal preferred

thereto by the petitioner was dismissed  by the learned Additional District Judge

pursuant  to proper  appreciation  of evidence; that the learned  Rent Controller has

rightly  appreciated  that the petitioner  has failed to narrate facts including the

W.P.  No.357/2019

Page | 3

dates as to when and how the family members of respondent  No.2  obtained

possession  of suit premises  or when and to whom the same has been rented  out

to some other  tenant except the petitioner;  that the petitioner has badly failed to

prove his case before both the forums below and the impugned  judgment  and

order suffer from no illegality,  therefore,  the sarne  may kindly be maintained  and

the instant writ petition may be dismissed.

5. 

6. 

I have heard  learned  counsel for the parties  and gone through the record.

Perusal of record reveals that the petitioner  was tenant in Shops  No.L,2,3,

4,7 &.8 situated at Plot No.L19, I&T Centre, Sector G-9/1',Islamabad,  which were

leased  out by Ghulam Murtazafrespondent  No.2 to the petitioner through  lease

agreement  dated 30.07.1990,  which  had expired  on 30.06.799L  after the elapse  of

one year but the eviction  petition was filed by respondent  No.2 on 01.04.2011

before learned  Rent Controller,  Islamabad on three  grounds i.e. reconstructioru

personal  bonafide  use and expiry  of lease agreement.  The eviction petition  was

allowed in the first round of proceedings  and appeal was preferred  by the

present petitioner in terms of section  21. of IRRO, 2001 before  learned Additional

District  |udge, which was dismissed and order was maintained in writ petition

as well as before Apex Court and CPLA filed by the petitioner  was also

dismissed.  The petitioner after final  decision  from  Apex Court was dispossessed,

however, he filed another application  in terms  of section 17(6)  of IRRO,2001  with

the claim that he may be allowed  to put into possession  of the shops  by the order

of Rent  Controller  as respondent No.2/landlord  has failed to demolish the

premises within  04 months  nor reconstructed the building and violated his own

commitment on which he sought eviction against  the petitioner.  The said

application  was dismissed by learned Rent Controller, Islamabad vide  judgment

dated  20.07.2078.  The same  was maintained  in Court of appeal  by learned

Additional  District Judge (West) Islamabad  vide judgment dated 26.10.2018.

W.P.  No.357

9

4

7.  However,  in order  to resolve  the controversy, it is necessary  to go through

the provisions  of section  17(6)  of IRRO, 2001,,  which is reproduced  as under:-

'17(6)  lNlure the landlord wla has obtairud possession  of a
building in pursuance of an order  made under sub-section (5) does
not himself,  or wlure possession  of the building  or rented land has
been obtained for any  member of his family such member  does not,
occury the building or rented land within one month of the date of
obtaining its possession,  or hm:ing obtained possession  relets  it
within six months of the said date to any person otlur than tlu
tenant,  the tenant  may apply  to the C-ontroller  for an ordcr  directing
that tlu possession of such building be restored  to him and tlu
Controller  may  malce  an order acardingly."

8. 

The above referred  provisions  of law explain certain rights available  to the

landlord  in eviction process of tenant, however,  if the landlord  has obtained the

possession  of the building in pursuance  of an order  made  under sub-section  5 of

section  17 does not himself or where  possession of building  or rented  land has

been  obtained for any member of his family,  fails to occupy the building within

one month  of the date of obtaining its possession or relets the same within  six

months of the date of dispossession  of the tenant, the right of tenant stands

revived. Sub-section  5 of section 17 of IRRO, 200L spells out satisfaction  of

learned Rent  Controller  that claim of the landlord is bonafide  and as such  Rent

Controller  can pass order directing  the tenant to put the landlord  in possession  of

the building  or rented land. Be that  as it may,  the petitioner  being  ex-tenant of

respondent No.2 to has to discharge  his onus  that the order  of eviction obtained

by respondent No.2  on the ground of bonafide claim or personal bonafide  need

has not been complied with. I have gone through the judgment  passed by

learned  Rent Controller in first round as well  as in the pleadings and evidence of

affidavit  Exh.A.l. The  issues  were framed  on2'1..04.2015  wherein issue No.1  was

as to Whether  respondent  is liable to be ejected from the demised  premises  on

the grounds taken  in this petitiory whereby learned  Rent Controller has given his

findings  on issue No.1 in para 8 of the judgment  of eviction dated 27J1..2013,  in

which it has been referred that "petitioner has stated catesoricalla resardins his

W.P. No.357/2019

Page | 5

personal  bonafide  rued there.fore  bonartde rwed stands  proaed."  The said finding  has

been challenged  through  the present application  U/S 17(6) of IRRO, 2001 but the

pleadings of the petitioner  as well as the record  does  not reflect any of the

material evidence to substantiate the plea that the building  has been  releted to

third  party in order to deprive the petitioner from his right protected  U/577(6)

of IRRO, 2001,. Even otherwise, if such facts have  been justified  on record by the

petitioner, even than the petitioner  is not entitled for such relief mainly on the

ground that the eviction order passed  against  the petitioner in the first round of

the proceedings U/S 17 of IRRO, 200L  was also passed due to expiry of lease

agreement, which itself is admitted  on record.

9. 

I have gone through the order  passed by learned  Rent Controller  in the

first round  dated  27.1,.2073 qua  issue  No.1, wherein  beside the personal  boanfide

need and reconstruction of shops, question of expiry  of lease has specifically

been urged  as in paral2 of the said order it has specifically  been  mentioned  that

"Moreooer, the lease  agreement betuteen the partie* which is aoailable on file as

Exh.P,4, has already  been erpired  and there is no lresh lease agreement  between

the parties.  Eurther,  the responilent has also admitted  in his cross-examination

that the lease agreement  has already  been expireil. The  res?onilent  self-stated

that no fresh  aareement  has  been

bettneen the oarties  and as Der

agreement he should aacate  the prcmises.  So. these  ad.missions  on part of

responilent proae beyond any shadow o.f doubt that the tenancy  has expired.."

Therefore,  in such type of situation  the Apex Court has now settled  the rights in

the recent  judgment  reported as PLD 2078  SC 87 (Vaqar Zafar Bakhtautri os.

HaiiMazharHussainshah\.  wherein  it has been held that-

" Thttrs, we conclude  that as after expiration  of the tenancy  period, a
tenant,  though can continue  to hold oaer tlu possession of the rented
premises,  but his tenancy  is renilered  inoalid, in that, it has come  to
an end  and if there is no express  consent  of the landlord to extend  the
tenancy  period  the tenant shall be guilty  of haoing  infringed  the
conditions  of tenancy, rendering  him liable to be eoicted under

W.P.  No.357/2079

Page  | 6

section  17(2)(ii)@)  of the Ordinance,  2001.  ln the light of the aboae,
toe do not find any merit in these appeals, which are hereby
dismissed."

As per law laid down by the Apex Court in above referred  judgment  the

petitioner  was liable to be evicted  from the demised  premises on this score alone.

10.  In the light of above principles laid down by the Apex Court, when the

lease agreement  has already been expired, no right survives  in favour of the

tenant,  even otherwise,  Courts below  have rightly held that the petitioner  has

failed to provide  the credentials of the newly admitted  tenant in the said

premises, even no date has been  mentioned  on which the shops were rented out

by respondent  No.2 to some  other person. I have gone  through the concurrent

findings of learned Rent  Controller and learned Appellate  Court  and as such no

illegality has been observed,  which requires  interference  in Constitutional

jurisdiction in terms of Article 199 of Constitution  of Islamic  Republic of

Pakistan,1973.

11.  In view of above discussiory  the instant  writ petition  bears no merits,

therefore,  the same stands dismissed.

(MOHSTN  AKHTAR

IUDGE

Announced  in open Court on A6' ll'  )/?1

RAniam.

