ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.3156/2020 
Najm-us-Saqib 
VS 
Minhaaj Saqib & 04 others  

Petitioner: 

In-person. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Ejaz Janjua and Mr. Nasir Mehmood, 
Advocates for Respondents No.1 to 3.  

and 

W.P. No.114/2021 
Minhaaj Saqib & 02 others 
VS 
Najm-us-Saqib & 02 others 

Petitioners by: 

Mr. Ejaz Janjua and Mr. Nasir Mehmood, 
Advocates.  

Respondent No.1: 

In-person. 

Date of Hearing: 

23.02.2021. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  single  judgment, 

this  Court  intends  to  decide  the  captioned  writ  petitions  for  having 

involved similar questions of law and parties.  

2. 

For  the  purpose  of  clarity,  Najm-us-Saqib  is  to  be  referred  as 

“petitioner”, whereas, Minhaaj Saqib, Sahar Saqib and Saima Malik are to 

be referred as “respondents”.  

3. 

  Through captioned W.P. No.3156/2020, the petitioner has called in 

question  concurrent  findings  of  the  Family  Court  as  well  as  of  the 

Appellate  Court,  dated  06.12.2018  and  28.09.2020,  respectively,  whereby 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 2 

maintenance allowance in favour of respondents has been fixed on higher 

side.  

4. 

On  the  contrary, 

through  captioned  W.P.  No.114/2021,  the 

respondents  have  assailed  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned 

Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad, dated 28.09.2020, whereby the 

judgment and decree passed by the learned Judge Family Court/Guardian 

Judge (West), Islamabad, dated 06.12.2018, has been modified.  

5. 

Succinctly,  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3  had  married  on 

25.07.1989 and were blessed with three children namely Sahar Saqib, Myra 

Saqib and Minhaaj. The petitioner divorced respondent No.3 on 13.01.2011, 

where-after  Myra  Saqib  started  living  with  the  petitioner  (father),  while 

Sahar Saqib and Minhaaj left with respondent No.3 (mother),  as such, the 

petitioner  was  not  paying  the  expenses  occurring  on  the  children  living 

with their mother / Respondent No.3, which compelled the respondents to 

file  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance.  The  suit  was  contested  by  the 

petitioner  by  filing  written  statement,  however,  the  right  of  petitioner  to 

defend the suit was struck off on account of his failure to pay the interim 

maintenance since November, 2016 and the suit was decreed to the tune of 

Rs.100,000/- per month for each respondents from the date of institution of 

suit  along  with  10%  annual  increase.  Feeling  aggrieved  thereof,  the 

petitioner  preferred  an  appeal,  whereby  the  matter  was  remanded  to  the 

learned  Family  Court  with  direction  to  record  reason  to  the  extent  of 

fixation of quantum and period of maintenance allowance. After recording 

 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 3 

of pro and contra evidence, the suit was decreed vide impugned judgment 

and decree dated 06.12.2018, in the following manner:  

  Plaintiff  No.1  is  entitled  for  recovery  of  past  maintenance 

allowance  from  the  defendant  @  Rs.40,000/-  per  month,  from 

September 2011 till institution of this suit. Further plaintiff No.1 

is  also  entitled  for  recovery  of  future  maintenance  allowance  @ 

Rs.60,000/-  per  month    from  the  date  of  institution  of  this  suit, 

till  he  attains  the  age  of  majority  or  till  he  is  otherwise  legally 

debarred,  with  15%  simple  annual  increase,  due  in  December 

2019.  

  Plaintiff  No.2  is  entitled  for  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance 

from  the  defendant  from  September  2011  till  May  2015  @ 

Rs.40,000/- per month. While from June 2015, till completion of 

her  LLM  from  abroad,  plaintiff  No.2  is  entitled  to  receive 

Rs.100,000/-  per  month.  Plaintiff  No.2  is  entitled  to  receive 

future maintenance allowance @ Rs.40,000/- per month from the 

defendant  till  her  legal  entitlement  with  15%  annual  increase 

which shall be applicable from December, 2019.  

Feeling  aggrieved  with  the  above  impugned  judgment  and  decree,  the 

petitioner  filed  an  appeal,  which  has  partially  been  accepted  vide 

impugned judgment and decree, dated 28.09.2020,  whereby the judgment 

and decree of the  learned trial court have been modified  in the following 

manner:  

“The  respondents  No.1  and  2  are  not  entitled  to  the  past 

maintenance. The respondent No.1 is entitled to the maintenance @ 

Rs.40,000/- per month from date of institution of suit till his age of 

majority  or  he  is  otherwise  legally  debarred  with  10%  annual 

increase  due  in  December  2019.  The  respondent  No.2  is  entitled  to 

recover the maintenance from the appellate @ Rs.40,000/- per month 

from  date  of  institution  of  suit  till  her  marriage  with  10%  annual 

increase due from December, 2019. No order as to cost.” 

 
 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 4 

Both  the  parties  feeling  aggrieved  thereof  filed  their  respective  captioned 

writ petitions.  

6. 

 Najam us Saqib/petitioner in-person contended that both the courts 

below  have  overlooked  the  basic  law  that  without  cross  examining  the 

witnesses  produced  by  respondents,  no  reliance  can  be  made  on  the 

evidence produced by such witnesses; that both the courts below have not 

properly appreciated the facts and circumstance of the case, rather entirely 

neglected  the  fact  that  the  petitioner  got  retired  from  service,  therefore, 

imposition  of  such  huge  maintenance  allowance  on  the  petitioner 

overburdens him; that both the courts below have overlooked the fact that 

the only source of petitioner’s income is the pension, which is quite meager 

and  petitioner  could  not  carry  the  burden  of  the  maintenance  allowance 

settled  by  the  courts  below,  as  such,  respondent  No.2  is  not  a  minor 

according  to  the  prevailing  law,  therefore,  not  entitled  for  maintenance 

allowance,  per  se,  both  the  Courts  below  have  decreed  the  suit  in  a 

slipshod manner vide the impugned judgment and decree,  which  are not 

sustainable in the eyes of law.  

7. 

Conversely,    learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  to  3  contended 

that  the  learned  first  Appellate  Court  has  modified  the  judgment  and 

decree  passed  by  the 

learned  trial  Court  without  any  plausible 

justification, rather such modification is in violation of principles settled by 

the apex court that past maintenance would be governed by Article 120 of 

the  Limitation  Act,  1908;  that  the  firstly  Appellate  Court  has  ignored  the 

basic  principle  of  Islamic  Shariah  as  well  as  of  the  applicable  law  that 

 
 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 5 

father  is  duty  bound  to  maintain  the  child  not  only  till  the  age  of  legal 

entitlement but even  after  her  divorce,  if  any;  that the  learned  trial  Court 

pursuant to proper appreciation of the facts and circumstances of the case 

had  decreed  the  suit  of  respondents  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

06.12.2018, which are liable to be restored.  

8. 

9. 

 Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  both the  parties  were  aggrieved  with 

the  judgment  &  decree  dated  28.09.2020,  passed  by  learned  Appellate 

Court,  whereby  the  claim  of  petitioner  Najm-us-Saqib  has  partially  been 

accepted  and  maintenance  was  reduced  in  terms  of  its  rate  as  well  as 

period  declared  in  judgment  dated  06.12.2018,  passed  by  Judge  Family 

Court, however, on the other side respondents are also aggrieved with the 

modification  of  decree,  however,  during  the  course  of  arguments 

petitioner  Najm-us-Saqib  father  of  respondents  No.1  &  2  conceded  the 

maintenance of his son namely Minhaaj Saqib and contends that he has no 

objection  qua  the  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  Appellate  Court  to 

the extent of his son and he is ready to satisfy the decree within his means. 

However,  he  has  raised  objection  on  the  maintenance  awarded  to  his 

daughter/respondent  No.2  namely  Sahar  Saqib,  who  was  born  on 

08.07.1990 and presently 31 years of age and is a practicing lawyer. 

10.  As  per  the  contention  of  petitioner  Family  Court  committed 

illegality  while  ignoring  the  fact  that  respondent  No.2  was  adult  at  the 

time of filing of suit and even the suit was filed without her signature. He 

has also raised serious objection on  the character of respondent No.2 and 

 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 6 

declared  her  disobedient  daughter  who  is  not  entitled  for  maintenance 

from  her  father.  Admittedly  no  such  evidence  is  available  on  record  to 

consider  that  daughter  of  petitioner  is  disobedient  and  is  not  entitled  for 

any  maintenance  though  there  is  some  stance  that  respondent  No.2  was 

major  at  the  time  of  filing  of  suit  but  entire  evidence  shows  that 

respondent  No.2  was  not  maintained  and  it  is  not  the  case  of  petitioner 

before  the  Courts  below  that  maintenance  was  properly  paid.  The 

allegation  qua  the  disobedience  has  only  been  stressed  by  the  petitioner 

mainly on the ground that respondent No.2 is living with her mother and 

is not in talking terms with her father/present petitioner. 

11. 

I have also gone though the contention raised by the petitioner that 

courts below have fixed the maintenance on higher side while considering 

the petitioner as Ambassador living abroad and contends that he has been 

retired,  presently  getting  pension  and  is  not  able  to  pay  the  maintenance 

which  is  beyond  his  capacity.  However,  it  has  not  been  denied  that  all 

these questions raised by the petitioner were not argued by him before the 

appellate  Court  and  appellate  court  has  considered  all  these  aspects  in 

detail as a result whereof maintenance decree has been modified in favour 

of petitioner. It has not been denied that respondent No.2 is still unmarried 

though  it  has  been  contended  by  the  petitioner  that  she  is  working  lady 

and is not entitled for any maintenance but this aspect did not absolve the 

petitioner  being  father  to  pay  the  maintenance  as  directed  by  the  courts 

below, especially when petitioner himself has contracted second marriage 

in September, 2011 and have a daughter from second marriage, this aspect 

 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 7 

clearly  establishes  that  petitioner  is  man  of  means  and  he  could  not  be 

exempted from the maintenance of her daughter who is still un-married as 

such  mere  age  of  majority  itself  is  not  sufficient  to  declare  unmarried 

daughter  disentitled  to  maintenance  allowance.  Reliance  is  placed  upon 

2012  MLD  1394  (Ch.  Muhammad  Bashir  VS  Mst.  Ansarun  Nisa  and  7 

others). Although, petitioner contends that his daughter is disobedient but, 

there is no evidence available to factually verify this allegation, in absence 

of  such  evidence  /  plea  of  disobedience  is  considered  to  be  an 

afterthought,  however,  question  of  age  of  respondent  No.2,  who  is  more 

than 31 years has to be seen in the light of principles laid down in Quran & 

Sunnah  as  to  whether  she  is  entitled  for  maintenance  from  the  father, 

though  he  is  not  interested  to  pay  the  same.  In  this  regard,  this  Court  is 

guided by the settled principle as reported by Adbdullah ibn Amr, that the 

Messenger of Allah (Peace Be Upon Him), said, “it is enough sin for a man to 

withhold from those dependent upon him.”(Sahih Muslims 996). This Court has 

also  gone  through  the  settled  principle  as  highlighted  in  Muhammadan 

Law,  written  by  Syed  Ameer  Ali,  that  while  dealing  with  question  of 

maintenance  of  female  children,  a  father  is  bound  to  maintain  his  female 

children until they are married, if they have no independent means of their 

own, as such, this aspect has also been appreciated in PLD 1957 Lahore 441 

(Mst.  Sughra  Begum  VS  Muhammad  Din).  It  is  also  settled  that  marriage 

does not necessarily absolves the father from the obligation of maintaining 

his  daughter,  referred  in  Hidaya,  Volume  1  (Page  410);  Fatawai  Alamgiri 

Volume 1 (Page 752) and Radd ul Mukhtar.  

 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 8 

12.  While considering all these aspects highlighted in Islamic Law, there 

is  no  cavil  to  proposition  that  father  is  bound  to  maintain  the  daughter 

despite  taking  the  plea  that  a  disobedient  daughter  is  not  entitled  to 

maintenance  but,  such  aspect  has  been  deprecated,  even  there  is  no 

concept  of  abandonment  (Aaq)  for  disgruntled  son  /  daughter  depriving 

him/her  of  the  inheritance  and,  therefore,  daughter  could  not be  deprive 

of her right to be maintained by her father during his lifetime.  Reliance is 

placed  upon  PLD  2013  Lahore  464  (Gakhar  Hussain  v.  Mst.  Surayya 

Begum).  Similarly,  the  age  of  majority of  girl  is  no  ground  to  exclude  her 

from  receiving  maintenance  from  her  father  as  the  father  is  bound  to 

provide maintenance to daughter till she gets married and, as such, there is 

no  age  restriction.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2010  YLR  520  Lahore 

(Muhammad  Ali  v.  Judge  Family  Court,  Depalpur)  and  2020  CLC  148 

Karachi (Faiz Ahmad v. Mst. Soni). 

13.  When the Courts below have already considered the socio-economic 

status  of  father  and  concurrently  fixed  the  maintenance,  especially  when 

the first Appellate Court also considered the grounds raised by the father, 

as a result whereof the maintenance has been modified, then the father is 

under  moral  and  legal  duty  to  maintain  his  children  in  befitting  manner 

and  he  could  not  escape  from  his  moral  and  legal  duty  to  maintain  his 

daughter.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2004  SCMR  1598  (Muhammad  Abdul 

Lateef v. Sheikh Muhammad Ikram, Additional District Judge, Lahore).  

14.  At  last,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  contended  that  it  is 

appropriate  to  remand  this  matter  to  justify  the  allegation  vis-a-vis  the 

 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 9 

evidence  qua  the  status  of  petitioner  being  a  retired  bureaucrat  but,  this 

Court  is  not  in  agreement  with  such  plea  as  family  matters  are  not  to  be 

remanded lightly as it would prolong the agony between the spouses, per 

se, remand should be ordered only in cases where parties were not given 

opportunity to produce the evidence on issues of dispute, which is not the 

case  in  hand  as  the  petitioner  is  negligent  in  his  conduct  to  lead  the 

evidence,  therefore, 

in  such  circumstances,  the  request  made  by 

respondents is not appreciable in the light of principles laid down in case 

reported  as  1997  SD  384  (Mst.  Surria  Bibi  VS  Additional  District  Judge, 

Khanpur, etc.). 

15.  While considering the entire background, the maintenance fixed by 

the  appellate  Court  after  modification  has  fairly  settled  the  question  of 

fixation of maintenance while considering the status of petitioner / father, 

who  is  a  retired  bureaucrat,  who  can  manage  the  affairs  of  an  unmarried 

daughter  within  his  sources,  even  otherwise,  the  petitioner  /  father  has 

conceded to the claim of his son, who is only entitled to get  maintenance 

till  age  of  majority,  therefore,  the  only  liability  of  maintenance  is  to  the 

extent  of  unmarried  daughter  upon  the  petitioner  /  father,  as  such,  the 

plea raised by the children for enhancement of maintenance is not justified, 

especially when the petitioner has been retired from service.  

16. 

In  view  of  above  reasons,  both  the  parties  have  failed  to  make  out 

their  case  in  any  manner  for  interference  in  the  findings  of  the  Courts 

below,  even  otherwise,  petitioner  being  father  is  under  obligation  to 

maintain his children, especially unmarried daughter, therefore, there is no 

 
W.P. No.3156/2020 and W.P. No.114/2021  

        Page 10 

question  of  interference,  similarly  even  the  learned  first  Appellate  Court 

has  already  reduced  and  modified  the  maintenance  fixed  by  the  learned 

Family  Court.  In  this  backdrop,  no  case  of  interference  is  made  out  in 

judicial  review, 

therefore,  both 

the  captioned  writ  petitions  are 

hereby DISMISSED.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
 JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 3rd March, 2021. 

Khalid Z. 

JUDGE 

 
 
     
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
