d

JUDGMENT SHEET
rN THE rSLAlurABAp  H|GH  COURT.
ISLAMABAD

Regular  FirstAppeal  No. 14312020
Syed Fayyaz
VS
Syed  Muhammad Shah, etc

Appellant  by:
Respondent  No.1 by
Respondent  No.2 by

Raja Ahsan  Mehmood  Satti,  Advocate,

Mr. Awais ul lslam,  Advocate,

Ch. Aziz ur RehmanZia,  Advocate,

Date of Decision:

11..O8.2920.

FI,AZ AHttlAD  A,NJUM JANDRAN.  J.- Through  the
instant Regular  First Appeal, appellant impugns the
order & decree dated  O4.O3.2O20,  passed by the
learned Senior Civil Judge,  lslamabad-West,  whereby
his suit for declaration,  permanent and mandatory
injunction was decreed in the light of statement of
respondent  No.1 /defendant  No.1 .
2.  The facts, relevant for the disposal of the instant
appeal are that the appellant,  respondent  No.1 and
respondents  3 to 7 are sons and daughters of Haider Ali
Shah linked with "Sadat Banu Fatima Silsila Alia
Kazmia",  were permanent  residents of Mouza  Baikan
Syedan (presently  Sector  F-11l3, lslamabad) and were
exclusive owners  in possession  of their ancestral  land
consisting  of more than 1000-Kanal  in the said village.
The appellant,  the respondent No.1 and proforma
respondents  are also legal heirs of Mst. Chano  Bi widow
of Ghulam  Hussain  Shah, who was in possession of
property  measuring  45-Kanal  18-Marlas in khasra
No.165-171  and died issueless. After the death of their
predecessors Haider Ali Shah and Chano Bi, properties
were devolved  upon the appellant  and others by way of

a

R.F.A.  No.l4Il  l2O2O

ffi

2

inheritance.  The respondent  No.2-CDA acquired the
said properties for establishing  of Sector  F-1113,
lslamabad except  the area of the shrine of Haider Ali
Shah comprising some land, which includes  graveyard,
rooms with boundary  wall. The appellant was settled  in
the UK along with his family  and respondent  No.1 was
authorized to manage  the affairs of the ancestral
property including suit property/shrine;  that on the last
visit of appellant,  the respondent  No.1 did not allow him
to enter the shrine and on inquiry, it revealed that
respondent  No.1 had rented out the rooms  to different
persons and had been receiving rent of  more than
Rs.100,000/- per month without the permission  of the
appellant;  the appellant  was not paid a single  penny  out
of the compensation/ acquisition  amount from  the
respondent No.2rCDA  and thus had been deprived of
his legal right which led to filing of the suit for
declaration,  permanent and mandatory  injunction.
3.  The respondent  No.1 contested  the suit by filing
written statement  wherein he controverted  the claim of

the appellant. On facts, it was replied that the appellant
was compensated  against his share of acquired  land
through  one residential  plot No.823 in Sector  lr10-1
besides agricultural  land measuring 12.5 Acre vide
permit No.D-005830  in District  Jhang. lt was further
averred that nobody including  the appellant  was ever

restrained to visit the shrine.
4.  The respondent No.2-CDA despite  availing
opportunities  failed to file written statement and
ultimately their right was closed vide order dated
14.01.2020. On 04.03.2020, the respondent No.1 got
recorded  statement and the learned trial Court after
hearing learned counsel  for the parties, decreed the
suit vide order and decree dated 04.03.2020, on the

R.F.A.  No.ltltl l2O2O

-3

above statement  in terms that the appellant  was held
entitled to visit the suit property/shrine  and the
respondent No.1 was directed not to restrain the
appellant  from visiting the shrine/graves  of his parents.
The appellant  feeling aggrieved  of the said order and
decree,  filed the instant  regular first appeal.
5.  Learned counsel for the appellant  contends that
the statement  made basis to pass the impugned  order
was only to the extent of application  under  Order  XXXIX

Rule 1&2 CPC while the impugned  order and decree  is
silent to  the extent of  rest of  the claim qua
compensation of the acquired land and the due share
out of the rental amounts, being received by the
respondent No.1, therefore,  the impugned  order and
decree  are liable to be set-aside.
6.  Learned counsel for  the respondent No.1
contends  that neither any property  has been rented out
nor their exists any boundary  wall around the shrine
and the graves; that no gate is installed and there is a
space for offering  prayers, contiguous to the graves,
and that nobody was ever restrained to offer the
prayers and to visit the shrine; that they never
restrained the appellant  in the past nor intend to do so.
7.  Learned  counsel for the respondent  No.2-CDA
argued that the land was acquired way back in 1960
and the compensation  had already  been paid to the land
owners including the appellant; some land was left for
shrine and graves  which is being  administered  by the
respondent  No.1 and that no room or any other space
had been let on rent, as asserted  by the appellant.
8.  Heard the learned  counsel for the parties and
examined  the record with their able assistance.
9.  Record reveals  that on 04.03.2O2O, respondent
No.1 got recorded  following statement-

R.F.A.  No.{43  l2O2O

-4-

d Lf en L-oJy' ttt y'; Tt.iacquired  -/VLiCDA of n.( -(LJA"
tt Sy'u1@t h Ttldi utg L*ud  LCDA -dt/-i {'l,tt$L}vt
L L u l:a <uL?.  ? d J*t { L *  $' 1f , t.e I u nl, tg,l e u !l: 6,,./
: J* t,f 4yLJ.,t,,fif  6 /Q f p I  -,.1 4,,tt fitt t)t I t f uL{.  - 7t nv \ n tt d 4
/,1 *a, G,* ut + Jv 40, 50 zt 4 6, -*{t,<t-,/ -, tl 6 I ffo t 7
t tl.l {
6 tal  t uF 1 7vgu./v  : ai { r7), r r.l, 
" 
"-?tJ,7,

-z-.|v, f4} { clrt  t, u -(7  6 

=t 

10.  Record further  reveals that the date 04.03.2020
was fixed for arguments on application  under Order
XXXIX, Rule 1&2 CPC, as argued in support of this
appeal  but on the same day, the respondent  No.1 got
recorded above statement  and thereafter learned
counsel for the plaintiff/appellant  asserted  that  " that the
defendant  had adnitted  ln hls wrltten statement that he has
no ebJectlo?  lf th-e plalntlfr viqits tbe shrine/grave of his
falh?r etc, thgfefo-re. tfie suit be decreed  to this ertent  as
tfie plalAtiffs clatn ls to filS e$ont " These facts have duly
been mentioned in Para-2 of the impugned order. lt
was/is not the case  of the appellant  that the counsel has
made the above statement in derogation to  his
instructions. Therefore, after undergoing  the above
proceedings,  the learned trial Court passed  the
impugned order.
11. Moreover,  not only the respondent  No.1 but the
respondent  No.2-GDA  had specifically asserted that
there is no boundary  wall and a gate with lock and that
the compensation  of the land acquired way back in
1960 had already been paid to the land owners. To
controvert  this fact not only by the respondent  No.1 but
as well as officials  respondents-CDA,  there is nothing
available  on record and even appellant could not rebut
the same during arguments through any evidence. To
counter  the objection  over visit of the appellant to the

R.F.A.  No.143  l2O2O

-5-

graves and shrine of his ancestors,  the respondent
No.1 reiterated  the same stance today during  the
arguments  with an addition that they will have no
objection over visit and stay of the appellant to the
graves  of his ancestors  round  the clock,  therefore, in
such eventuality,  particularly  in the light of statement  of
learned counsel  for the appellant mentioned in the
Para-Z of the impugned order,  it cannot  be said that the
impugned order and decree suffers  from any illegality

or material irregularity.
12. ln view of above,  the instant regular first appeal is
devoid of merits and accordingly dismissed.  No order

as to costs.

lmran

GteizAHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN)

JUDGE

