ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

Wrlt PeUUon  No. 277412020
Zialat  Mehmood Abbasi
VS
Sabiqa  Sonia, etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedlnEs

Date of
order/
Proceedlnos

Order with signature  of Judge and that of partles
or counsel where necessary.

30.09.2020  Mr. Majid Ali, Advocate.

Through the instant writ petition, petitioner
impugns  order dated 15.09.2020  passed  by the
learned Judge Family Court, lslamabad-East
whereby application  of the petitioner/defendant for
reduction of interim  maintenance  allowance was
dismissed.
2.  Relevant  facts are that the respondents  1 to 3
filed a  suit for the recovery of maintenance
allowance against the petitioner, wherein interim
maintenance  at the rate of Rs.10,000/- per month for
each minor was fixed; the petitioner had been
working  abroad in UAE and on his arrival back to
the country, filed an application  for reduction  of the
interim maintenance  with the stance that due to
Covid-19 pandemic  he became jobless,  therefore,
the amount fixed as interim maintenance  may be
reduced. The learned Guardian Judge dismissed
the said application vide order dated 15.09.2020,
hence  the instant writ petition.
3.  Learned  counsel contends that the petitioner
had been paying the interim maintenance as
directed by the learned Guardian  Judge but due to
pandemic  of Covid-19, he became jobless and,
therefore,  unable to pay the same being not in
consonance with his financial  position while the
respondent  No.1 is a working  lady and being rea!

Wrlt  PeUUon  No.  27742020

-2-

mother  may help in maintaining  the minors.  Learned
counsel placed  reliance  upon case laws reported as

2017 tlLD 214 and 2014 CLC 715.
4.  Heard, record perused.
5.  Record reveals that interim maintenance
allowance  of the two minors was fixed at the rate of
Rs.10,000/- per month each in September,  2019 and
the petitioner  paid the same for initial six months  till
February 2O2O and thereafter  came-up with the
application  for  reduction of  the  interim
maintenance  after six months. lt is manifest from
the record that he requested for waiver of interim
maintenance  for a period of six months. During the
said period, the petitioner did not pay even
Rs.5000/-  per month as he prayed  through  the
instant writ petition in terms of maintenance  to the
minors to show his readiness  and left the minors
unattended in those hard days which cannot be
considered as an excuse to absolve him from his
duty. lt is settled principle  that it is the bounden
duty of  the father to  maintain his children
irrespective of the fact that they are residing  with
their mother.
6.  The learned  Family Court has already dealt
the petitioner with leniency  by making  three
instalments  of  the  outstanding amount  of
maintenance.
7.  The dispute between  the parties is in respect
of maintenance  which is a schedule  item as per
Family Court Act, 1964. Being  a special law, remedy
of an appeal against the interim order has been
excluded from the statute  by the legislature.  When
remedy to challenge an interim order is not
provided through statutory  provision, then it does
not amount that by way of filing writ petition against

)

Writ  Petition  No.  277412020

-3-

an interim order, same remedy could be availed. At
this score alone, the instant writ petition  is not
proceedable.
8.  The case law relied upon by the learned
counsel do not extend any help to the petitioner
due to having  distinct facts and circumstances.
9. 
ln view of above, there exists  no justification
to interfere  in the impugned order. Consequently,
the instant writ petition is dismissed  in limine.

lmran

(GWA.  AHMAD  ANJUrU  JANDRAN)
JUDGE

