Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       WRIT PETITION  NO. 2784 OF 2021 

Mst. Sidra Asif 

VS 

Baqir Ali and others.  

PETITIONER BY:      

Mr. Abdul Hafeez, Advocate.   

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Syed  Ali  Abdullah  Rizvi  and  Syed 
Moazzam Ali Rizvi, Advocates. 

DATE OF DECISION: 

21.02.2022. 

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  The  petitioner  is  aggrieved  by 

judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge 

dated  23.06.2021  pursuant  to  which  the  appeal  filed  by 

respondent  No.1  was  accepted  and  the  judgment  and  decree 

passed by the learned Judge Family Court dated 27.01.2021 was 

set aside. 

2. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that 

the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.1  were  married  pursuant  to 

marriage  deed  dated  07.01.2017.  That  rukhsati  did  not  take 

place  and  respondent  No.1  divorced  the  petitioner  pursuant  to 

divorce  deed  dated  25.01.2018.  That  according  to  the  marriage 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 2 

deed  the  petitioner  was  entitled  to  Haq  Mehr  in  the  amount  of 

Rs.5,000/-  in  cash  and  15  tolas  of  gold.  That  Rs.5,000/-  cash 

amount was paid at the time of execution of the marriage deed. 

But 15 tolas of gold was remained unpaid, for which purpose the 

petitioner  filed  the  suit  that  was  decreed  by  the  learned  Judge 

Family Court on 27.01.2021 ordering respondent No.1 to pay 7.5 

tolas of gold to the petitioner. That the learned Additional District 

Judge  set-aside  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned  Family 

Court  through  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  on  the  basis 

that the Special Attorney appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 

had  stated  during  cross-examination  that  the  amount  of 

Rs.5,000/- and 15 tolas of gold were paid to the petitioner at the 

time  of  execution  of  the  marriage  deed.  And  as  the  petitioner 

had  not  controverted  the  contention  by  any  suggestion  in 

rebuttal,  such  contention  would  be  deemed  to  be  accepted  and 

consequently  respondent  No.1  was  not  liable  to  pay  anything 

having  taken  the  position  that  the  entire  amount  of  Haq  Mehr 

had  already  been  paid.  He  submitted  that  pursuant  to  the 

marriage  deed,  the  15  tolas  of  gold  was  deferred  dower  and  as 

rukhsati  never 

took  place  and 

the  marriage  was  not 

consummated there was no occasion for respondent No.1 to pay 

the dower to the petitioner. He contended that other than a bald 

statement  made  during  cross-examination  there  was  no 

evidence that 15 tolas of gold specified as deferred dower in the 

marriage deed was ever paid to the petitioner.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submitted  that 

Barim  Maqsood  Raja  (DW-1)  appearing  as  special  attorney  for 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 3 

respondent  No.1 

stated  during 

cross-examination 

that 

notwithstanding  the  fact  that  15  tolas  of  gold  was  deferred 

dower it was paid at the time of execution of the marriage deed 

and  consequently  no  payment  of  dower  was  outstanding.  He 

submitted  that  where  a  fact  as  asserted  by  a  witness  was  not 

cross-examined such fact was deemed to be admitted. He relied 

on  Usman  Khan  VS  Mst.  Shehla  Gul  (2020  CLC  910)  and 

Muhammad  Aslam  VS  Absar  Fatima  (2011  CLC  1521)  in 

support of his contentions. 

4. 

The  petitioner  and  respondent  No.1  entered  into  a 

marriage  contract  on  07.01.2017  which  stated  in  clause  13  of 

the marriage deed that the dower amount was Rs.5,000/-in cash 

and 15 tolas of gold. Clause 14 of the marriage deed stated that 

15  tolas  of  gold  would  be  deferred  dower.  Respondent  No.1 

executed a divorce deed on 25.01.2018 in London and sent it to 

the  petitioner.  After  failure  of  reconciliation  proceedings,  a 

divorce certificate was issued on 10.09.2018. The petitioner filed 

a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower  wherein  she  claimed  that  the  15 

tolas  of  gold  which  constituted  deferred  dower  was  outstanding 

and that respondent No.1 was liable to pay the same. Para 1 of 

the suit states the following:  

That the nikah of the plaintiff was solemnized with defendant 

on  07.01.2017  at  Union  Council  Sahang,  Village  Pind  Bala, 

Tehsil  Gujar  Khan,  District  Rawalpindi  in  accordance  with 

Islamic  Law  against  the  dower  consideration  of  Rs.5000/- 

prompt  and  deferred  dower  weighing  15  tolas  of  gold 

ornaments  out  of  which  prompt  dower  is  paid  and  deferred 

dower is outstanding. 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 4 

5. 

In  his  written  statement  respondent  No.1  stated  the 

following in relation to para 1.  

1.  That  Para  No.  1  is  admitted  to  the  extent  of  solemnizing 

Nikkah with the defendant and payment of dower rest of the 

Para is incorrect and vehemently denied the detail answer to 

this Para is already given in preliminary objection above.  

6. 

A perusal of the above establishes that respondent No.1 

admitted  the  fact  asserted  by  the  petitioner  in  relation  to 

payment of dower i.e. that Rs.5,000/-, which constituted prompt 

dower,  was  paid  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the  marriage  deed 

and  15  tolas  of  gold  specified  as  deferred  dower  remained 

unpaid.  In  his  preliminary  objections  within  the  written 

statement respondent No.1 in para 3 stated that as the marriage 

between  the  parties  had  not  been  consummated  no  question  of 

payment  of  deferred  dower  arose  and  took  a  clear  position  in 

such preliminary objections that deferred dower was a guarantee 

for  a  woman  against 

ill-treatment,  non-maintenance  and 

desertion  and  where  the  parties  had  agreed  to  divorce  the 

question  of  payment  of  deferred  dower  did  not  arise.  A  perusal 

of  the  written  statement  clearly  establishes  that  the  respondent 

accepted  the  factual  assertion  by  the  petitioner  that  deferred 

dower  was  not  paid.  Respondent  No.1  also  filed  an  affidavit 

before  the  learned  Family  Court  through  his  Special  Attorney 

(DW-1),  which  stated  in  para  2  that  “the  marriage  of  the 

deponent was not consummated and the prompt dower was paid 

at the time of nikah in the presence of witnesses and nothing is 

outstanding  on  account  of  anything”.  Thus,  even  the  testimony 

in the form of affidavit sworn by respondent No.1 only confirmed 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 5 

that  respondent  No.1  had  paid  prompt  dower  to  the  petitioner, 

and  implied  that  because  the  marriage  was  not  consummated, 

he  was  not  liable  to  pay  deferred  dower  to  the  petitioner  and 

thus  nothing  was  outstanding.  Barim  Maqsood  Raja  (DW-1), 

however,  during  cross-examination  took  a  position  contrary  to 

that  in  written  statement  as  well  as  affidavit  sworn  by 

respondent  No.1  that  not  only  was  the  prompt  dower  in  the 

amount of Rs.5,000/-  paid at the time  of execution of marriage 

deed but 15 tolas of gold which constituted deferred dower was 

also paid at such time in presence of witnesses.  

7. 

The  learned  Judge  Family  Court  in  its  judgment  noted 

that respondent No.1 failed to produce any witness to verify the 

payment  of  15  tolas  of  gold  ornaments  as  dower.  The  only 

evidence  available  is  a  statement  made  by  Special  Attorney 

(DW-1)  about  such  payment,  which  the  learned  Family  Court 

found insufficient in proof of the fact that such dower was paid. 

The learned Family Court took into account the fact that deferred 

dower  became  payable  in  two  situations  i.e.  in  the  case  of 

divorce  and  in  the  event  of  death  of  the  husband.  And  as  the 

petitioner  had  been  divorced  by  respondent  No.1  it  found  that 

half  of  the  deferred  dower  amounting  to  7.5  tolas  of  gold  was 

payable by respondent No.1 to the petitioner in view of the fact 

that their marriage had not been consummated.  

8. 

The learned Additional District Judge relied on para 2 of 

the  affidavit  (Ex-D3)  sworn  by  respondent  No.1  wherein 

respondent  No.1  had  stated  that  prompt  dower  was  paid  at  the 

time  of  nikah  and  that  nothing  was  outstanding  on  account  of 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 6 

anything.  The  learned  Additional  District  Judge  read  this  part  of 

the affidavit together with the assertion made by Barim Maqsood 

Raja  (DW-1)  during  cross-examination,  that  the  deferred  dower 

was also paid by respondent No.1 to the petitioner at the time of 

execution  of  the  marriage  deed,  and  held  that  as  the  assertion 

made  in  the  cross-examination  was  not  rebutted  with  any 

further,  it  would  be  deemed  to  have  been  admitted  by  the 

petitioner.  

9. 

The  learned  Additional  District  Judge  appears  to  have 

not  appreciated  the  fact  that  respondent  No.1  in  his  written 

statement  in  relation  to  Para-1  of  the  suit  admitted  the  factual 

assertion made in the suit that the prompt dower in the amount 

of  Rs.5,000/-  was  paid  and  the  deferred  dower  specified  as  15 

tolas  of  gold  remained  unpaid  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the 

marriage deed. The affidavit (Ex-D3) of respondent No.1 further 

confirms  the  same  contention.  Collective  reading  of  the  written 

statement  filed  by  respondent  No.1  together  with  his  affidavit 

(Ex-D3)  establishes  the  contention  of  respondent  No.1  that  he 

had  paid  the  petitioner  the  prompt  dower  as  specified  in  the 

marriage deed at the time of execution of such deed and was not 

liable to pay the deferred dower as the marriage had never been 

consummated.  

10. 

The  question  before  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  as 

well  as  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  therefore  was 

whether  as  a  matter  of  law  respondent  No.1  was  liable  to  pay 

deferred  dower  in  the  event  that  the  marriage  was  not 

consummated.    Instead  of  appreciating  the  written  statement 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 7 

and the affidavit (Ex-D3) sworn by respondent No.1 the learned 

Additional District Judge erred in setting aside the judgment and 

decree  of  the  learned  Family  Court  merely  on  the  basis  of  one 

statement made by Special Attorney of respondent No.1 (DW-1) 

during cross-examination, that the deferred dower (i.e. 15 tolas 

of gold) was also paid to the petitioner at the time of execution 

of  the  marriage  deed  in  presence  of  witnesses.  A  reading  of 

cross-examination clearly reflects that it was suggested to DW-1 

that such contention was incorrect as  he was asked whether he 

had  noticed  that  15  tolas  of  gold  was  mentioned  as  deferred 

dower

  (

  to  which  he  responded  that  he  had  read  the 
)
ﻞﺟُﻮﻣﺮﯿﻏ

same. He had further been asked whether he had produced any 

other witnesses to the marriage deed (who would then also have 

witnessed  the  payment  of  the  deferred  dower),  to  which  he 

responded that such witnesses had  not been produced  and that 

DW-1 was also not a witness to the marriage deed himself.  

11. 

It is obvious from a comparison of the position taken by 

respondent  No.1  in  the  written  statement  and  the  affidavit  (Ex-

D3) that such position is in contradiction with the assertion made 

by  DW-1  during  cross-examination.  The  learned  Additional 

District  Judge  also  did  not  appreciate  that  respondent  No.1 

whether  himself  or  through  a  special  attorney  could  not  take  a 

position  during  cross-examination  which  was  contrary  to  the 

content  of  written  statement  as  well  as  the  content  of  the 

affidavit  sworn  as  testimony  of  respondent  No.1.  The  learned 

Additional District Judge also did not appreciate that suggestions 

were made to DW-1 after his assertion in cross-examination that 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 8 

15  tolas  of  gold  was  paid  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the 

marriage  contract  that  such  amount  was  deferred  dower  and 

further  that  none  of  the  witnesses  of  the  marriage  deed  who 

purportedly  witnessed  the  payment  of  such  deferred  dower  by 

respondent  No.1  to  the  petitioner  were  produced  before  the 

Court.  

12. 

It  is  settled  law  that  a  party  cannot  take  a  position 

while  providing  oral  testimony  which  is  contrary  to  the  position 

taken in the written statement and pleadings of such party. The 

learned Family Court correctly appreciated the evidence and lack 

of production of any witnesses testifying that deferred dower had 

been  paid  by  respondent  No.1  to  the  petitioner  at  the  time  of 

execution  of  marriage  deed.  The  learned  Additional  District 

Judge failed to appreciate that while there is nothing prohibiting 

the  payment  of  deferred  dower  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the 

marriage  deed,  whole  idea  of  specifying  certain  portion  of  the 

dower  as  deferred  is  that  the  husband  is  not  liable  or  willing  to 

pay  the  same  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the  marriage  deed  or 

on  demand  of  the  wife  thereafter,  till  the  time  of  divorce  or 

death of the husband. It would thus be extraordinary that while 

specifying  a  certain  part  of  the  dower  as  deferred  dower  in  a 

marriage contract the husband were to treat the same as prompt 

dower  at  the  time  of  execution  of  such  marriage  contract.  In 

order  to  establish  that  such  assertion  was  true  it  was  for  the 

husband to discharge the onus and establish through production 

of witnesses to the marriage deed that they did witness payment 

of deferred dower at the time of execution of the marriage deed. 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2784/2021 

P a g e  | 9 

As  no  witnesses  to  the  marriage  deed  were  produced  by 

respondent No.1 the learned Family Court rightly concluded that 

there  was  no  evidence  produced  by  respondent  No.1  that  the 

deferred dower as specified in the marriage deed had been paid 

at the time of execution of such deed.  

13. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge  erred  in  setting  aside  the  reasoned  judgment  of  the 

learned Family Court and the decree passed on such basis.  The 

instant  petition  is  allowed  and  consequently  the  impugned 

judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned  appellate  Court  dated 

23.06.2021  is  set-aside,  and  the  judgment  and  decree  passed 

by the learned Judge Family Court dated 27.10.2021 is upheld.  

        (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

Saeed.  

 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
