Form  No:  HOD/C-121 
JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 2018 

Ch.  Naseer Ahmed. 

VS

Rent Tribunal, Islamabad and OS  others. 

Writ Petition No.3755 of 2018 

Mrs.  Mussarat Naseer. 

VS

The Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad and 05 others. 

Petitioners By 

Respondents By 

Ibad-ur-Rehman  Lodhi,  Shehryar 
M/s 
Tariq, Advocates (in Writ  Petition No.3642 
of 2018). 
Malik  Qamar  Afzal,  Saad  Khan,  Ms. 
Misbah 
Ishaq  and  Ms.  Tania  Bezi, 
Advocates  (in  Writ  Petition  No.3755  of 
2018). 

M/s  S.  Naeem  Bokhari  and  Ijaz  Akhtar 
Janjua, Advocates (respondents No.3 to  6 
in  Writ  Petition  No.3642  of  2018)  and 
(respondents  No.2  to  5  in  Writ  Petition 
No.3755 of 2018). 
Malik  Qamar  Afzal,  Saad  Khan,  Ms. 
Misbah 
Ishaq  and  Ms.  Tania  Bezi, 
Advocates for  respondent  No.7  (in  Writ 
Petition No.3642 of 2018) 

Date of Hearing 

18.10.2019 

***** 

-2- 

Writ  Petition  No.3642  of 2'11.8 
Writ  Petition  No.3755  of 201.11 

AAMER  FAROOO.  l.  - This  judgment  shall  decide  the  instant 

petition as  well  as  Writ  Petition No.3755 of  2018 as  common questions of  law and 

facts are involved. 

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  respondents  No.3  to  6  filed  eviction 

application  against  the  petitioner  as  well  as  respondent  No. 7  (the  petitioner  in 

writ  petition  No.  3755/2018)  with  respect to  Plot  No.8, F-10  Markaz, Islamabad, 

measuring  4444.44  square  yards.  It  was  alleged  in  the  referred  eviction 

application  that  the  petitioner  as  well  as  respondents  No.3  to  7  were  the  co- 

owners of  Plot No.8 supra,  however, sub-divided the  property  into  two  i.e.  Plot 

No.8  and  8-A,  F-10  Markaz, Islamabad  and  also  executed  a  partnership  deed 

with  respect  to  running  of  the  business of  hospital.  It  was  contended  that 

respondents No.3 to  6  executed a  lease  agreement  in  favour  of  the  petitioner 

and  respondent  No.7 on  01.01.2006,  which  was for  a  period  of  ten  years. The 

grounds  for  eviction  as  stipulated  in  the  eviction  application  were,  inter-alia, 

personal bona fide  need and  expiry  of  the  lease  agreement;  the  petitioner  and 

respondent No. 7  contested the application, however, the  same was dismissed by 

the  learned  Rent  Controller,  vide  judgment  dated  08.03.2018.  Appeal  was 

preferred  by  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.7  but  the  same  also  was 

dismissed, vide order dated 26.07.2018, hence the petition. 

3. 

Learned counsel for  the  petitioner,  in  the  instant  petition,  inter-alia, 

contended  that  there  is  no  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between  the 

petitioner  and  respondents No.3  to  6.  It  was further  contended that  the  parties 

are  partners  and  co-owners  in  the  property  and  where  such  is  the  case  no 

eviction application  is  maintainable; that  since the  relationship had been  denied, 

the  learned  Rent  Controller  was  obliged  to  frame  an  issue  in  this  behalf  and 

decide the  same, which  was not  done. It  was submitted  that  the  Courts did  not 

-3- 

Writ Petition  No.3642 of 2018 
Writ Petition No.3755 of 2018 

take  into  account the  dicta,  in  this  behalf, that  where  the  relationship is  denied 

the Court has to first  determine the  issue.  Reliance was placed on cases reported 

as 

''Mian  Umar  lkram-ul-Haque  VS  Dr.  Shahida  Hasnain  and  another"  (PU 

201.7 SC 01.), ''Muhammad Wakil Khan VS  Additional District Judge, Lahore and 

3  others."  (2007  CLC 1.1.51.),  "Umar Farooq  VS  Rent  Controller/Civil Judge, 

Multan and another"  (201.8 CLC Note 42).  It was further  submitted  that  there 

is  no  proper  partition  deed  between  respondents No.3  to  6  and  the  petitioner 

and  respondents  No. 7;  that  there  is  a  private  partition  agreement  which  is  in 

violation  of  the  Capital  Development  Authority  Rules  and  Regulations,  hence 

carries no sanctity.  It was highlighted that  in  the absence of a  proper partition all 

the  parties are  co-owners  and  an  eviction  application  by  one  co-owner  against 

the  other  does  not  lie.  Reliance was  placed on  cases reported  as  ''Muhammad 

Hussain and  2  others  VS  Addl  District  Judge,  Burewala and  4  otners."  (2009 

YLR  1.736),  "Ghulam  Yasin  VS  Ghulam  Mustafa  and  another."  (2006  YLR 

454),  ''Abdul Zahir  VS  Jaffar  Khan" (201.0SCMR1.89)  and  "Umar Hayat Khan 

VS 

lnayatullah  Butt"  (1.994  SCMR 572).  It  was  also  contended  that  the 

respondents in  evidence admitted that  the co-ownership of the  petitioners is  also 

under  challenge  and  where  such  is  the  case  the  eviction  application  is  not 

maintainable.  Reliance was  placed  on  ''Kamran Rasool  VS  Town  Committee, 

Zafarwar (2006 SCMR 1.061.),  and  ''Rehmatullah VS  Ali  Muhammad"  (1.983 

SCMR 1.064-).  It  was  further  submitted  that  where  a  tenant  becomes the  co- 

owner  or  is  the  co-owner,  no eviction  application  is  maintainable.  Reliance was 

placed on  ''Mst.  Sanobar Sultan VS  ObaidUl/ah Khan" (PLO 2009 SC 71.). It was 

submitted that  in  the  facts and circumstances, the  only  remedy with  respondents 

No.3 to  6  was to  file a  suit for  possession through  partition.  Reliance was placed 

on  "Gu/fraz and others  VS  Mir Dad and another"  (PU 2017 Islamabad 52). 

-4- 

Writ P«ition  No.3642  of 2018 
Writ  Petition  No.3755  of 2018 

4. 

Learned counsel for  respondent No. 7  (the  petitioner  in  Writ  Petition 

No.3755 of  2018)  reiterated  and adopted the  arguments  of  learned counsel for 

the  petitioner  in Writ  Petition No.3642 of  2018 but also contended that  since the 

partition  agreement  between the  parties is  not  in  accordance with  law,  hence it 

is  not a  case of valid  partition  but at  best it  could be regarded as  one co-owners 

putting  the  other  co-owners  in  possession with  respect to  the  particular  portion 

of  the  property  and  where  such  is  the  case  there  cannot  be  regarded  a  valid 

tenancy  and  the  appropriate  remedy  for  the  landlords/respondents  No.3  to  6 

would  be  to  file  a  suit  for  possession through  partition.  It  was  submitted  that 

since  the  rent  agreement  is  unregistered,  it  cannot  be  evidence  of  proof  of 

relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant.  It  was  also  submitted  that  the  Court was 

required exclusively to  frame  an issue regarding the  relationship of  landlord and 

tenant  and rendered its finding. 

5. 

Learned counsel for  respondents No.3 to  6,  inter-alia, contended that 

there  is  a  relationship  of  landlord and tenant  inasmuch as  the  execution of  the 

lease  agreement  is  admitted  and  payment  of  rent  is  also  admitted.  It  was 

contended that  where  such is  the  case  the  fact that  the  tenants  are in  exclusive 

possession, a  valid tenancy is  created and the findings  by the  Courts i.e.  the Trial 

Court and the  Appellate Court do  not suffer from  any error  of  law or fact,  in  this 

behalf.  It  was submitted  that  expiry of the  lease  agreement is  a  valid ground in 

light  of  the  recent judgment  of  the  Hon'ble Supreme Court  of  Pakistan. It  was 

also submitted  that  the  instant  petition  is  in the  nature  of  certiorari  and in  view 

of  the  fact  that  where  there  are concurrent findings  of  fact,  this  Court is  not to 

replace findings  on the  fact  rather  is  to  see  whether  there  is  any error of  law or 

of  jurisdiction.  Learned  counsel  further  contended  that  the  partition  does  not 

have to  be  in  writing  or  registered but  could also be verbal  or  otherwise  on  an 

unregistered  document.  Reliance was  placed on  ''Peddu Reddiar  VS  Kothanda 

-5- 

Writ Petition  No.3642 of 20111 
Writ Petition No.3755 of 2018 

Reddi"  (AIR  1966  Mad 419)  and  "Ganu Sasntu  Mhakavekar  VS  Shankar 

Tukaram Chougule" [(1969)  71 BOMLR  165J Reliance was  also  placed  on 

"Waqar Zafar Bakhtawari  VS  Haji MazharHussain Shah and otners."  (PLO 2018 

SC  81),  "Administrator,  Thal Development  through  EACO  Bhakkar and  others 

VS  Ali  Muhammad"  (2012  SCMR  730 ),  "Pakistan Institute  of  International 

Affairs  VS  Naveed Merchant and others" (2012 SCMR 1498). 

6. 

Arguments  advanced by  learned counsel for  the  parties  have  been 

heard and the documents placed on record examined with  their  able assistance. 

7. 

The  facts,  leading  to  filing  of  the  instant  petitions,  have  been 

mentioned hereinabove, therefore,  need not be  reproduced. 

8. 

The  petitioner  and  respondents  No.7  in  reply  to 

the  eviction 

application denied the  relationship between them  and respondents No.3 to  6.  In 

this  behalf, the  denial is  contained in  paragraph 17  of  the  preliminary objections 

in  the following words:- 

"17.  That  the  relationship of  landlord  and 

tenant does not exist in between the parties rather the 

answering respondents are having the possession of 

the whole building as co-sharer, hence petition under 

reply merits dismissal. " 

It  was also alleged in  the  reply that  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No. 7  are co- 

owners/co-sharers and are entitled  to  each and every  inch of  the  joint  property 

unless the same is  partitioned  in  metes and bounds in  accordance with  law. In  so 

far  as  payment  of  rent  is  concerned,  it  was  submitted  that  consideration was 

being  paid to  respondents  No.3 to  6  for  use  of  the  land.  Keeping in  view  the 

referred  stance  of  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No. 7, 

the 

learned  Rent 

Controller framed  seven issues but  no issue was framed  regarding the  denial of 

relationship. In  the  instant  case the  denial of  relationship  has  not  been made in 

-6- 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 20111 
Writ Petition No.3755 of 20111 

rhetorical fashion  rather  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  petitioner  and  respondent 

No. 7  are co-owners in  the  property alongwith  respondents No.3 to  6.  Admittedly 

the  execution of  lease  agreement  has  been admitted  and even  payment of  rent 

is  admitted  though  termed  as  compensation for  use  of  the  land.  It  is  also  an 

admitted  position that  the  partition  agreement  between the  parties  is  admitted, 

whereby  plot,  in  question,  i.e.  Plot No.8 was  divided  into  two  i.e.  Plot  No.Band 

Plot No.8-A, however,  the  sub-division/partition  was  neither  got  approved from 

Capital  Development  Authority;  the  entity  competent  to  partition  a  property 

falling  within  its jurisdiction  where  it  is  permissible. The  said  property  being an 

amenity  plot  for  the  purposes of  a  maternity  center  and  allied  services cannot 

partition  as  per  the  rules  and  regulations  of  Capital  Development  Authority. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.3  to  6  during  the  course  of  arguments 

placed  reliance  on  two  judgments  from  Indian  jurisdiction  to  substantiate  his 

argument  that  a  partition  need not  be  through  a  registered  instrument.  It  was 

observed in  "Ganu Sasntu Mhakavekar  VS  Shankar  Tukaram Chougule" [(1969) 

71BOMLR165]as follows:- 

"8. 

.. 

There  appears  to  be  some 

conflict  between  decision  of  various  High  Courts  in 

India  with  regard to the  question  whether partition  is 

or  is  not  a  transfer  of  property,  and  consequently 

whether  it is governed  by the  Transfer  of Property Act 

or  not.  However, 

the  Bombay  High  Court  has 

consistently  held  in  the  case  of  Waman  v.  Ganpat 

(1985)  37  Bom.  L.R.625  in  the  case  of  Kisansing 

Mohansing  v.  Vishnu  Balkrishna  : AIR  1951Bom4,  in 

the  case  of  Soniram  Raghushet 

v.  Dwarkabai 

: 

AIR1951Bom94,  and  in  the  case of Dayabhai  v.  State 

of Bombay  (1959) 62 Bom.  L.R.  348, that the partition 

is  a  transfer  within  the  meaning  of section  5  of  the 

Transfer  of Property Act.  In  view of the fact  that  our 

High  Court has consistently  taken  this  view, I have no 

hesitation  in coming  to the conclusion  that  a partition 

-7- 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 2018 
Writ Petition No.3755 of 2018 

is a transfer of property within the meaning of Section 

5 of the Transfer of Property Act. 

9. 

That, however, does not  conclude the 

matter. All transfers of property are not required to be 

made  in  writing, for  Section  9  of  the  Transfer of 

Property Act provides that ta transfer of property may 

be  made  without writing in  every case in  which  a 

writing  I  not  expressly  required  by  law.  Unless, 

therefore,  there  is  some  express provision  in  the 

Transfer of Property Act or some other law requiring 

that  a partition must  be  made  in  writing, it  would 

appear that  it  would be made by oral transfer.  The 

Calcutta High Court has taken a  view in the case of 

Gyannessa v.  Mobarakannessa I.L.R.  (1897) 25 Cal. 

210, that where no writing is required by the Act, the 

transfer may be made orally. My  attention has  also 

been drawn to Section 2 of the  Transfer of Property 

Act which provides that nothing contained in the said 

Act shall be deemed to affect any terms or incidents of 

any  contract or  constitution of property which  are 

consistent  with  the  provisions  of  the  Transfer  of 

Property Act  and are allowed by the law for the time 

being in force. In Mulla's Commentary on Transfer of 

Property Act, 5th edn., at pag 0,  it is stated that a right 

of partition  is  an  incident of property held  in joint 

tenancy or tenancy in common which is  not affected 

by the Act by virtue of section 2(&) of the. Transfer of 

Property Act and partition may be made orally. In the 

Calcutta 

case 

reported 

in  Gyannessa 

v. 

Mobarakannssa referred to  above, some  of  the  co  

owners  possessing  an  undivided  share  in  several 

properties took by arrangement a specific property in 

lieu of their shares in all the properties, It  was held 

that the transaction was not an  exchange within the 

meaning of Section 118 of the  Transfer of Property 

Act.  But  the  completed transaction amounted  to  a 

partition which was not required by law to be effected 

by  an  instrument  in  writing.  The  Allahabad  High 

-8- 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 2018 
Writ Petition  No.3755 of 2018 

Court  has  also  held  in  Ram  Kishen  VS  Sheo  Sugar 

[1924) A.I.R.  All  304, that a private partition  could  be 

effected  without  any  written  document.  It  would, 

therefore,  appear  that  a  partition  whether  of joint 

family  property  or  between  co-owners  who  are 

strangers  could be made orally." 

Similarly, in  "Peddu Reddiar  VS  Kothanda Reddi"  (AIR 1966 Mad 419), it  was 

observed as follows:- 

"(9)  The  question  of law,  however,  remains,  whether 

the  arrangement,  by which  items  1  to 4 of A  schedule 

and  one  fourth  share  in  the  well  in  item  6  where 

allotted specifically to Ellappa, is valid in law. Ellappa 

and  Peddu  Reddi  wee  co-owners.  An  oral  partition 

between  co-owners  is  valid  in  law.  Sec.  9  of  the 

Transfer  of  Property  Act  says  that  a  transfer  of 

property  may  be made  without  writing in every case in 

which  a  writing  is  not  exp"essly  required  by  law.  A 

partition  between co-owners it may perhaps  be said to 

involved  a  transfer  of property  because  in  the  specific 

properties  allotted to a particular  co-owner the interest 

which 

the  other  co-owners  had  previous 

to  the 

partition  is given  up  and  to that  extent  it may  be said 

to  be  a  transfer  of  property.  But  the  transfer  of 

Property Act  itself  does not  expressly  required  such  a 

partition 

to  be  in  writing,  and  there  is  no  other 

provision  of  law  requiring  such  a  partition  to  be 

evidenced by writing.  The only Section  in the  Transfer 

of Property Act  which  can possibly  be held  to apply is 

Sec.  118  dealing  with  exchange.  That  runs  thus: 

"When  two persons  mutually  transfer  the  ownership 

of  one  thing  for  the  ownership  of  another,  neither 

thing  or both things  being money  only, the transaction 

is  called  an  "exchange".  A  transfer  of  property  in 

completion  of  an  exchange  can  be  made  only  in 

manner  provided for  the  transfer  of such  property  by 

sale.  S.54  dealing  with  "sale"  of  course  requires  an 

-9- 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 201.8 
Writ Petition  No.3755 of 201.8 

instrument  in  writing  for  sale  of  a  property  worth 

more  than  Rs.100  in  value. Sec.118  was construed  by 

the  Calcutta 

high  Court 

in  Gyannessa 

v. 

Moharakanessa,  (1898),  ILR  25  Cal.21.  There  also 

the  question  involved  was  whether  an  oral  partition 

was  valid.  Both  the  learned  judges  concurred  in 

holding  that  it  was  valid.  Macpherson  J.  gave  the 

following  reason: 

"Assuming 

that  there  was  what  amounted 

to  an 

'exchange'  within  the  words  of  S.118  between  the 

vendor  defendants  and  the  plaintiffi, 

the  undivided 

interest  of the former  in  all the  other properties  being 

exchange for  the  undivided  interest of the  latter in the 

jote,  the  Transfer of Property Act  does not apply to the 

transaction.  The  exchange  was  intended  to  and  did 

effect  a partition.  The  completed  transaction  was the 

partition  by  which  the  parties  held  in  severalty  the 

lands  which  had  been  before  held  in  common.  The 

law  does not  required  a partition  to be effected  by an 

instrument  in  writing, and the  right  of partition  being 

an  incident  of property  held  as  this property  was, the 

right  is  not,  according  to the  second  section,  affected 

by any of the provisions  of the Act.  The Act,  moreover, 

does  not profess  to deal  with partitions  or  the  way in 

which  they are to be effected". 

In  other  words, the  reasoning  of Macpherson  J.  was 

that  in  essence  partition  was  the  transaction  which 

was  effected  and  not  an  exchange.  Ameer  Ali  J. 

expressed himself  thus: 

"S. 118 in my opinion  is not applicable to cases where 

some  of the  co-owners possessing  an  undivided  share 

in  several  properties  take  by  arrangement  a  specific 

property  in  lieu  of their  share  in  all.  Sec.  118,  as  its 

language  shows,  refers  to  cases  where  two  persons 

owning  two specific properties  transfer  of convey their 

respective ownership  one to the other". 

-10- 

Writ P«ition  No.3642  of 2018 
Writ  Petition  No.3755  of 20111 

Though, the  above judgments  categorically hold that  the  partition  need not be  in 

writing  through  a  registered instrument,  however, the  matter  in  the  instant case 

since is  somewhat  different  inasmuch as  the  partition  is  not  permissible under 

the  laws of  Capital Development Authority  inasmuch as  the  plot,  in  question,  is 

an  amenity plot. 

9. 

The  learned  Rent  Controller  as  well  as  the  Appellate  Court  have 

relied  upon the  evidence tendered  in  order  to  come to  the  conclusion that  the 

execution  of  lease agreement  is  admitted  and  the  same  has expired  and  also 

that  rent was being paid, hence the tenancy is  admitted,  however, no finding  has 

been  rendered  on  the  fact  that  whether  the  partition  is  valid,  which  question 

goes to  the  root  of  the  matter  inasmuch as  if the  partition  is  not valid despite a 

clear intention  and  understanding  by the  parties  as  is  borne  out  from  partition 

agreement  as  well  as  the  lease  agreement,  a  status  of  the  petitioner  and 

respondent No.7 would  be  or that  of  the  co-owners, however, to  the  contrary if 

the  partition  is  valid the  petitioner  and respondent No. 7  would  be tenants  under 

respondents No.3 to  6.Where the  case  is  that  a  tenant  becomes a  co-owner  in 

that  eventuality  and  eviction  application  against  the  said 

tenant 

is  not 

maintainable in  light  of  the  dictum  of  the  Hon'ble Supreme Court of  Pakistan in 

case  reported as  "Mst  Sanobar Sultan VS  ObaidUllah Khan" (PLO 2009 SC 71), 

however, the  Hon'ble Supreme Court of  Pakistan in  case titled  ''Haji Abdullah Jan 

VS  Anwar  Khan"  (PLO  2000  SC  787)  observed 

that  after  private 

settlement/partition  of  said property the applicant or any other  co-owner or all of 

them  may  if  so  advised file  fresh  eviction  application  against the  tenant  clearly 

stating his/ their  requirements for  personal bona fide need, meaning thereby that 

the  august  Apex  Court  acknowledged the  private  partition  of  the  property.  In 

"Tufail and  others  VS  Aurangzeb and  others"  (2015  CLC 1682), the  Hon'ble 

-11- 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 2018 
Writ Petition No.3755 of 2018 

Peshawar High Court observed that  a  co-sharer cannot seek eviction of the other 

co-sharers without  partition  of the joint  property. 

10. 

In  view  of  the  above  position  of  law  and  facts,  the  sole  question 

which emerges before this Court was the effect of  non-framing  of a  specific issue 

relied regarding denial  of  relationship and  the  effect  of  partition  of  the  property 

and execution  of  the  lease  agreement. As  noted  above,  in  the  instant  case,  the 

denial of  relationship  is  not  based  on  the  title  of  the  landlord or  is  a  stereotype 

denial, which  is  found  common in  most of  the  cases  but  rather  is  based  on  the 

fact  that  the  parties  are  co-owners in  the  Plot  No.  8,  F-10  Markaz, Islamabad. 

There  is  a  partition  agreement  duly  executed which  is  not  registered,  however, 

the same is  not approved by Capital Development Authority. 

11. 

The  instant  petition  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  is  in  the 

nature of  certiorari,  whereby  orders/judgments  of  Rent Controller and Appellate 

Court  have been  challenged on  the  grounds  of  patent  illegality  and/or  error  of 

jurisdiction.  In  such  petitions,  this  Court  ought  not  give  finding  of  fact  or  on 

mixed question of  law or fact  and also should not  replace the  findings  of fact  of 

the  fora  whose  orders  have  been  challenged. As  noted  above,  both  the  Rent 

Controller and the Appellate Court have not rendered any finding  on  the question 

of  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between  petitioner  and  respondent  No. 7 

and  respondents  No.3  to  6  in 

light  of  the  validity  or  invalidity  of  partition 

agreement.  The  Rent  Controller  also  did  not  frame  any  issue  regarding  the 

relationship. 

12. 

In  view  of  the  situation,  it  would  be  appropriate  that  the  learned 

Rent  Controller  should  hand  down  a  finding  on  relationship  between  parties 

keeping  in  view  the  effect  of  partition  agreement,  if  any.  This  Court  in 

''Muhammad Akbar  Chohan  VS  Rent  Controller,  Islamabad"  (2017  MLD 53) 

-12- 

Writ Petition No.3642 of 2018 
Writ Petition No.3755 of 2018 

held that  not  in  every  case the  Rent Controller  has  to  frame  issues and call  for 

evidence as  under  Islamabad  Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001  an  inquiry  is  to 

be  made  about  the  state  of  affairs,  but  a  finding  is  to  be  rendered  regarding 

controversy before it. 

13. 

For the  above  reasons, the  instant  petition  as  well  as  Writ  Petition 

No.3755 of  2018 are allowed and impugned judgments  by the  Appellate Court 

and  Rent  Controller  dated  26.07.2018  and  08.03.2018  are  set-aside; 

consequently, eviction application filed  by respondents No.3 to  6  shall be  decided 

afresh  after  framing  issue on  relationship  between  parties.  In  this  behalf,  the 

parties shall  rely  on  evidence already tendered  or  may  lead additional  evidence 

with  leave of  learned  Rent  Controller.  Since  matter  is  pending  since  long,  the 

same shall be decided within  six (06)  weeks from  the  date of this judgment.  The 

learned Rent Controller shall not  be  prejudiced by any observation  made by this 

Court hereinabove, on the  merits of the case. 

(AAMER  FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in Open  Court this 16th day of January.  2020. 

*M. Zaheer Janjua* 

JUDGE 

