Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.371 of 2021 

Nasreen Akhtar and 03 others 
VS
Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad and others  

S. No. of order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary. 

  11.          30.05.2022.  Mr. Ashiq Hussain Tarar and Ms. Ayesha  

Malik, Advocates for petitioner. 
 Mrs. Shireen Imran, Advocate for 
 respondents.  

The  petitioners  have  impugned  (i)  the 

judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  court  dated  12.11.2019,  and  (ii) 

the judgment and decree passed by the learned 

Additional  District  Judge  dated  27.10.2020, 

pursuant  to  which  the  learned  trial  Court  and 

the  learned  Appellate  Court  determined  the 

maintenance  payable  by  respondent  No.3  to 

the  petitioner  No.1  for  petitioners  2,  3  and  4 

and  determined  the  entitlement  of  petitioner 

No.1 to recover dowry articles. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  No.1 

submitted 

that 

the  petitioner  No.1  was 

aggrieved  by  the  impugned  judgments  and 

decrees  on 

two  counts.  One, 

that 

the 

maintenance  in  the  amount  of  Rs.12,000/-  for 

each child was insufficient in view of the means 

of respondent No.3 and ought to be enhanced. 

And  two,  the  learned  Additional  District  Court 

erred  when  it  reversed  the  judgment  and 

 
 
 
 
 
2 | P a g e    

W.P. No.371/2021 

decree of the learned Family court to the extent 

of  petitioner  No.1’s  entitlement  to  recover  a 

necklace  and  two  earrings  from  respondent 

No.3.  Learned  counsel 

for 

the  petitioner 

submitted  that  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court 

had correctly appreciated the evidence adduced 

before  him  and  held  that  respondent  No.3  had 

acknowledged  the  receipt  of  jewelry,  including 

a  necklace  and  earrings  as  part  of  dowry 

articles.  And  consequently  to  such  extent  the 

claim  of  petitioner  No.1  to  receive  the  same 

from  respondent  No.3  was  established.  Thus 

the  learned  Additional  District  Court  had  erred 

in  holding  that  petitioner  No.1  had  failed  to 

discharge  the  onus  to  prove  that  the  necklace 

and two earrings had been kept by respondent 

No.3  and  had  not  been  returned  to  petitioner 

No.1. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3 

supported  the  impugned  judgment  passed  by 

the learned Additional District Court.   

4. 

Perusal  of  the  judgment  of  the  learned 

Judge Family Court reflects that the entitlement 

of  petitioner  No.1  to  receive  the  necklace  and 

the earrings as pieces of jewelry was based on 

respondent  No.3’s  admission  that  the  said 

items 

formed  part  of  the  dowry  articles 

received  by  respondent  No.3  from  the  parents 

 
3 | P a g e    

W.P. No.371/2021 

of  petitioner  No.1.  And  that  respondent  No.3 

had  failed  to  lead  evidence  to  establish  that 

such  articles  had  been  returned  to  petitioner 

No.1. The  learned Additional District Court  had 

reversed  this  finding  by  holding  that  in  the 

admission  made  by  respondent  No.3  it  had 

been stated that the jewelry in question (i.e. a 

necklace  and  two  earrings)  had  been  handed 

over  to  petitioner  No.1  when  she  rejoined 

respondent  No.3  in  GIK  and  these  items  were 

not  returned  to  petitioner  No.1’s  family  along 

with other dowry articles as petitioner No.1 was 

wearing  these  jewelry  articles.  The  learned 

Additional District Court found that the onus to 

establish that the articles had been retained by 

respondent  No.3  while  the  remaining  dowry 

articles  were  returned  was  on  petitioner  No.1 

who  had  failed  to  discharge  the  onus  and  that 

she had adduced no evidence in support of her 

claim.  

5. 

This  court 

finds 

that 

the 

learned 

Additional  District  Court 

had 

correctly 

appreciated  the  evidence  and  corrected  an 

error made by the learned Judge Family Court. 

The  finding  of  the  learned  Judgment  Family 

Court in relation to the jewelry items was based 

on  the  admission  of  respondent  No.3.  But 

within  such  admission,  respondent  No.3  had 

 
4 | P a g e    

W.P. No.371/2021 

also  claimed  that  the  jewelry  articles  were  in 

the  possession  of  petitioner  No.1  and  not  with 

respondent  No.3.  It  was  therefore  not  for  the 

learned Judge Family Court to partly accept the 

statement of respondent No.3 in relation to the 

jewelry  items  having  been  received  as  part  of 

dowry  and  disregard 

the  statement  of 

respondent No.3 to the extent that he asserted 

that  the  said  jewelry  articles  had  been  handed 

back  to  petitioner  No.1.  As  the  finding  was 

based on an admission by respondent No.3, the 

entire  statement  ought  to  have  been  accepted 

or  rejected by the  learned Judge  Family Court, 

which  was  not  done.  And  to  such  extent  the 

findings  of  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court 

suffered 

from 

infirmity,  which  had  been 

corrected  by  the  learned  Additional  District 

Court.  

6. 

On  the 

issue  of  maintenance,  after 

appraising  the  evidence  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court  determined  that  the  petitioner 

was  entitled  to  receive  maintenance  in  the 

amount  of  Rs.12,000/-  for  each  of  the  three 

children  (i.e.  petitioners  No.2,  3  and  4).  The 

learned  Additional  District  Court  reviewed  the 

evidence adduced and confirmed the amount of 

maintenance  allowance  granted  by  the  learned 

judge  Family  Court.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

 
5 | P a g e    

W.P. No.371/2021 

petitioners  has  failed  to  point  out  any  infirmity 

or  illegality  in  the  manner  in  which  the 

evidence  had  been  appreciated  by  the  learned 

trial  Court  and  the  learned  Appellate  Court. 

This Court is not convinced that there is reason 

to  exercise  its  extra  ordinary  constitutional 

jurisdiction  to  interfere  with  the  maintenance 

fixed by the learned trial Court and the learned 

Appellate  Court  in  their  concurrent  findings.  It 

is  settled  law  that  in  constitutional  jurisdiction 

this  Court  cannot  second  guess  the  judgment 

exercised by the Family Court after appraisal of 

evidence so  long as such exercise of discretion 

does not suffer from any illegality.  

7. 

For  the  aforementioned  reasons,  this 

petition is without merit and is dismissed.  

*M.A. Raza* 

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
