ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P.  No.205712019
Umer Zaman
VS
Saima Masood and others

S. No. oforder
/ proceedinos

Date of order/
Proceedinqs
27.05.2019  Mr. Wasi Ullah Khan Surrani, Advocate  for the

Order  with signature of Judge  and that  of parties or counsel
where  necessarv.

petitioner.

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner,  Umer Zaman, impugns the order dated
04.O2.2O19, passed by the learned Judge  Family

Court,  lslamabad,  whereby  Rs.10,000/-  was fixed
as interim  maintenance for his two minor
daughters, who are presently in the custody of
their mother.
2.  Learned counsel for  the  petitioner
subffid  that although the petitioner's salary  is
Rs.1ffi,OOor- per month, he has to support  his
second wife and chitdren  as wetl as other family
members;  and that Rs.10,000/-  per month  as
interim maintenance  for  each of  his two
daughters is most exorbitant  and beyond  the
petitioner's financial  means. Learned counse! for
the petitioner  prayed for the writ petition to be
allowed  in terms of relief sought therein.
3. 
I have heard  the contentions of the learned
counsel for the petitioner and have perused the
record with his able assistance.
4.  Since the impugned  order dated  O4.O2.2O19
is an interlocutory order, I am not inclined to go
into the merits of the case lest it may prejudice  the
petitioner's  case during  the trial.
5.  As Section 14(3) of the West Pakistan Family
Courts  Act, 1964, expressly  bars a right of appeal
or revision  against an interim order passed by a

)

W.P.  No.205712019

Family Court, the same cannot be circumvented
by challenging such an interim order in the
Constitutional  jurisdiction of the High Court' A
party aggrieved  by such an interim order has to
wait until a Family court passes  a final order and
then to challenge it in an appeal.  This is because
an interim order merges  into the final verdict. The
purpose behind barring an appeal or a revision
against an interim  order of the Family court is to
avoid delays in disposal  of the cases by the Family
Court. Since the suit instituted by respondent  No'1
is for recovery of maintenance, etc., the final
decree that may be passed  by the learned Judge'
Family court would be appealable under section
14 of the West Pakistan  Family Courts Act, 1964'
Reference in this regard may be made to the
following case law:-
(i) 

ln the case ol Syed  Saghir Ahmad Naqvi  VS'
Province of Sindh (1996 SCMR  1165)' it has
been held as follows:-

oThe statute  excluding  a right of appeal
from the interim order cannot be passed
by bringing under attack such interim
orders in Constitutional  iurisdiction'  The
party affected has to wait till it matures
-into- 
a final order and then to attack it in
the proper  exclusive forum created  for the
purpose of examining  such orders"'

(ii)  ln the case Mumtaz Hussain  alias Butta VS'
Chief Administrator  of Augaf, Puniab (1976
SCMR 450), it has been held as follows:-

'As the said Ordinance  has taken  away
the right of petitioner to interim reliet
learned  counsel submitted that this was a
ground which entitled the petitioner  to
prosecute a writ petition despite the
pendencY  of the Proceedings on the
District Court. The argument  is
misconceived because the  writ
iurisdiction  of the superior Courts cannot
be invoked in aid of iniustice and in order
to defeat the express provisions  of the
statutory law."

3

W.P.  No.2057/2019

(iii)  ln the case of Mst. Maham Shabbir  VS
Salman  Haider (2014 CLC 330), the Hon'ble

lslamabad High Court held as follows:-

o9. ... High Court in exercise  of its writ
jurisdiction is not sitting as a Court of
appeal,  or  court of  revision. lts
jurisdiction  to interfere on the point of fact
is limited. lnterlocutory  order if does not
suffer from any illegality,  malafide  or is
not in excess of jurisdiction or lack of
exercise  of jurisdiction  or not based on
misreading,  misconstruing  or discarding
of the evidence  and material on record
cannot be challenged  in constitutional
jurisdiction.  Nevertheless,  the facts of
each case are  to  be  considered
separately  and no uniform principle can
be determined  for exercising the writ
jurisdiction."

6. 
!t is my view that exceptional circumstances
which could justify  invoking  the jurisdiction  of the
High Court under Article  199 of the Constitution
would be when the order or action assailed was
palpably without jurisdiction, malafide,  void or
*o.-n$iuairc  The order impugned  in this
petition is clearly  interlocutory  in nature  and does
not dispose of the entire case before  the Family
Court.  The impugned order is neither  without
jurisdiction nor malafide, void or coram-non-
judice so as to warrant interference in the
Constitutional  jurisdiction  of this Court under
Article  199 of the Constitution.
7.  The order dated  O4.O2.2O19 being  purely
interlocutory in nature  could not be subjected to
chatlenge  by filing a Constitutional petition  before
this Court as it would amount to defeating the
legislative intent behind  Section 14(3) of the West
Pakistan Family Courts  Act, 1964. Therefore, I am
not inclined to interfere  in the said interlocutory
order passed  by the learned Judge,  Family Court.
8.  Since I do not find the pre-requisites for
interference  in the Constitutional  jurisdiction  of

4

W.P.  No.2O57l2019

this Court with the impugned  order dated
O4.O2.2O19  to be satisfied in the case at hand,  the
instant writ  petition is  dismissed as  not
maintainable. The petitioner  will be at liberty to
challenge  the said order dated O4.O2.2019 in an
appeal against the final order passed by the
learned  Judge,  Family Court, af the occasion
arises for doing so. There shall be no order as to

costs.

St lt tf

(iilAN

HASSA
JUDGE

