ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P  No. 201 of 2022 

Zaheer Abbas  

VS
Mst. Yasmin Bibi, etc 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of 
parties or counsel where necessary.  

                              20.01.2022.  Syed Tahir Abbas, Advocate for the Petitioner. 

Through the instant petition, the Petitioner 

has  assailed  judgment  dated  29.11.2021  passed 

by  learned  Additional  District  Judge-I,  East-

Islamabad,  whereby  appeal  against  ex-parte 

judgment & Decree, dated 07.11.2019, passed by 

learned  Senior  Civil  Judge-III,  East-Islamabad 

has been dismissed.  

2. 

Learned  counsel  has,  inter-alia,  contended 

that  the  impugned  orders  have  been  passed  on 

the basis of misreading and non-reading; that the 

impugned  judgments  are  based  on  conjectures 

and  surmises;  that  the  impugned  judgments  are 

liable to be set to give a chance of fair trial to the 

Petitioner.  

3. 

4. 

 Arguments heard. Record perused.  

Upon  inquiry,  learned  counsel  for  the 

Petitioner  has  admitted  that  address  of  the 

Petitioner,  as  given 

in  the  proceedings/suit 

pending  before  the  learned  Family  Court,  is 

indeed  correct.  Learned  counsel  has  also 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
2 | W . P   N o .   2 0 1 / 2 0 2 2  

confirmed  that  the  publication  was  made  in  the 

suit.  Furthermore  it  is  also  admitted  that  the 

Petitioner actually entered appearance before the 

learned  trial  Court  on  one  date  but  thereafter 

remained  absent  and  ex-parte  judgment  and 

decree was passed.  

5. 

Perusal  of  the  impugned  judgment  dated 

29.11.2021  shows  that  the  Petitioner/Appellant 

was in knowledge about pendency of the suit and 

himself  requested  for  adjournment  for  engaging 

his  counsel  as  well  as  for  submission  of  written 

statement.  Relevant  portion  of  the  impugned 

judgment for is also reproduced hereunder:- 

9. 

……….the 

learned  Trial  Court 

issued 

summon, which was duly served on 22.07.2019 

and  his  signatures  had  also  been  obtained  on 

back  of  summon.  On  23.07.2019,  present 

Petitioner put his appearance before the learned 

Trial  Court  and  his  signatures  with  thumb 

impression  have  also  been  obtained  on  the 

margin of order sheet. Thereafter, the case was 

adjourned  to  16.09.2019  for  submission  of 

wakalatnama  as  well  as  written  statement, 

however,  on  next  date  i.e  16.09.2019,  despite 

repeated calls, present Petitioner did not appear 

before 

the  Court  and  resultantly,  ex-parte 

proceedings  were  initiated  against  him.  Order 

sheet  of  learned  Trail  Court  clearly  depicts  that 

present  appellant  was  in  well  knowledge  about 

pendency  of  suit  and  he  himself  requested  for 

an adjournment for engaging his counsel as well 

as  for  submission  of  written  statement  and  the 

learned  trial  Court  Adjourned  the  case  on  the 

request  of  present  Petitioner.  However,  on  next 

date,  the  present  Petitioner  malafidely  did  not 

appear before the Court.”. 

 
 
3 | W . P   N o .   2 0 1 / 2 0 2 2  

It  is  pertinent  to  mention  that  the  above  said 

facts  mentioned  in  the  impugned  judgment  have 

not been controverted by the learned counsel for 

the Petitioner. 

6. 

In  the  above  circumstances  and  candid 

admission  made  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Petitioner before this Court, it is crystal clear that 

impugned  judgments  do  not  suffer  from  any 

illegality  or 

irregularity  and  warrants  no 

interference  of  this  Court  in  exercise  of  its 

constitutional  Jurisdiction.  Hence  the  petition  in 

hand stands dismissed in limine.  

sherazi 

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
   JUDGE 

 
         
  
 
   
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
