Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No. 2625 of 2021 

Muhammad Touseeq Danial Bhatti 
VS 
Ms Ayesha Naeem, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  
01) 

Date of order/ 
proceedings  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

19-07-2021.  Mr  Khurram  Mahmood  Qureshi  Advocate,  for  the 

petitioner.  

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  C.J.-  Muhammad  Touseeq 

Danial  Bhatti  son  of  Muhammad  Shafique  Bhatti  [hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  “Petitioner”]  has  invoked  the  jurisdiction 

of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  [hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  “Constitution”]  assailing  judgments  and  decrees,  dated 

27.04.2021  and  17.12.2020,  rendered  by  the 

learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  (East)  Islamabad  and  the  learned 

Family Court, (East) Islamabad, respectively.  

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  Ms  Ayesha  Naeem 

daughter  of  Naeem  Akhtar  [hereinafter  referred  to  as 

“Respondent  no.  1”]  filed  a  suit  on  15.01.2019,  seeking 

recovery  of  maintenance  and  dowry  articles.  The  Petitioner 

and Respondent no. 1 had entered into a marriage contract on 

26.07.2014.  During  subsistence  of  the  marriage  the  parties 

were  blessed  with  a  daughter  namely,  Malaika  [hereinafter 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Page - 2 
W.P. No.2625/2021. 

referred to as the “Minor”]. The marital disputes between the 

parties  led  to  dissolution  of  marriage.  The  suit  was  filed  by 

Respondent    no. 1 and it was contested by the Petitioner by 

filing written statement. Out of the divergent pleadings of the 

parties, 

the 

learned  Family  Court  vide  order,  dated 

01.10.2020,  framed  four  issues.  After  recording  of  evidence 

and affording an opportunity of hearing to the parties, the suit 

was  partially  decreed  in  favour  of  Respondent  no.  1.  The 

learned  Family  Court  determined  an  amount  of  Rs.30,000/- 

(rupees  thirty  thousand)  per  month  as  maintenance  of  the 

Minor alongwith 10% annual increase. The Petitioner preferred 

an  appeal  and  it  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Additional 

District Judge, (East) Islamabad.  

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  been 

heard  at  length.  He  has  mainly  argued  that  the  latter  is 

unemployed and, therefore, he is not in a position to pay the 

decreed maintenance amount. The learned counsel has further 

contended that the learned courts have misread the evidence. 

He has argued that the business of running a ‘tea/refreshment 

stall’  does  not  generate  sufficient  income.  The  petitioner 

admits  his  liability  regarding  the  Minor  but  the  amount 

determined by the learned Family Court is beyond his financial 

capacity.  

4. 

The  learned  counsel  has  been  heard  and  the 

record perused with his able assistance.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.2625/2021. 

5. 

The  Petitioner  has  invoked  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  assailing  concurrent  findings  of  two 

competent courts. The judgments rendered by both the courts 

are  well  reasoned  and  do  not  suffer  from  any  legal  infirmity. 

While  exercising 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution,  this  Court  cannot  reappraise  the  evidence  nor 

substitute  the  opinion  formed  by  a  competent  court.  The 

ground  of  jurisdictional  error  has  not  been  raised.  This  Court 

has  no  reason  to  interfere  with  the  well-reasoned  concurrent 

findings.  

6. 

The  petition  is,  therefore,  without  merit  and 

accordingly dismissed in limine.  

Tanveer  Ahmed/* 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
