ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISI.AMABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLATI'IABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTi,IENT
W.P.No.431 of 2019
Shehnaz Akhter  Zahoor  Ahmed
VS
The learned Additional District Judge-lV  East-lslamabad and another

S. No. of order/
proceedings

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel
Date of order/
proceedinqs
where  necessary.
Nlaz Awan, Advocate for the
29.O9.2O2O Ms. Kashlfa

peUtloner,
Mr. Muhammad  Aslam
respondent  No.2

ChlshU, Advocate for

Through the instant writ petition,  the
petitioner,  Shehnaz Akhter Zahoor Ahmed,
impugns  the judgment dated 11.12.2018 passed
by the Court of the learned Additional  District
Judge,  lslamabad,  whereby the appeal  filed by
respondent No.2 (Muhammad  Aslam Chattha)
against the judgment and decree  dated
28.04.2018 passed by the Court of the learned
Judge  Family Court,  lslamabad,  was partially
allowed and the said judgment  and decree dated
28.04.2018 was modified to the extent that the
petitioner was held entitled for maintenance from
the date of the institution  of the suit and not from
June 2004. The learned Family Court had held
that the petitioner  was entitled  to the payment of
maintenance  from June 2OO4.
2.  The petitioner and respondent No.2 got
married on 14.07.2002.  On 11.O5.2O17, the
petitioner filed a suit for recovery of maintenance
before  the learned  Family  Court at lslamabad.
Vide judgment and decree dated 28.04.2018,  the
learned Family Court decreed  the petitioner's  suit
and held that she was entitled  to the payment of
maintenance  allowance at the rate of Rs.10,000/-
per month from June 2OO4 till the subsistence of
the marriage. Furthermore,  it was held that the

2

W.P.No.43112019

maintenance allowance  would be liable to an
increase by 15% Per annum.
3.  Respondent No.2 preferred an appeal
against  the said judgment  and decree  passed  by
the learned Family Court. Vide judgment dated
1'l .12.2018,  the said appeal was partially  allowed
and it was held that the petitioner  would be
entitled to maintenance  with effect  from the date
of the institution of the suit. The said judgment
has been assailed  by the petitioner in the instant
writ petition.
4.  Learned  counsel  for the petitioner, after
narrating the facts leading to the filing of the
instant petition, submitted  that the marriage
between  the petitioner and respondent  No.2 had
not been dissolved  when the suit for maintenance
was filed; that the sole ground  on which the
learned Appellate Court modified the well-
reasoned  judgment of the learned Family Court
was that the petitioner and respondent No.2 had
gone on a trip to Kaghan and Naran in August
20,,|.6  and that from time to time the petitioner had
used respondent No.2's  vehicle; that respondent
No.2 was not absolved  from his responsibility  to
pay maintenance  to the petitioner even if it is
assumed that the couple were happily living
together; and that the learned Appellate Court
erred by not appreciating  that respondent  No.2,
in his cross-examination,  had admitted that in the
entire period, he had not paid for the petitioner's
costs of living. Learned counsel  for the petitioner
prayed for the writ petition to be allowed  in terms

of the relief sought therein.
5.  On the other hand, learned  counsel for
respondent No.2 submitted that for the issuance
of a writ of  certiorari there has to be a
jurisdictional  irregularity or a patent  error in the

3

W.P.No.43112019

judgment;  that it was not disputed that the
learned Appellate Court had the jurisdiction  to
entertain an appeal against the judgment and
decree  passed  by the learned Family Court; that
respondent  No.2 paid maintenance  to  the
petitioner up to O1.O4.2O17  when the relations
between the couple were cordial;  that for the
period  beyond O'1.04.20'17, respondent  No.2 is
ready to pay maintenance  to the petitioner; that
during the execution proceedings,  the petitioner
had refused to accept maintenance for the period
beyond  01.04.2017i  and that since the contesting
parties  had gone on a trip to Kaghan  and Naran  in
August 2016,  this shows that their relations  were
conviviat and that there was no dispute regarding
the payment of maintenance  by respondent No.2
to the petitioner.  Learned counsel for respondent
No.2 prayed  for the writ petition to be dismissed.
6. 
I have heard the contentions  of the learned
counsel for the contesting  parties and have
perused  the record with their able assistance.
7.  The sole ground  on which the learned
Appellate Court modified the judgment  and
decree dated  28.O4.2O18 passed by the learned
Judge Family  Court was that the petitioner and
respondent  No.2 had gone on a trip to Kaghan
and Naran in August  20,,|.6  and that respondent
No.2's car had been in the use of the petitioner.
The learned Appellate Court proceeded on the
assumption that if  the relations between a
married couple  are cordial, the claim for the
payment  of maintenance made by a wife cannot
be altowed. This is not in consonance  with the
law. A husband is not relieved  of his obligation  to
pay maintenance to his wife whether the relations
between  them are strained  or not. lt is only in
cases where a wife willfully deserts  her husband

4

W.P.No.43112019

c+q 

"5 r- "+s 

or fails to perform  her marital  duties without  any
lawful excuse, she will lose the right to claim
maintenance. The evidence  on the record does
not show such desertion on the part of the
petitioner.
8.  Respondent  No.2 had appeared before the
learned  Family  Court as DW.1 and in his cross-
examination he had deposed inter alia as follows:-
*  cElt d  rp..,l. \;g* z-)G S 
" d .#;  .,,(itrt 
"5 
9.  The said testimony appears to  have
escaped  the attention  of the learned Appellate
Gourt while modifying  the judgment and decree
passed  by the learned Family Court. !n view of the
said tacit admission by respondent  No.2 that
maintenance had not been paid to the petitioner,  I
am of the view that the impugned  appellate
judgment  dated 11.'12.2018 suffers  from
misreading  and non-reading  of evidence,  which is
enough to justify interference  with the said
judgment  in the Constitutional  jurisdiction  of this

-1dr^'r-,;J '^'t'r
cit;lJil )lt;il

Court.
10. !n view of the above, the instant writ petition
is allowed; the impugned appellate judgment
dated 11.12.2018 is set-aside and the judgment
and decree dated 28.04.2018  passed by the
learned Judge Family Court is restored.  There
shall  be no order as to costs.

Sulttn'

(irtlANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB)
JUDGE

