ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.   : 

 W.P. NO.3272-2016 

Maemona Azhar etc. 
VS    
Capital Development Authority through its Chairman etc. 

Petitioners by         :  Ms.  Natalya  Kamal,  Dr.  G.M.  Chaudhry,  Raja 
Muhammad Shafait Abbasi, Awais Haider Malik, Mir 
Afzal Malik, Zohaib Hassan Gondal, Syed Kazim Raza 
Naqvi,  Mr.  Safraz  Hussain,  Mr.  Rashid  Hafeez,  Mr. 
Shafiq-ur-Rehman  Dab,  Malik  Huzaifa,  Mr.  Zia  ul 
Haq,  Mr.  Khurram  Ibrahim  Baig,  Advocates  for 
petitioners in their respective writ petitions.     

Respondents by     :  M/s  Shaharyar Tariq,  Ch.  Haseeb  Muhammad  (L.A.), 
CDA,  Muhammad  Taimoor  Khan,  Mushtaq  Ahmed 
Awan,  Muhammad  Akram  Shaheen,  Syed  Ghulam 
Mustafa,  G.  Shabbir  Akbar,  Jam  Mati  Ullah  Bobra, 
Uzma Aslam Mughal, Zafar Hussain Ahmed, Khurram 
Mehmood  Qureshi,  Faisal  Bin  Khurshid,  Ch. 
Muhammad  Asif  Khan,  Ch.  Aziz  ur  Rehman  Zia, 
Surriya  Marriam  Khaleeq,  Amir  Latif  Gill,  Wasim 
Abid, Husnain Haider Thaheem, Ms. Mahnoor, Sajida 
Khanum,  Babar  Saeed  Butt,  Sajid  Mehmood  Abbasi, 
Naveed  Akhtar  Joiya  and  Kalsoom  Rafique,  Ms. 
Hadiya  Tayyaba,  Syed  Masood  Hussain,  Muhammad 
Anwar  Dar,  Samar  Anwar  Dar,  Mian  Haseeb    Ali 
Bhatti,  UsmanAhmad  Ranjha,  M.  Naeem  Siddique 
Bhatti,  Muhammad  Akhtar  Awan,    Ms.  Mehwish 
Riffat, Faisal Nawaz Advocates for respondents.  
Nisar Ali Shah,  D.D. (BCS), CDA 

Assisted by:  

Ms. Maheen Zeeshan (Law Clerk) 

Date of hearing     : 

24.11.2023 

AAMER FAROOQ C.J.  Through 

this 

judgment, 

the  petitions 

mentioned in Schedules-A and B, shall be decided as common questions of law and 

facts are involved.  

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  the  Petitioners  in  most  of  the  petitions  are 

running  hostels/shared  student  accommodations  in  the  residential  areas  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

2 

Islamabad  which  are  controlled  and  regulated  by  the  Respondent  Authority  i.e. 

Capital  Development  Authority  (CDA).  In  some  of  the  petitions,  the  Petitioners 

are requesting for directions from this Court to the Respondent Authority to take 

action  against  owners/operators  of  such  hostels/shared  student  accommodations 

in  residential  areas  of  Islamabad.  In  the  other  set  of  cases,  the  Respondent 

Authority has either served notices for discontinuation of the non-conforming use 

by  the  Petitioners,  or  has  initiated  action  by  imposition  of  penalties  including 

imposing fine and even sealing of the premises. The Petitioners being aggrieved of 

the  actions  of  CDA  have  challenged  the  notices  issued,  and  have  challenged  the 

vires  of  Islamabad  Residential  Sectors  Zoning  (Building  Controlled  Regulations), 

2005  (“the  2005  Regulations”)  (as  listed  in  Schedule-A)  and  the  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory  Residential  Sectors  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulations, 

2020 (“the 2020 Regulations”) (as listed in Schedule-B).  

3.  The  Petitioners 

submit 

that 

they  are  providing 

shared 

student 

accommodation/hostels  facilities  and  as  such  the  students  are  using  these 

premises  as  places  of  residence  as  shared  households.  The  Petitioners  argue  that 

they are not engaging in any commercial activity and are only using the premises 

for  residential  purposes.  It  has  also  been  argued  that  their  rights  to  life,  liberty, 

freedom  of  trade  and  right  to  hold  property  are  being  violated  and  as  such  the 

rights guaranteed under Articles 18, 10A, 23, and 24 of the Constitution are being 

infringed. The Petitioners have also claimed that there is no specific prohibition in 

law  against  operating  hostels  in  residential  areas.  They  argue  that  “non-

conforming use” has not been defined by the CDA Ordinance, 1960, while the term 

“building” as defined under section 2(d) of the Ordinance has been given too wide 

a definition which cannot be whittled down through Regulations. The Petitioners 

point out the difference between “commercial activity” and “commercial use”, and 

have  argued  that  using  a  residential  building  as  shared  accommodation/hostel  is 

different  from  using  the  same  as  a  school,  hospital,  restaurant,  office,  etc.  The 

Petitioners  claim  that  using  residential  buildings  as  hostels  does  not  change  the 

residential character of the building and thus does not fall under the definition of 

“non-conforming  use”.  Furthermore,  the  Petitioners  have  challenged  the  2005 

Regulations as well as the 2020 Regulations for being ultra vires the Constitution, 

 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

3 

specifically Articles 18, 23 and 24. They state that classification of use of premises 

can  only  be  created  by  the  legislature  and  that  in  this  case  there  is  no  parent 

legislation  permitting  such  classification.  The  Petitioners  have  also  called  into 

question the competence of CDA to create a prohibition through Regulations. 

4.  

The  Respondent  Authority  (CDA)  submits  that  in  all  the  connected 

petitions,  the  plots  in  question  are  in  the  nature  of  „Residential  Houses‟  and  as 

such  can  only  be  used  for  residential  purposes.  The  use  of  residential  houses  as 

shared  accommodation/hostels 

is  non-conforming  use  under  the  relevant 

Regulations  and  as  such  the  Petitioners  are  liable  to  the  penalty  provided  under 

law.  The  Respondent  Authority  has  placed  reliance  on,  inter  alia, Col.(R) Javed 

Agha and 31 others VS Arshad Mahmud and 4 others[2017  MLD  627 

Islamabad], Mrs. Shamshad Butt VS Deputy Commissioner CDA, Islamabad 

and 3 others[2023 CLC 304 Islamabad]. 

5.  

Arguments by all parties have been heard at length and record perused.  

6. 

At  this  juncture,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  petitions  challenging  the 

vires of the 2005 Regulations, as listed in Schedule-A, have become infructuous for 

two reasons; firstly, this Court has already decided the question of vires of the 2005 

Regulations in its judgment in the case of Col.(R) Javed Agha and 31 others VS 

Arshad Mahmud and 4 others  dated  22.09.2016,  reported  as  2017  MLD  627 

Islamabad, and, secondly, the 2005 Regulations stand repealed by virtue of clause 

5.8(i) of the 2020 Regulations which reads as follows: 

“5.8   REPEAL AND SAVINGS  

Following Regulation is hereby repealed:  

i. Islamabad Residential Sectors Zoning (Building Control) Regulation 2005 is hereby repealed” 

7.  

In  the  petitions  listed  in  Schedule-B,  the  Petitioners  have  challenged  the 

actions  taken  under,  and  the  vires  of,  the  2020  Regulations;  and,  have  also 

questioned  competence  of  CDA  to  classify  use  of  property.  Each  of  these 

challenges will be discussed in sequence. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

4 

8. 

Under section 49C of the CDA Ordinance, if any premises are being used in 

contravention  of  the  Ordinance  or  Regulations,  the  Authority  is  empowered  to 

require the user of such premises to desist from unauthorized use by an order in 

writing. If such order is not complied with, the Authority may, after providing an 

opportunity  to  be  heard  to  such  user,  remove,  demolish  or  alter  the  premises,  or 

alternatively, may stop the use of the land and may use such force including police 

force as is necessary. The Authority is also entitled to recover the cost thereof from 

the person responsible for such use. The said provision is reproduced hereunder: 

“49C. Removal of building, etc., erected or used in contravention of this Ordinance.- 
(1)If  any  building,  structure,  work  or  land  is  erected,  constructed  or  used  in  contravention  of  the 
provisions  of  this  Ordinance  or  of  any  rule,  regulation  or  order  made  thereunder,  the  Deputy 
Commissioner, or any person empowered in this behalf by the Authority, may, by order in writing, require 
the  owner,  occupier,  user  or  person  in  control  of  such  building,  structure,  work  or  land  to  remove, 
demolish or so alter the building, structure or work, or to desist from using or to so use the land, as to be 
in accordance with the said provisions. 
(2)If an order under  sub-section(1) in respect of any building, structure,  work or land is not complied 
with within such time as maybe specified therein, the Deputy Commissioner, or any person empowered in 
this behalf  by the Authority, may, after giving the person affected  by the order an opportunity of being 
heard,  remove,  demolish  or  alter  the  building,  structure  or  work,  or  stop  the  use  of  the  land  and,  in  so 
doing,  may  use  such  force  including  police  force  as  may  be  necessary  and  may  also  recover  the  cost 
therefor from the person responsible for the erection, construction or use of the building, structure, work 
or land in contravention of the provisions as aforesaid.” 

9.  

The  2020  Regulations provide a  comprehensive  mechanism  to  be followed 

by CDA while exercising its powers to regulate use of property, to determine any 

use to be non-conforming and to seal subject premises on basis of non-conforming 

use.  Before  discussing  the  procedure  provided,  it  is  worthwhile  to  note  the 

relevant definitions under the 2020 Regulations. Clause 1.2 sub-clause (9)defines 

“Authority”  as  the  Capital  Development  Authority  as  defined  under  the  CDA 

Ordinance;  sub-clause  (10)  defines  “Authorized  Use”  as  use  of  the  building  as 

authorized by the Authority except otherwise specifically prescribed or permitted; 

sub-clause  (35)defines  “Competent  Authority”  as  Chairman  CDA,  concerned 

Member, or any other officer empowered by the Authority to approve plans and to 

control  the  building  activity;  sub-clause  (52)  defines  “Family”  as  a  group  of 

persons related by blood or marriage, and if not so related, of  not more than five 

persons  living  together  and  maintaining  a  common  household;  sub-clause 

(72)defines  “House”  as  a  building  to  be  used  for  residential  occupancy  of  one  or 

more families as prescribed under these Regulations; sub-clause (92)defines “Non-

 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

5 

conforming  Use”  as  the  use  of  a  plot  or  structure  thereon  not  conforming  to  the 

purpose  authorized  or  permitted  under  these  regulations  or  the  conditions  of 

allotment; sub-clause (121) defines“ Residential Building” as a building authorized 

for residential occupancy by one or more families but does not include hostels or 

lodging houses or guest houses; sub-clause (122)defines “Residential Plot” as a plot 

allotted  exclusively  for  residential  purpose;  sub-clause  (123)defines  “Residential 

Use” as a building or part of it authorized for residential occupancy by one or more 

families; sub-clause (146) defines “Use” as the purpose for which a plot or building 

thereon  is  authorized  or  permitted  under  these  regulations.  Clause  2  of  the 

Regulations provides  for authorized  uses of  buildings and  clause  2.17  specifically 

prohibits non-conforming uses. Clause 2.17.1 bans non-conforming use of any land 

or  building  or  part  of  a  building;  clause  2.17.2  provides  that  any  building  or 

structure  designed  for  an  intended  use  which  is  not  authorized  under  these 

regulations or conditions of allotment shall either be removed or converted into a 

building  or  structure  designed  for  a  use  which  is  authorized  under  these 

regulations or conditions of allotment. Clause 2.17.3 provides fines to be imposed 

on  first conviction  of  non-conforming use and,  in  case  of re-occurrence,  provides 

that  the  fine  to  be  paid  on  second  conviction  will  be  twice  the  amount  payable 

upon  first  conviction,  and  that  the  user/occupier  shall  be  evicted  and  the 

Authority shall take control of the premises. Clause 2.17.4 provides that only the 

Director Building Control, CDA may impose the fines. Clause 2.17.5 provides that 

where non-conforming use exists, show cause notice of 07 days is to be issued by 

the Building Control Directorate, after which 15 day notice may be issued to cease 

non-conforming  use.  After  expiry  of  the  15  days  notice  period  then,  Director 

Building Control, CDA, or any other officer so empowered, may issue an order to 

seal the premises and in pursuance of such order the premises shall be sealed by 

Director  Enforcement  CDA,  or  any  person  empowered  by  the  Authority  in  this 

regard,  in  the  presence  of  Magistrate,  CDA.  The  relevant  provisions  are 

reproduced as follows: 

“2.17 BAN ON NON-CONFORMING USES 

2.17.1 

 No land or building or part of the building shall be put to a nonconforming use.  

2.17.2   Any building or structure or part of the building designed or intended for a use, not authorized 
or  permitted  under  these  Regulations  or  conditions  of  allotment,  shall  either  be  removed  or 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

6 

converted into a building or  structure designed  or  intended for a use authorized  or permitted 
under these Regulations or conditions of allotment. 

2.17.3   A non-conforming use  of a residential building may render the  owner and the  occupant of the 

building liable, on first conviction to pay a fine mentioned below:— 

Residential 

Rs. 500,000/- 

Class-III  Shopping  Centre  &  I&T  Centre, 
F&V, Industrial building 

Rs. 750,000/- 

Marakiz 

Blue Area 

Rs.1,000,000/- 

Rs.1,500,000/- 

Mauve area, H-Series& all other types 

Rs.1,000,000/- 

and in the case of re-occurrence, on 2nd conviction to pay a fine double as mentioned above and 
the  owner  or  as  the  case  may  be  the  occupant  shall  be  liable  to  be  evicted  from  the  building 
summarily and the allotment / conveyance deed of the plot shall also be cancelled and possession 
of the building will be taken over by the Authority. 

2.17.4   The penalty mentioned above in this regard shall be imposed by Director Building Control, CDA 

only. 

2.17.5  With a view to maintain sanctity of Building Regulations, without prejudice to any proceedings 
pending  under  these  regulations,  premises,  where  non  conforming  use  exits  may  be  sealed  by 
Director  Enforcement  CDA  or  any  person  empowered  by  the  Authority  in  the  presence  of 
Magistrate,  CDA.  Sealing  may  be  done  after  issuance  of  order  for  sealing  of  said  premises  by 
Director Building Control, CDA or any person empowered by the Authority and after expiry of 
notice of 15 days & show cause notice of 07 days, issued by Building Control Directorate. 

Premises may be de-sealed by the order  of the next higher authority i.e. Member (Planning & 
Design),  CDA  or  any  person  empowered  by  the  Authority  on  submission  of  fine  /  dues  and 
application along with affidavit (from the  owner) that, the said premises  shall never be put in 
non-conforming  use  again.  The  case  will  be  processed  after  confirmation  of  ownership  /  dues/ 
litigation from Directorate of Estate Management, CDA.” 

10.  

In  case  titled  Mrs. Shamshad Butt VS Deputy Commissioner CDA, 

Islamabad and 3 others cited as [2023 CLC 304 Islamabad] this Court provided 

comprehensive guidelines regarding the procedure to be followed by the Authority 

in cases of non-conforming use. The relevant extract is reproduced hereunder: 

“20. In view of the above discussion, this Court comes to an irresistible conclusion that the 
CDA  authorities  including  the  Deputy  Commissioner  and  Officers  of  Building  Control 
Section are to follow certain important guidelines for future purpose while dealing with the 
cases of non-conforming use in Islamabad Capital Territory, which are as under: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

7 

i. The  Building  Control  Inspector  who  visit  the  building  /  office  /  house,  which  was  under 
non-conforming  use  has  to  submit  a  written  report  clearly  stating  therein  the  name,  date, 
time when the building was visited as well as the reasons on the basis of which he reaches to 
the conclusion that building is under non-conforming use. 
ii. The  report  must  contain  the  timeline  of  non-conforming  use  tentatively  to  assess  the 
quantum of fine by the Deputy Commissioner, CDA till the removal of non-conforming use. 
iii. Any visiting card, sign board, pictures, video evidences, letter head correspondence, which 
could be made basis of opinion of non-conforming use of the building may also be made part 
of the report including but not limited to the statement of individual who are occupant in the 
building, if any. 
iv. The Deputy Commissioner CDA on the basis of such report may initiate the proceedings 
in  terms  of  Section  49-C  of  CDA  Ordinance,1960  read  with  the  relevant  clauses  of 
Islamabad  Residential  Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulations-2005,  shall  issue 
notice to the occupant/allottee/owner accordingly. 
v. The  Deputy  Commissioner  after  issuing  notice  to  the  occupant  at  the  first  instance,  if 
comes  to  conclusion  that  building  is  continuously  under  non-conforming  use  and  he  has 
given  due  opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  occupant,  who  whether  joins  the  proceedings  or 
otherwise,  may  pass  an-interim  order  of  sealing  of  the  premises  by  all  means  without  the 
final verdict. 
vi. In case, the occupant undertakes to remove subject non-conforming use within reasonable 
time, the Deputy Commissioner may on the undertaking give such opportunity for removal 
of  the  non-conforming  use  for  a  limited  period,  which  could  be  verified  after  the  specified 
time  line.  In  case,  the  occupant  has  not  removed  the  property  from  non  conforming  use, 
Deputy  Commissioner  may  pass  a  final  order  of  imposing  penalty  and  sealing  of  the 
premises. 
vii. The  Deputy  Commissioner  shall  issue  notice  to  the  allottee  along  with  the  report  of 
Building Control Inspector conveying him non-conforming use of the property. 
viii. The Deputy Commissioner shall ensure the proper service of notice to the occupant by 
way of Registered Post and also by Special Messenger and may even affix the notice upon the 
subject premises before taking the action. 
ix. The  Deputy  Commissioner  shall  take  the  report  of  Building  Control  Section,  CDA  and 
may put the same or confront to the occupant or the allottee for his input or rebuttal by way 
of affidavit and may also extend an opportunity to the occupant/landlord/allottee to rebut 
the same. 
x. The Estate Management Section of the CDA can only cancel the allotment or conveyance 
deed of such premises under non conforming use, if the Deputy Commissioner reaches to the 
conclusion  that  the  owner  is  guilty/liable  for  non-conforming  use  under  the  law  and  even 
persistently using the building in a similar manner, despite passing of the order. 
xi. The Estate Management Section, CDA shall independently issue a notice to the allottee 
before  cancellation  of  allotment  on  the  basis  of  order  of  the  Deputy  Commissioner  if  no 
plausible explanation has been rendered by the allottee within prescribed time referred in the 
notice. 
xii. In  terms  of  clause  2.17.5  of  Islamabad  Sector  Zoning  Building  Regulation  2005,  the 
building  under  non-conforming  use  may  be  sealed  after  expiry  of  15  days  of  first  notice 
issued  by  Building  Control  Directorate  by  Director  Enforcement,  CDA  or  any  person 
empowered by the Authority  in  presence  of  Magistrate of  CDA upon  issuance  of  order for 
sealing of said premises by Director Building Control CDA. 
xiii. The  Deputy  Commissioner,  CDA  while  imposing  fine  upon  the  occupant  shall  pass 
speaking order justifying his penal action against the occupant/allottee.” 

 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

8 

In light of the above, it is abundantly clear that the Authority is required to follow 

the Regulations in letter and spirit before sealing any premises on the basis of non-

conforming  use  and  where  the  procedure  and  mechanism  as  provided  in  the 

Regulations has been properly followed, there can be no exception to the sealing 

of premises. From bare reading of the 2020 Regulations, it is clear that Residential 

Plots are authorized to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families. 

Renting  out  individual  rooms  to  students  on  shared  accommodation  basis,  as  is 

being  done  in  the  instant  cases,  does  not  fulfill  the  criteria  for  residential  use.  It 

must  also  be noted  that  under  the  definition  of  “Residential  Building”  the  use  of 

the  same  as  hostels  or  lodging  houses  or  guest  houses  has  been  clearly  and 

specifically excluded. This Court is, therefore, of the view that when the Authority 

has followed proper procedure, has issued the notices as mandated, the action of 

sealing of premises cannot be said to have been done ultra vires.  

11.  

The  next  challenge  to  be  considered  is  that  of  vires  of  the  Regulations  in 

reference  to  constitutional  rights  and  provisions.  It  must  be  noted  that 

Fundamental  Rights,  specifically  under  Articles  18,  10A,  23,  and  24  of  the 

Constitution,  invoked  by  the  Petitioners  are  not  absolute  and  are  subject  to 

restrictions and limitations which may be imposed by law. CDA has been created 

and  empowered under  the  CDA  Ordinance  as the  regulator  to,  inter alia,  regulate 

use of land and to make Regulations as necessary for such regulation of land. There 

has  been  no  specific  attack  on  CDA‟s  power  to  frame  Regulations,  however,  in 

some of the connected petitions, it has been argued that CDA cannot determine or 

classify  use  of  land  to  be  non-conforming.  In  this  regard,  it  must  be  noted  that 

similar questions had arisen, and have been answered by this Court, in previously 

decided  petitions  vide consolidated  judgement  in  case  titled Col.(R) Javed Agha 

and 31 others VS Arshad Mahmud and 4 others dated  22.09.2016,  reported  as 

2017  MLD  627  Islamabad.  The  main  point  of  contention  in  these  petitions  was 

whether  the  use  of  residential  properties  as  guest  houses  in  residential  areas  of 

Islamabad  was  permissible,  and  whether  the  respondent  (CDA)  was  legally 

competent to take action against violations of the relevant law and regulations on 

the  basis  of  „non-conforming  use‟  of  residential  properties.  The  main  questions 

arising in the said case were of vires of the provisions of the CDA Ordinance as well 

 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

9 

as the 2005 Regulations framed there-under; and the competence of the Authority 

to  classify  and  prohibit  types  of  uses  of  residential  properties.  While  answering 

the  question  of  vires,  this  Court  in  its  previous  judgement  analyzed  the  relevant 

precedents as follows: 

“10. The petitioners have made a challenge to various provisions of the Ordinance which provide 
framework  for  exercising  functions  and  powers  by  CDA  and  Rules  and  Regulations  framed 
under the Ordinance. Since challenge has been made to the parent legislation i.e. Ordinance as 
well as the Regulations framed thereunder, therefore, it is worthwhile to discuss the law on the 
basis of which the vires of a legislative instrument can be examined. In this behalf the Hon'ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  titled  Lahore  Development  Authority  through  D.V.  and 
others v. Imrana Tiwana and others (2015 SCMR 1739) laid down the principles to be applied 
and considered by the Court when striking down or declaring a legislative enactment as void or 
unconstitutional; the august Apex Court observed as follows:- 

"Following are the principles which must be applied and considered by the court when 
striking down or declaring a legislative enactment as void or unconstitutional. 
(i)  There  was  a  presumption  in  favour  of  constitutionality  and  a  law  must  not  be 
declared unconstitutional unless the statute was placed next to the Constitution and no 
way could be found in reconciling the two; 
(ii) Where more than one interpretation was possible, one of which would make the law 
valid  and  the  other  void,  the  Court  must  prefer  the  interpretation  which  favoured 
validity; 
(iii) A statute must never be declared unconstitutional unless its invalidity was beyond 
reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt must be resolved in favour of the statute being 
valid; 
(iv)  Court  should  abstain  from  deciding  a  Constitutional  question,  if  a  case  could  be 
decided on other or narrower grounds; 
(v) Court should not decide a larger Constitutional question than was necessary for the 
determination of the case; 
(vi) Court should not declare a statute unconstitutional on the ground that it violated 
the spirit of the Constitution unless it also violated the letter of the Constitution; 
(vii) Court was not concerned with the wisdom or prudence of the legislation but only 
with its Constitutionality; 
(viii) Court should not strike down statutes on principles of republican or democratic 
government unless those principles were placed beyond legislative encroachment by the 
Constitution; and 
(ix) Mala fides should not be attributed to the Legislature.”” 

While  placing  reliance  upon  the  Supreme  Court  dicta  in  Lahore  Development 

Authority through D.V. and others v. Imrana Tiwana and others[2015 SCMR 

1739],  this  Court  held  the  2005  Regulations  to  be  intra  vires  and  not  in  conflict 

with any constitutional rights or provisions. The same principles shall be applied 

while  answering  the  question  of  vires  of  the  2020  Regulations.  It  must  also  be 

noted that there is no material change in the provisions regarding non-conforming 

use under the 2020 Regulations.  

 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

10 

12.   The  overall  scheme  of  CDA  Laws,  including  the  Ordinance  and  the 

Regulations  framed  there-under,  was  discussed  in  detail  by  this  Court  in  its 

previous judgement cited 2017 MLD 627(ibid) and the scheme and purpose of the 

said provisions was summarized as follows: 

“12. The  bare  reading  of  the  referred  provisions  shows  that  CDA  was  required  to  prepare  a 
Master  Plan  and  phased  Master-Programme  for  the  development  of  Capital  Site  as  well  as 
specified areas. In this behalf plan and programme so prepared were required to be approved by 
the Federal Government. The petitioners have vehemently argued that there is no Master Plan 
for  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  as  no  approval  was  accorded  to  the  plan  and  programme  by 
Federal Government. During the course of arguments learned counsel for the respondents and 
representative  of  the  Cabinet  Division  appeared  in  person  and  placed  on  record  Minutes  of 
Meeting  of  the  Cabinet  held  on  26.10.1960  for  approval  of  the  Master  Plan  and  Master-
Programme  of  Islamabad.  The  minutes  placed  on  record  are  reproduced  below  and  are  as 
follows: 

Copy No. SECRETT MEETING OF THE CABINET HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 26TH OCTOBER, 1960 AT 4:30 P.M. PRESENT The 
President. The Minister for Health, Labour and Social Welfare. The Minister for Foreign 
Affairs and Commonwealth Relations. The Minister for Law. The Minister for Food and 
Agriculture, Rehabilitation and Works. States and F.R. and Finance. The Minister for 
Industries. The Minister for Railways and Communications. The Minister for Education. The 
Minister for Fuel, Power and Natural Resources. The Minister for Commerce. The Minister 
for National Reconstruction and Information, Kashmir Affairs and Minority Affairs. The 
Minister for the Interior. The Cabinet Secretary. The Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet. ----
 BY SPECIAL INVITATION The Chairman, Capital Development Authority. ---- Case 
No.796/55/60 ---- Master Plan of Islamabad DECISION Cabinet approved the 
master plan and master programme of Islamabad. ---- 

13. The  bare  reading  of  the  minutes  shows  that  the  Cabinet  approved  the  Master  Plan  and 
Master-Programme  of  Islamabad,  therefore,  the  Master  Plan  and  phased  Master-Programme 
duly approved by the Federal Government exists as required under section 11 of the Ordinance. 
Under sections 12 and 13 of the Ordinance, CDA in pursuance of the Master Plan and phased 
Master-Programme can develop a scheme or schemes through local bodies or agencies or itself 
pertaining  to  the  matters  provided  in  subsection  (2)  of  section  12  ibid.  Under  clause-a  of  the 
referred  subsection  a  scheme  may  relate  to  land  use,  zoning  and  land  reservation.  In  order  to 
develop  the  scheme  and  execute  the  same,  a  comprehensive  procedure  for  land  acquisition  is 
provided under the Ordinance which for the present purposes is not relevant. Under section 46 of 
the Ordinance penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Ordinance, Rules or Regulations 
or scheme sanctioned is provided by way of punishment for a maximum period of six months or 
fine or both. In this behalf the trial is summary in nature and is to be conducted by a Magistrate 
and  the  cognizance  of  an  offence  punishable  under  the  Ordinance  can  only  be  made  on  a 
complaint in writing by the CDA or any officer authorized by the CDA for the said purpose. In 
case any building, structure work or land is erected, constructed or used in contravention of the 
provisions of the Ordinance, Rules or Regulations made thereunder is prohibited under section 
49(C), of the Ordinance and the Deputy Commission may order inter alia a person to desist from 
using the land in violation of the prohibition. Finally section 51 of the Ordinance empowers CDA 
to make Regulations with respect to matters which are necessary or expedient and the same are 

 
  
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

11 

to be published in the official gazette. Exercising powers under section 51 the CDA from time to 
time has framed Regulations and the ones relevant for the present purposes are the Islamabad 
Land  Disposal  Regulations,  2005  and  Islamabad  Residential  Sectors  Zoning  (Building 
Controlled  Regulations),  2005.  In  ILDR  plots  have  been  classified  into  different  categories 
(Regulation  3)  viz  (i)  Residential  plots  (ii)  Commercial  and  Business  Plots.  (iii)  Community 
Buildings and Facilities Plots.(iv) Administrative and Public Sector Plots.(v) Industrial Plots. 
(vi)  Diplomatic  Plots.  (vii)  Public  Parks,  Playing  Fields,  Graveyards  and  Incidental  Open 
Spaces.  (viii)  Agro-Farming  and  Agro-Industry  Plots.  (ix)  Plots  in  Model  Villages  and  Sub-
Urban  Centers.  Similarly,  IRSZR  were  framed  spelling  out  the  various  concepts  regarding 
building use and definitions involved with respect thereto. In this behalf under Regulation 2.1.3 no 
land or building is to be put to a non-conforming use. Under Regulation 2.1.4 the nonconforming 
use  of  a  building  would  render  the  owner  and  occupant  of  the  building  liable  to  penalty  and 
eviction  and  even  cancellation  of  the  allotment  of  the  plot.  Under  Regulation  2.1.5  CDA  may 
change the land use provided the same is permissible under the layout plan and the functional 
plan.  Regulation  2.17  restricts  non-conforming  use  by  way  of  imposition  of  penalty.  The  most 
relevant Regulation for the ease of convenience is reproduced below and is as follows:-- 
"2.17. Ban on non-conforming uses 
2.17.1. No land or building shall be put to a non-conforming use. 
2.17.2.  Any  building  or  structure  designed  or  intended  for  a  use  not  authorized  or  permitted 
under these Regulations or conditions of allotment, shall either be removed or converted into a 
building  or  structure  designed  or  intended  for  a  use  authorized  or  permitted  under  these 
Regulations or conditions of allotment. 
2.17.3. A non-conforming use of a residential building may render the owner and the occupant of 
the building liable, on first conviction to pay a fine of [Rs. 0.5 million] and in the case of failure to 
discontinue the non-conforming use within 15 days of the conviction, to an additional fine which 
may extend to [five thousand rupees (Rs.5000)] for every day during which he has persisted in the 
failure. After a persistent nonconforming use for a period of three months, the owner or as the 
case  may  be  the  occupant  shall  be  liable  to  be  evicted  from  the  building  summarily  and  the 
allotment /conveyance deed of the plot may also be cancelled. 
2.17.4. The penalty mentioned above in this regard, shall be imposed by the Deputy Commission 
only." 
14. The bare examination of the Regulations shows that no land or building is to be used for non-
conforming  and  the  violation  of  the  same  renders  the  occupant  and  the  owner  of  the  building 
liable to fine to the tune of Rs.500,000/- and in case of continuous violation 15 days of additional 
fine  to  the  extent  of  Rs.5000/-  every  day  and  subsequently  eviction  and  or  cancellation  of  the 
allotment. By virtue of a recent amendment CDA also has the power to seal the premises. Under 
Regulation 4.1.23 CDA can by a general order or special order exempt any land or building from 
the operation of any one or all Regulation. 
15. As  can  be  discerned  from  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  that  CDA  is  a  regulator  i.e.  its 
functions  inter  alia  includes  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  Capital  City.  The  way  it  has  been 
exercising  its  powers  or  functions  is  not  exemplary  and  there  are  lapses  on  its  part  in 
performance  of  functions.  The  Ordinance  is  a  legislative  enactment  prior  to  the  present 
Constitution  and  under  Article  268(6)  of  the  Constitution  all  such  enactments  are  to  be 
interpreted in a way so as to adapt the same according to the provisions of the Constitution.” 

13.   This  Court  also  discussed  at  length  the  principle  of  constitutionality  with 

reference  to  the  CDA  Ordinance,  and  competence  of  the  Authority  to  make 

Regulations there-under as follows: 

 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

12 

“17. In light of the recent judgements by the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court as well as august Apex 
Court it is evident that distinction is drawn between the executive functions and judicial/quasi 
judicial  powers  exercised  by  the  same  authority,  however,  the  fact  that  within  the 
administrative/executive  regime  judicial  powers  are  being  exercised  does  not  violate  the 
trichotomy of powers as enshrined in the Constitution. It was also argued that CDA does not 
have the authority to determine whether non-conforming use has infact occurred. The petitioners 
placed reliance on the case titled Muhammad Jamil Asghar v. Improvement Trust (PLD 1965 SC 
698).  The  Magistrate  under  section  46  of  the  Ordinance  is  empowered  to  impose  fine  or  even 
order imprisonment. Under section 46 (D) the Magistrate is to try the offence in a summary way 
as provided in section 260, Cr.P.C. on a complaint to be filed in writing by the CDA. This clearly 
shows that the Magistrate under the Ordinance exercises judicial functions independent of CDA 
who  is  a  complainant  in  the  matter,  therefore,  acts  independent  of  the  authority.  the  trial  is 
conducted  in  a  summary  way  is  as  provided  in  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898  wherein  due 
regard to the principles of natural justice as well as fair trial is to be given. 
18. The Ordinance provides that CDA can make Regulations where it is necessary and expedient 
and the same is to be published in the official gazette. The powers given under section 51 ibid to 
CDA is valid and when Regulations are made in compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance 
they are law. Reliance is placed on the case titled M.D. Tahir Advocate v. Federal Government 
through  Secretary  Cabinet  Division  Islamabad  and  others  (1996  CLC  1987).  The  petitioners 
argued that by delegating legislative functions to an executive authority i.e. CDA vast unfettered 
powers of creating offence and imposing of penalties have been given to the executive which is not 
sustainable  and  is  in  violation  of  the  Constitution.  In  case  titled  Haji  Ghulam  Zamin  and 
another v. A.B. Khondkar and others (PLD 1965 Dacca 156) it was observed as follows:-- 

"37. It is also undeniable that legislation must also be adapted to the complex conditions 
involving  a  host  of  details  with  which  the  Legislature  cannot  deal  directly.  The 
Legislature, therefore, having formulated the norms of its main legislative policy, must, 
of  necessity,  leave  the  working  of  details,  with  which  it  cannot  deal  directly,  to  other 
agencies, in the proper fulfillment of its legislative duty, that is, to perform its essential 
law-making function. In this background, the Constitution has never been regarded as 
denying, to the Legislature the necessary resources of flexibility and feasibility in laying 
down policies and establishing standards, while leaving it to selected functionaries the 
making  of  D  incidental  and  auxiliary  provisions,  within  prescribed  limits  and  the 
determination  of  facts  to  which  the  policy  as  declared  by  the  Legislature  is  to  apply. 
Without  such  power  of  assignment  the  Legislature  would  face  the  anomaly  of  being 
called upon to exercise a legislative power, which, under various circumstances, would 
be but a futility. The Legislature is not allowed to become impotent, but the necessity 
and  validity  of  such  delegated  legislation,  and  the  wide  range  of  administrative 
authority which has been developed thereby, cannot obscure the limitations of authority 
to delegate. 
38.  Delegation  by  the  Legislature  is  permitted  within  prescribed  limits  in  order  to 
execute the legislative norms an E provisions that have been enacted. Thus a restricted 
delegation in aid of the proper functioning of legislative power has not been regarded as 
unconstitutional. There are innumerable decisions to support the aforesaid proposition 
and before we discuss some of them, we would like to observe that the principles we have 
discussed above resolve themselves thus: 
(1) Legislation being the exclusive function of the Legislature, it cannot abdicate such 
function. 
(2)  The  Legislature,  after  having  enunciated  the  essential  legislative  principles  and 
standards, is, however, entitled to delegate to outside agencies such functions which are 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

13 

essential to an effective exercise of the legislative power with which it has been endowed 
by the Constitution. 
(3)  The  Legislature,  however,  cannot  efface  itself  and  delegate  all  its  functions  to  an 
extraneous agency. 
39.  The  justification  for  such  a  delegation  is  that  the  Legislature,  being  the  exclusive 
machinery for legislation, cannot be allowed to be paralysed if and when an ancillary 
delegation becomes a physical necessity for its proper function. In the United States of 
America,  under  the  Constitution  itself  the  power  is  specifically  provided,  but  in  the 
context of our Constitution such a power is implied in the exclusive legislative function 
with which the Legislature is vested. 
40. It is not, however, permissible for a Legislature to substitute in its place any other 
authority.  It  cannot  ask  anybody  else  to  perform  its  function.  There  is  a  positive 
embargo upon self-effacement and a total abdication of legislative function." 

19. The legislature under section 51 authorized CDA to make Regulations where it is necessary 
and expedient. CDA in exercise of powers framed Regulations from time to time and also framed 
Regulations mentioned above. As mentioned above, in the referred Regulations plots have been 
divided into different categories. The referred division or categorization of plots under the ILDR 
2005 is in pursuance of section 12(2)(a) as well as 49(C) of the Ordinance which permits that a 
scheme or schemes to be developed by CDA can have zones and the land or building is to be used 
with  respect  to  the  referred  zones  or  use  provided  either  in  the  Ordinance  or  Rules  or 
Regulations, in this behalf, hence it cannot be said that under section 51 ibid legislature has given 
vague or wide powers and/or CDA by framing 2005 Regulations have exceeded its authority or 
acted in violation of/or contrary to the provisions of the Ordinance. The judgement relied upon 
by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  in  support  of  their  contentions  with  respect  to  the 
referred  arguments  are  in  consonance  with  the  principles  mentioned  above.  In  past  as  well 
various attacks were made on the zoning Regulations/categorization by Capital Development 
Authority. In Seeds High School through Project Director v. Government of Pakistan through 
Secretary  of  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice,  Islamabad  and  2  others  (PLD  2004  Lahore  305) 
wherein  CDA  acted  against  establishment  of  School  in  a  residential  area  and  the  same  was 
assailed before the Hon'ble Lahore High Court in the referred case observed as follows:-- 

"2.  The  impugned  act  of  the  C.D.A.  has  also  been  challenged  upon  the  touchstone  of 
various fundamental rights  guaranteed under the  Constitution of Islamic Republic  of 
Pakistan, 1973, 
6. As regards the violation of fundamental rights, it submitted that the freedom of trade 
and profession is subject to its regulation under the law. Regarding discrimination, it is 
submitted  that  a  perpetrator  of  an  illegal  act  cannot  claim  protection  on  the  ground 
that similar action has not been taken against other violators. 
12. No case can be built by the petitioner on the basis of Article 18 of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. Article 18 is reproduced as under:-- 
Art. 18.--Freedom of trade business or profession.---Subject  to  such 
qualifications, if any, as may be prescribed by law, every citizen shall have the right to 
enter  upon  any  lawful  profession  or  occupation,  and  to  conduct  any  lawful  trade  or 
business: 
Provided that nothing in this Article shall prevent-- 
(a) the regulation of any trade or profession by licensing system; or 
(b) the  regulation  of  trade,  commerce  or  industry  in  the  interest  of  free  competition 
therein; or 
(c) the  carrying  on,  by  the  Federal  Government  or  a  Provincial  Government,  or  by  a 
corporation  controlled  by  any  such  Government,  of  any  trade,  business,  industry  or 
service, to the exclusion, complete or partial of other persons. " 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

14 

The freedom of trade, business or profession is controlled by the said Article itself. The 
word lawful trade, business or profession is sufficient to qualify such right. A profession, 
trade or business can be hedged to the extent of a lawful prohibition imposed upon it by 
law whereafter such trade or business becomes unlawful. 
13. The claim of the petitioner that the act of C.D.A. amounts to discrimination and is in 
violation  of  Articles  4  and  25  of  the  Constitution  is  also  devoid  of  force.  Article  4 
guarantees  every  citizen  the  right  to  enjoy  protection  of  law  and  to  be  treated  in 
accordance with law. According to Article 4(2)(b), no person shall be prevented from or 
be hindered in doing that which is not prohibited by law. The law in this context does not 
refer to Statute Law only. According to Salmond, "the body of principles recognized and 
applied by the State in the administration of justice" would equally be recognized as law 
as contemplated by this Article. The Islamabad Capital Territory Zoning Regulations 
have the intent and force of law as indeed is possessed by the C.D.A. lay out plans and 
instruments  such  as  the  C.D.A.  Master  Plan  under  the  C.D.A.  Ordinance.  The 
submission  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  that  the  Zoning  Regulations  are 
ultra vires of the C.D.A. Ordinance has not overly impressed this Court. 
15. From the argument addressed on behalf of the respondents, it appears that the C.D.A. 
is serious in its efforts to curb/ eliminate non-conformist use of the particular Sectors 
and in this it is earnestly acting to attain the objective. That no action has yet been taken 
against  some  schools  shall  give  no  right  to  the  petitioner  to  operate  in  a  residential 
Sector if the same is otherwise prohibited.” 

20. Similarly  this  Court  in  case  titled  Faisal  Zafar  Malik  v.  Ajmal  Bukhari  Deputy 
Commissioner CDA and 3 others (PLD 2011 Islamabad 36) while examining Regulation 2.17.3 of 
IRSZR, 2005 upheld the same. 
21. It is case of the petitioners that since there is no prohibition in any law on establishment and 
running  of  guest  houses,  therefore,  the  same  can  be  done  from  any  building.  It  has  also  been 
argued that by putting a restriction of carrying on the activity of running a guest house is not a 
restriction but amounts to prohibition and is also in violation of Articles 18, 23 and 24 of the 
Constitution.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  titled  Arshad  Mehmood  and 
others  v.  Government  of  Punjab  through  Secretary,  Transport  Civil  Secretariat,  Lahore  and 
others (PLD 2005 Supreme Court 193) laid down the guidelines regarding the restrictions which 
are to be imposed and their scope and observed that the word reasonable restriction did not say 
that  it  would  mean  prohibition  or  prevention  completely  except  under  certain  circumstances. 
Similarly  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  titled  Pakistan  Muslim  League  (N) 
through  Khawaja  Muhammad  Asif  MNA  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through 
Secretary Ministry of Interior and others (PLD 2007 Supreme Court 642) observed as follows: 

"28. The Fundamental Rights can neither be treated lightly nor interpreted in a casual 
or  cursory  manner  but  while  "interpreting  Fundamental  rights  guaranteed  by  the 
Constitution, a cardinal principle has always to be borne in mind that these guarantees 
to  individuals  are  subject  to  the  overriding  necessity  or  interest  of  community.  A 
balance  has  to  be  struck  between  these  rights  of  individuals  and  the  interests  of  the 
community.  If  in  serving  the  interests  of  the  community,  an  individual  or  number  of 
individuals  have  to  be  put  to  some  inconvenience  and  loss  by  placing  restrictions  on 
some  of  their  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution,  the  restrictions  can  never  be 
considered to be unreasonable. "(Nasirabad Properties Ltd. v. Chittagong Development 
Authority PLD 1966 Dacca 472). 

22. Capital  Development  Authority  by  categorization  of  plots  and  restricting  the  land  use 
according  to  the  said  categorization  does  not  prohibit  the  petitioners  from  carrying  on  or 
establishing  the  guest  houses  rather,  a  restriction  has  been  imposed  whereby  such  a 
business/activity can only be carried out from commercial plots/land. Such a restriction does not 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

15 

violate  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  petitioners  as  observed  by  the  august  Apex  Court 
hereinabove; the fundamental rights do not have an overriding effect but balance has to be struck 
between the rights of an individual and interest of the community. 
23. Similar interpretation was made in case titled Pakcom Limited and others v. Federation of 
Pakistan  and  others  (PLD  2011  Supreme  Court  44)  wherein  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan observed as follows:-- 

"52. The interpretation of Article 18 has been made variously and the judicial consensus 
seems to be that the "right of freedom  of trade, business or professions guaranteed by 
Art.  18  of  the  Constitution  is  not  absolute,  as  it  can  be  subjected  to  reasonable 
restrictions  and  regulations  as  may  be  prescribed  by  law.  Such  right  is  therefore  not 
unfettered. The regulation of any trade or profession by a system of licensing empowers 
the  Legislature  as  well  as  the  authorities  concerned  to  impose  restrictions  on  the 
exercise of the right. They must, however be reasonable and bear true relation to 'trade' 
or  profession  and  for  purposes  of  promoting  general  welfare.  Even  in  those  countries 
where  the  right  to  enter  upon  a  trade  or  profession  is  not  expressly  subjected  to 
conditions  similar  to  this  Article,  it  was  eventually  found  that  the  State  has,  in  the 
exercise of its police power, the authority to subject the right to a system of licensing, i.e., 
to permit a citizen to carry on the trade or profession only if he satisfies the terms and 
conditions  imposed  by  the  prescribed  authority  for  the  purposes  of  protecting  and 
promoting general welfare" (PLD 1989 Kar. 219, Govt. of Pakistan v. Akhlaque Hussain 
PLD 1965 SC 527)." 

24. Similarly  in  case  titled  Higher  Education  Commission  through  Project  Manager  v.  Sajid 
Anwar  and  others  (2012  SCMR  186)  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  observed  that 
fundamental rights are subject to law and reasonable restriction imposed by law. In case titled 
Pakistan  Broadcasters  Association  and  10  others  v.  Pakistan  Electronic  Media  Regulatory 
Authority through Chairman and another (PLD 2014 Sindh 630). The Division Bench of Hon'ble 
Sindh High Court  observed that provisions  of Article 18  of the Constitution provides  that the 
right  of  a  citizen  and  freedom  of  trade  business  or  profession  has  been  organized  as  a 
fundamental  right  of  every  citizen  which  can  be  enforced  by  law,  however,  such  right  is  not 
absolute  and  is  subject  to  such  qualifications  as  prescribed  by  law.  In  case  titled  Muhammad 
Iqbal Qureshi and others v. Mayor, Hyderabad Municipal Corporation, Hyderabad and another 
(1992  SCMR  857)  the  august  Apex  Court  observed  that  right  to  acquire  land  and  dispose  of 
property under Article 23 of the Constitution is subject to reasonable restriction. In case titled 
D.G.  Khan  Cement  Company  Ltd.  through  Chief  Financial  Officer  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan 
through  Secretary  Ministry  of  Law  and  3  others  (PLD  2013  Lahore  693)  the  Hon'ble  Lahore 
High Court observed as follows:-- 

"17. Fundamental rights and their protection is essential to a modern democracy. "Take 
human rights out of democracy, and democracy has lost its soul. Human rights are the 
crown jewels of democracy. A democracy without human rights is like an empty vessel" 
However, even in a democracy fundamental rights have limitations, this is because "in a 
democratic  society,  a  human  right  may  be  limited  to  ensure  the  very  existence  of  the 
state; to ensure its continued existence as a democracy; to ensure public health; to ensure 
public  education;  as  well  as  several  other  national  causes.  These  are  the  purposes  for 
which a democratic society may limit the rights of its members ... This demonstrates the 
special nature of democracy, which is based on the idea that the state protects the rights 
of  the  individual,  and  the  individual  protects  the  State  -  its  safety  and  peaceful 
existence." 
18. In the context of this case, constitutional limitations are embedded in Articles 23 and 
24 of the Constitution. The right to acquire, hold and dispose of property under Article 
23 of the Constitution is subject to "reasonable restrictions". While the right to property 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

16 

under  Article  24  states  that  no  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  property  save  in 
accordance with law. It is essential to understand the meaning and scope of "law" and 
"reasonable restrictions" under the Constitution. 
19.  "Laws  could  restrict  human  rights,  but  only  in  order  to  make  conflicting  rights 
compatible or to protect the rights of other persons or important community interests. 
Any restriction of human rights not only needs a constitutionally valid reason but also 
to  be  proportional  to  the  rank  and  importance  of  the  right  at  stake"  "Reasonable 
restriction"  or  any  sub-constitutional 
limitation  ('law')  on  a  constitutional 
fundamental  right  must  also  flow  from  the  Constitution  to  protect  lawful  rights  and 
interests of the others or the society at large. The "law" or "reasonable restrictions" in 
pith and substance must promote and advance fundamental rights of the community at 
large in order to qualify as a limitation to override the fundamental rights guaranteed 
to an individual under the Constitution. The "law" or the "reasonable restrictions" must 
be  fashioned  to  uphold  the  constitutional  themes  of  democracy,  freedom,  equality, 
tolerance, social justice and advance the principles of policy under the Constitution. The 
roots  of  sub-constitutional  limitation  ("law"  or  "reasonable  restrictions")  must  be 
grounded  in  the  Constitution  itself  only  then  can  they  possess  the  constitutional 
character and strength to take away the fundamental rights of an individual." 
25. Insofar as the levy  of penalty or fine through Regulations is concerned, the same  was dealt 
with in detail by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan through Pakistan Telecommunication 
Authority  (PTA)  Islamabad  through  Chairman  v.  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Company 
Limited,  Headquarters,  G-8  Markaz,  Islamabad  (2016  SCMR  69)  wherein  the  august  Apex 
Court observed as follows:-- 
"22.  Perhaps  the  Regulation  18(2)  of  the  Regulations  of  2005  may  not  be  happily  worded  and 
could have been constructed with a greater care and accuracy. It is an ancient and consistently 
applied principle of Interpretation of Statutes that where "object and intention of statute is clear, 
it  must  not  be  reduced  to  a  nullity  by  the  draftsman's  unskillfulness  or  ignorance"  (The 
Interpretation of Statutes 7th Edition by Sir Peter Mexwer). 
23. Even otherwise, it is a settled law that the Courts should always lean in favour of validity of a 
Statutory Instrument and should be slow to strike it down and an interpretation, which saves the 
law, should be adopted rather than holding a law to be invalid, unconstitutional or ultra vires. 
Reference, in this behalf may be made to the judgments reported as (1) Mehreen Zaibun Nisa and 
others v. Land Commissioner, Multan and others (PLD 1975 SC 397), (2) Multiline Associates v. 
Ardeshir  Cowasjee  and  2  others  (PLD  1995  SC  423),  (3)  Messrs  Elahi  Cotton  Mills  Ltd  and 
others v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, M/o Finance, Islamabad and 6 others (PLD 
1997 SC 582), (4) Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Finance and others v. 
Haji Muhammad Sadiq and others (PLD 2007 SC 133), (5) Syed Aizad Hussain and others v. 
Motor Registration Authority and others (PLD 2010  SC 983), and (6)  Dr.  Tariq Nawaz and 
another v. Government of Pakistan through the Secretary, Ministry of Health, Government of 
Pakistan, Islamabad and another (2000 SCMR 1956). 
24.  A  perusal  of  Section  23  of  the  Act  of  1996  reveals  that  it  deals  with  contravention  of  any 
provision  of  the  Act  of  1996  or  the  Rules  framed  there-under  for  any  term  or  condition  of  a 
License and in terms of Section 23(3)(c)(i) of the Act of 1996, a fine may be imposed in this behalf 
to a maximum of Rs.350 million. Regulation 18(2) of the Regulations of 2005 deals only with one 
of such contravention i.e. Regulation 18(1) of the Regulations of 2005 for which a penalty/fine @ 
10%  per  annum  is  provided.  Obviously,  the  quantum  of  fine,  if  imposed,  would  be  subject  to  a 
maximum limit mentioned in Section 23 of the Act of 1996. In the instant case, the fine sought to 
be imposed is less than the amount mentioned in section 23(3)(c)(i) of the Act of 1996. In view of 
the  above,  it  is  difficult  to  hold  that  Regulation  18(2)  of  Regulations,  2005  is  ultra  vires  the 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

17 

parent  statute  i.e.  the  Act  of  1996  and  the  findings  to  the  contrary  by  way  of  the  impugned 
judgment are not sustainable." 
26. In light of the above judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan it is clear that fine or 
penalty can be imposed through Rules or Regulations if it remains within the object and scope of 
the parent statute. The Ordinance provides for levy of penalty and punishment of imprisonment 
under section 46 ibid and Regulation 2.17 prescribes precise amount of fine that can be imposed 
for non-conforming use, therefore, the same is within the ambit and scope of the Ordinance. 
27. It was also argued on behalf of the petitioners that under Regulation 2.17 of IRSZR a house, 
apartment  or  flat  in  a  residential  building  may  be  used  by  its  resident  professional  such  as  a 
Lawyer, Doctor and Engineer etc. for Home occupation with prior permission of CDA provided 
that  over  all  residential  character  of  the  building  does  not  change  and  not  more  than  25%  of 
covered  area  is  used  for  professional  work.  Through  the  referred  Regulation  CDA  has  made 
reasonable classification by providing a category whereby professionals with permission of CDA 
can use their properties for professional work provided the area used for such work is not more 
than  25%  of  the  covered  area  and  there  is  no  complaint  by  neighbours  of  nuisance,  hence  the 
Regulation in question is not discriminatory in any way or is in violation of the parent statute. 
28. The key question that calls for adjudication in the instant case is whether use of a residential 
property for establishment and running of a guest house is in violation of the zoning Regulations 
inasmuch as whether the same amounts to a commercial activity. IRSZR, 2005 as well as ILDR, 
2005  categorize/classify  plots  into  different  categories.  The  relevant  classifications  for  the 
purposes of the instant cases are into residential and commercial and business. In this behalf in 
Regulation  3(2)  of  ILDR  running  of  guest  houses  has  been  classified  as  a  commercial  and 
business activity and residential plots have been defined as plots meant only for houses. The word 
house is defined in Regulation 2(l)(k) as a separate dwelling for human habitation for a family. 
Similarly, the restriction on any use of residential building which is non-conforming renders the 
owner  and  occupant  to  fine  under  Regulation  2.17.3  of  IRSZR,  2005.  In  this  behalf 
nonconforming  use  is  defined  in  Regulation  1.2.92  as  use  of  a  plot  or  structure  thereon  not 
conforming  to  the  purpose  authorized  or  permitted  under  the  Regulation  or  the  condition  of 
allotment. Similarly, residential building is defined in Regulation 1.2.121 as a building authorized 
for residential occupancy by one or more families but does not include hotel  or lodging house. 
Finally a house is defined in Regulation 1.2.72 of IRSZR as a building to be used for residential 
occupancy  of  one  or  more  families  as  prescribed  under  the  Regulations.  The  bare  perusal  of 
Regulation 2.17.3 and the definitions of residential building, house and non-conforming use shows 
that  residential  use  of  a  property  is  meant  for  habitation  by  a  family  or  families.  Similarly 
Regulation  3  classifies  guest  houses  as  commercial  activities  and  takes  it  beyond  the  scope  of 
residential  house.  The  Division  Bench  of  Hon'ble  Peshawar  High  Court  in  case  titled 
Muhammad Sayyahud Din v. Director General Peshawar Development Authority and 2 others 
(2015  CLC  84)  while  dealing  with  the  matter  under  similar  facts  and  circumstances  wherein 
Peshawar Development Authority had initiated action against guest houses observed that use of 
residential property for a  guest house is a commercial activity and further observed that they 
cannot be allowed to carry on commercial activities from the said building. The learned counsel 
for  the  petitioners  during  the  course  of  arguments  submitted  that  renting  out  a  residential 
building for a specified term is permissible and is not in violation of zoning Regulations. Likewise 
establishing a guest house and taking guest for a short period of time should be allowed and does 
not amount to a commercial activity. Admittedly, the guest houses have been given commercial 
meters for electricity and when guests are accepted for consideration the use does not fall within 
the definition of residential use as provided in IRSZR, hence the use does not remain residential 
whereas  where  the  property  is  let  out  for  residence  its  use  as  residential  building  or  a  house 
within  the  meaning  of  the  concepts  as  provided  in  the  definition  clause  of  Regulations  remain 
intact.  In  view  of  above  though  the  establishing  and  running  of  guest  houses  is  not  Prohibited 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

18 

Under the law, however, the petitioners are to abide by the zoning Regulations and land use in 
accordance  with  the  Regulations  of  2005  as  well  as  the  Ordinance:  Any  use  which  does  not 
conform  with  the  classifications  made  by  CDA  or  as  prescribed  under  the  Regulations  would 
tantamount  to  a  non-conforming  use  within  the  meaning  of  the  concept  as  provided  in  2005 
Regulations and would render the owner and occupant liable for action under the law. In view of 
above findings there is no justification or basis for striking down any provision of the Ordinance, 
the Islamabad Land Disposal Regulation, 2005 or the Islamabad Residential Sector (Building 
Control) Zoning Regulations, 2005.” 

14.  

In  light  of  the  above  discussion,  it  is  clear  that  the  Respondent  Authority 

was formed under the CDA Ordinance for the purpose of regulating the use of land 

and  development  in  the  Capital  Territory.  The  legislative  intent  in  this  regard  is 

clear and leaves no room for doubt that it is the purview of the Authority, as the 

prescribed regulator, to regulate the use of land and to make rules and regulations 

as required for such regulation. The powers conferred upon the Authority by the 

legislature in the CDA Ordinance are justified by the purpose for which they have 

been conferred, and thus there is no question of competence of CDA or of vires of 

Regulations where the Authority has exercised its powers in accordance with law 

and has only done so in furtherance of its mandate as the prescribed regulator. 

15.  With regards to the petitions challenging notices issued by the Respondent 

Authority pertaining to non-conforming use, it must be noted that notices issued 

in  pursuance  of  proper  procedure  while  complying  with  all  requirements  as 

prescribed  by  law  as  discussed  hereinabove  cannot  be  challenged  by  invoking 

constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  the  High  Courts  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  for  the  reason  that  issuance  of  such  notices  has  been  mandated  by 

law  for  the  purpose  of  providing  sufficient  opportunity  to  the  recipient  of  such 

notice  to  either  cease  the  non-conforming  use  or  state  his/her  case  before  the 

Authority.  If  the  mandated  procedure  is  followed  in  letter  and  spirit  by  the 

Authority,  the  accused  person  has  ample  opportunity  to  state  their  case  and 

defend  their  stance  in  those  very  proceedings.  In  case  cited2023  CLC  304 

Islamabad (ibid),this Court, has explained in detail the procedure to be followed 

by  the  Authority  in  cases  of  non-conforming  use  before  issuing  notices  in  the 

following manner: 

“11.  Learned  counsel  for  CDA  contends  that  the  petitioner  herself  acknowledges  in  the  lease 
agreement that building in question was leased out to the National Rural Support Programme 
(NRSP) which itself is a commercial entity and using the said building for commercial purposes, 

 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

19 

that  might  be  true  but  as  far  as  lease  agreement  is  concerned,  there  is  not  a  single 
acknowledgment  by  the  petitioner  that  she  extended  permission  to  use  the  building  for 
commercial  purposes  or  for  establishing  an  office,  nor  it  could  be  demonstrated  through  any 
other  document  of  National  Rural  Support  Programme  (NRSP),  that  subject  premises  is  the 
office, though the notices appended in this case refer that occupants have opened / established an 
office in residential premises. In such scenario this court is of the view that before taking such 
action under the law, the Inspector of Building Control Section, CDA shall bring on record the 
following measures:- 
i. The Building Control Section through notified Inspector shall visit the premises and collect any 
incriminating  material,  i.e.  office  card,  letter  head,  any  correspondence  in  which  the  building 
address has been used for commercial purposes. 
ii.  The  Building  Inspector  may  prepare  a  concise  report  of  visit  /  inspection  of  the  residential 
building  and  record  those  particulars  through  which  it  could  be  prima  facie  established  that 
building has been used for non-Conforming use. 
iii.  The  Building  Inspector  may  take  photographs  or  a  video  evidence  to  establish  the  non-
conforming  use  or  may  record  any  statement  of  the  official  /  occupant  of  the  building  qua  its 
usage. 
If the above referred evidence are not available as a minimum standard to take action for non-
Conforming use before the Deputy Commissioner CDA, then there is no need to issue notice to 
the  other  side  in  terms  of  section  49-C  of  CDA  Ordinance  1960.  The  plain  language  of  said 
provision of law casts duty upon the Deputy Commissioner, to satisfy himself before issuance of 
notice  that  minimum  requirements  have  been  demonstrated  by  the  Building  Control  Section 
CDA, which is not the case in hand to the extent of petitioner, therefore, the only evidence which 
is  available  on  record  is  the  lease  agreement  of  petitioner,  which  has  not  been  filed  by  the 
respondents / CDA, hence, the primary onus to prove the commercial use of building / house as 
per  the  lease  agreement  has  been  shifted  upon  the  respondents  /  CDA  as  per  Article-122  of 
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, which has not been discharged before passing of the impugned 
orders.” 

It therefore follows that, notices issued in compliance with said procedure cannot 

be challenged in writ jurisdiction as there is no adverse action being taken or order 

being issued whereby the questions of  vires and infringement of rights may arise, 

instead it is merely a procedural requirement to provide time and an opportunity 

of  being  heard.  The  Petitioners  should  have  responded  to  the  notices  of  non-

conforming use and should have stated their case before the Authority instead of 

skipping  the  prescribed  procedure  and  directly  invoking  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court.  It  is  therefore  re-iterated  that  notices  issued  in 

compliance  with  prescribed  procedure  are  intra  vires  and  thus  cannot  be 

challenged through writ petitions.  

16. 

The  crux  of  the  preceding  discussion  is  that  the  2020  Regulations  are 

parimateria  to  the  2005  Regulations,  the  vires  of  which  has  already  been 

deliberated  upon  and  decided  therefore  no  fresh  discussion  is  warranted.  Even 

 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

20 

otherwise, on the touchstone of the Tiwana (ibid) principles, the 2020 Regulations 

do  not  flout  any  constitutional  provisions  in  so  far  as  the  use  and  enjoyment  of 

property is to be regulated by law and the subject enactments, i.e. CDA Ordinance 

and Regulations framed there-under, are law.  

17. 

In  light  of  the  above  discussion,  this  Court  is  of  the  view  that  firstly,  the 

2020 Regulations are intra vires the Constitution and do not infringe fundamental 

rights;  secondly  where  the  Authority  has  followed  the  prescribed  procedure  in 

letter and spirit, the action of sealing premises cannot be challenged on grounds of 

vires;  and,  thirdly,  the  Authority  is  well  within  its  powers  while  determining  a 

certain use of a premises to be non-conforming under the Regulations.  

18. 

In  view  of  foregoing,  writ  petitions  mentioned  in  Schedule-A  &  B  are 

dismissed. 

Announced in Open Court on 17th day of May, 2024. 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Approved for reporting 

Zawar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

21 

Schedule A 

Serial No.  CASE NO./YEAR 

TITLE 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

W.P. No.1562-2020 

W.P. No.644-2017 

W.P. No.3549-2016 

W.P. No.3732-2016 

W.P. No.683-2017 

W.P. No.4339-2016 

W.P. No.4509-2016 

W.P. No.4626-2016 

W.P. No.4644-2016 

W.P. No.265-2017 

W.P. No.2898-2017 

W.P. No.3314-2017 

W.P. No.3690-2017 

W.P. No.3810-2017 

W.P. No.3816-2016 

W.P. No.1581-2019 

W.P. No.1604-2019 

W.P. No.3664-2019 

Dr. Muhammad Shakeel Anjum 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc.. 
Amir Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Shais Khan etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Shoaib Ayaz etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Arslan Ismail 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Uzma Batool etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Mst. Jameela Khatoon. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Khadim Hussain 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Shoaib Nazir 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Farah Iftikhar etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Amir Imtiaz  
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Amir Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Bin Nazir 
Versis 
Capital Development Authority,  etc. 
Mazhar Iqbal & Another 
Versis 
Capital Development Authority,  etc. 
Sudheer Ahmed etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority,  etc. 
Muhammad Usman Abbassi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Aamer Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority,  etc. 
Aamer Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

22 

19. 

20. 

W.P. No.3665-2019 

W.P.No.3729-2019 

21. 

W.P. No.3415/2022 

22. 

W.P. No.3417/2022 

23. 

W.P. No.3418/2022 

24. 

W.P. No.1828/2022 

25. 

W.P. No.842/2022 

26. 

W.P. No.554/2022 

27. 

W.P. No.4472/2021 

28. 

W.P. No.4459/2021 

29. 

W.P. No.4338/2021 

30. 

W.P. No.4280/2021 

31. 

W.P. No.4234/2021 

32. 

W.P. No.1772/2023 

33. 

W.P. No.1773/2023 

34. 

W.P. No.662/2023 

35. 

W.P. No.386/2023 

36. 

W.P. No.4298/2022 

37. 

W.P. No.3494/2022 

38. 

W.P. No.786/2023 

Aamer Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority,  etc. 

Aziz Khan 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

Adeel Naseer 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Mushtaq Ahmad 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Adil Naseer 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Adeel Naseer 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Adeel Naseer 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Raza 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abid Hussain 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Yawar Ali 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Umar Awan 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Akhtar Zaman 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Naveed Aslam 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Tasneem Zahra 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Bilal 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Mst. Urooj Ali 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

39. 

W.P. No.777/2023 

40. 

W.P. No.666/2023 

41. 

W.P. No.459/2023 

42. 

W.P. No.2375/2023 

43. 

W.P. No.2780/2023 

44. 

W.P.No.2402/2023 

45. 

W.P.No.3480/2023 

46. 

W.P.No.3157/2023 

47. 

W.P.No.2879/2023 

48. 

W.P.No.2875/2023 

49. 

W.P.No.2732/2021 

50. 

51. 

52. 

W.P.No.710/2021 

W.P.No.119/2021 

W.P.No.112/2021 

53. 

W.P.No.4070/2020 

54. 

W.P.No.4071/2020 

55. 

W.P.No.4072/2020 

56. 

W.P.No.2748/2020 

57. 

W.P.No.2708/2020 

58. 

W.P.No.2219/2020 

59. 

W.P.No.3986/2021 

23 

Muhammad Abdullah 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abdul Basit Raza 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abdul Aziz, etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Tahir Muhmood 
VS
The Deputy Commissioner, CDA, etc. 
Bashir Ahmed 
VS
The Deputy Commissioner, CDA, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Bilal Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Owais Ahmed Qureshi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Habib Ullah 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Saad Zia Abbasi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abdul Aziz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Altaf 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Altaf 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Yasir Mahmood 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Mohsin Abbas 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Abdullah 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abdul Majid 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Owais Ahmed Qureshi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Altaf 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Shahid Pervaiz Khan 
VS

W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

24 

60. 

W.P.No.3967/2021 

61. 

W.P.No.3852/2021 

62. 

W.P.No.3630/2021 

63. 

W.P.No.3498/2021 

64. 

W.P.No.3149/2021 

65. 

W.P.No.3062/2021 

66. 

W.P.No.3097/2021 

67. 

W.P.No.2469/2021 

68. 

W.P.No.2205/2021 

69. 

W.P.No.1985/2021 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

W.P.No.1767/2021 

W.P.No.1700/2021 

W.P.No.1646/2021 

W.P.No.1594/2021 

74. 

W.P.No.1565/2021 

75. 

76. 

W.P.No.1275/2021 

W.P.No.864/2021 

Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Awais Ahmad Qureshi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

Akif Bashir 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

Yasir Mehmood 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Kreative Kinder Haus 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abid Hussain 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Awais Ehsan 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Abid Hussain 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Altaf 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Atif Imtiaz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Saad Zia Abbasi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Aamer Imtaiz, etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Aamer Imtaiz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Awais Ahmed Qureshi 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Aamer Imtaiz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Aamer Imtaiz 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Sarmad Iftikhar 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

Schedule B 

Serial No.  CASE NO./YEAR 

TITLE 

 
 
W.P. No.3272-2016 etc. 

25 

1. 

2. 

3. 

W.P. No.3470-2023 

W.P.No.3365/2023 

W.P.No.3690/2023 

Sarmad Iftikhar 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc.  
Sarmad Iftikhar 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Sara Khattak, etc. 
VS
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

 
 
 
