Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W. P. No.4075/2019 

The Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan 
through its Secretary 

VS

The Special Court 
through its Registrar  

Petitioners by 

: 

Mr Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, Addl. Attorney General. 
Barrister Salman Safdar, Advocate (W.P.No.4076/2019) 
Mr Khashih-ur-Rehman, Secretary, Ministry of Law 
and Justice.  
Pir Muhammad Ishaq, Solicitor, Ministry of Law and 
Justice. 
Mr Iftikhar Ul Hassan, Dy. Solicitor, Ministry of Law 
and Justice. 

Date of Hearing 

: 

27-11-2019 

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.- 

We shall decide the petitions 

in hand which have definitely given rise to a unique, extra ordinary and 

unprecedented  situation.  In  both  the  petitions,  the  petitioners  have 

sought  prayers  which  relate  to  the  proceedings  in  the  pending  trial 

before  the  learned  Special  Court  constituted  under  the  Criminal  Law 

Amendment  (Special  Court)  Act 1976  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Act of 1976’).  Through  writ  petition  No.4075/2019,  the  Ministry  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-2- 

Interior, Government of Pakistan through its Secretary has invoked the 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Constitution’) assailing the order, dated 19-11-2019, passed by the 

learned Special Court. In the other connected petition the petitioner, 

namely, Barrister Salman Safdar has sought prayers which essentially 

are regarding fair trial. The learned Special Court, vide order dated 19-

11-2019,  had  denied  the  request  made  on  behalf  of  the  Federal 

Government  to  allow  some  time  so  that  Prosecutor(s)  could  be 

appointed.  Through  the  same  order  the  request  for  adjournment  by 

the defence counsel, appointed by the learned Special Court, was also 

not acceded to and thus the matter was reserved and  November 28, 

2019 was fixed as the date for announcement of the judgment.  In a 

nutshell,  both  the  petitions  raise  grievances  regarding  the  right  to  a 

fair trial. They assert that judgment cannot be pronounced under the 

Act of 1976 without giving a reasonable opportunity of hearing and in 

the  absence  of  a  prosecutor  appointed  by  the  Federal  Government. 

They also assert that the directions of the august Supreme Court have 

not been complied with.   

2. 

In  order  to  adjudicate  these  petitions  and  appreciate  the 

extraordinary importance of ensuring that the trial is manifestly seen 

to be fair, it is inevitable to advert to the events which had led to the 

 
 
  
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-3- 

filing  of  the  complaint,  pursuant  whereto  the  pending  trial  ensued 

regarding  the  charge  relating  to  the  alleged  commission  of  high 

treason.  

3. 

The  accused  in  this  case,  General  (R)  Pervez  Musharraf 

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Accused’), while holding the office of  

Chief of Army Staff had abrogated and subverted the Constitution on 

October  12,  1999  by  taking  over  and  declaring  himself  as  the  Chief 

Executive  of  the  country.  On  March  3, 2007,  the Accused  forced  the 

then Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan to tender his resignation which 

the  latter  refused  and  thus  he,  along  with  his  family  members, 

remained detained in the official residence for a while. An acting Chief 

Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  was  appointed.  This  unconstitutional 

suspension of the Chief Justice of Pakistan led to an uprising, popularly 

known  as  the  ‘Lawyers’  Movement’.  A  larger  Bench  of  the  august 

Supreme  Court,  consisting  of  13  Hon’ble  Judges,  accepted  a 

constitutional  petition  and  consequently  the  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan 

was restored to his office and the actions of the Accused were declared 

as  unconstitutional.    However,  on  November  3,  2007  the  Accused 

issued the Proclamation of Emergency Order, 2007 whereby the Chief 

Justice of Pakistan was yet again removed from his office. A Bench of 

the  august  Supreme  Court,  consisting  of  seven  Hon’ble  Judges,  had 

earlier  passed  an  order  restraining  the  Accused  or  any  other  person 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-4- 

from  taking  action  contrary  to  the  Constitution.  Once  again  lawyers 

from across the country stood up against the despotic and tyrannical 

actions  and  demanded  the  restoration  of  the  Constitution  and  the 

upholding of the rule of law. The lawyers were joined by the people of 

Pakistan who struggled together to make the State of Pakistan subject 

to the rule of law rather than the rule of a man. The world witnessed 

the idealism of young lawyers, students, members of civil society and 

the general public. Thousands of lawyers, members of the civil society 

and general public were incarcerated during this struggle. The burning 

of  lawyers  alive,  the  massacre  in  Karachi  on  May  12th  and  ninety 

innocent  citizens  losing  their  lives  during  this  struggle  against  the 

actions of the Accused taken on November 3, 2007, are facts that have 

become part of our history. The members of the legal fraternity did not 

hesitate  in  risking  their  lives  and  limbs  in  order  to  uphold  the 

Constitution  and  the  rule  of  law.  For  the  first  time  more  than  sixty 

Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts resisted the 

unconstitutional removal of the Chief Justice of Pakistan. This historic 

movement was ultimately successful in restoring the Constitution and 

upholding  the  rule  of  law  and  resultantly  it  led  to  the  ouster  of  the 

Accused.  The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  judgment  rendered  by  a 

Bench consisting of fourteen Hon'ble Judges declared the actions of the 

Accused, taken on November, 3, 2007, as unconstitutional and based 

on  mala  fide.  It  was  further  held  that  he  alone  had  taken  the  said 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-5- 

actions.  This  was  later  reiterated  by  the apex  Court  in  the judgment 

titled ‘Abdul Hameed Dogar v. Federal Government through Secretary 

M/o Interior and 2 others’ [PLD 2016 SC 454].  It is important to note 

that  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament),  through  the  18th  Amendment, 

inserted  Article  270  AA  in  the  Constitution  explicitly  declaring  the 

Emergency  of  the  fourteenth  day  of  October,  1999  and  the 

Proclamation of Emergency Order as having been made without lawful 

authority  and  of  no  legal  effect.  Despite  this  amendment,  the  then 

Federal Government chose to file a complaint on December 12, 2013 

under  the  Act  of  1976  regarding  five  offences  of  subversion  of  the 

Constitution  under  Article  6  read  with  section  2  of  the  High  Treason 

(Punishment) Act 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act of 1973’) 

relating to the actions taken by the Accused  against the judiciary on 

November  03,  2007.  The  complaint  was  entertained  by  the  learned 

Special Court  on  December  13,  2013 and  the  charge  was  framed  on 

March 31, 2014. The prosecution evidence was closed on  September 

18,  2014.  After  completing  the  proceedings  under  section  87  of  the 

Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,1898  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Cr.P.C.’),  the  learned  Special  Court,  vide  order  dated  19-07-2016, 

declared the accused as an absconder and issued a proclamation in this 

regard. A perpetual warrant of arrest was also issued and the name of 

the  Accused  was  directed  to  be  entered  in  the  list  of  proclaimed 

offenders. Pursuant to the removal of the name of the Accused from 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-6- 

the  Exit  Control  List,  the  latter  left  the  country  without  seeking 

permission from the learned Special Court. The inordinate delay in the 

conclusion of the trial led the Lahore High Court Bar Association to file 

an application before the august Supreme Court in Civil Review Petition 

No.513/2014  in  Constitutional  Petition  No.14/2013.  The  august 

Supreme Court vide the judgment reported as ‘Lahore High Court Bar 

Association  and  others  v.  General  (R)  Pervez  Musharraf  and  others’ 

[2019 SCMR 1029] disposed of the application by observing that if the 

Accused voluntarily chooses not to appear or join the proceedings, then 

he  would  lose  his  right  to  record  his  statement  under  section 342  of 

the Cr.P.C. The apex Court further observed that, being a proclaimed 

offender,  the accused  would  also  lose  the  right  of audience  and  that 

his right to defence would stand forfeited. The august Supreme Court 

thus directed the learned Special Court to proceed with the trial on the 

next  date  of  hearing  by  extending  to  the  Accused  an  opportunity  of 

recording his statement under section 342 of the Cr.P.C. and pleading 

any  other  defence  under  the  law.  It  was  observed  that  in  case  the 

Accused  failed  to  appear  on  the  date  of  the  hearing  then,  being  a 

proclaimed  offender,  the  learned  Special Court  would  be empowered 

to proceed against the Accused even in his absence under section 9 of 

the  Act  of  1976.  At  the  time  when  this  direction  was  passed,  the 

petitioner in W.P. No.4076/2019, namely Barrister Salman Safdar, was 

representing  the  Accused  pursuant  to  his  power  of  attorney  having 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-7- 

been  accepted  by  the  learned  Special  Court.  An  application  under 

Section 265-K of the Cr.P.C. filed by and on behalf of the Accused was 

also  pending.  Another  application  filed  on  behalf  of  the  Accused  was 

for  seeking  an  adjournment  on  the  ground  that  the  latter's  medical 

condition  did  not  allow  him  to  travel  to  Pakistan  in  order  to  appear 

before  the  learned  Special  Court  for  recording  his  statement.  The 

learned  Special  Court,  vide  order  dated  12-06-2019,  dismissed  the 

application  seeking  adjournment.  The  learned  Special Court  declared 

that  Barrister  Salman  Safdar  could  no  longer  represent  the  Accused 

and directed the Federal Government to submit a panel of lawyers so 

that a counsel could be appointed under section 9 of the Act of 1976 

to represent the Accused. The learned Special Court, through the same 

order, further observed that in the light of the direction given by the 

august Supreme Court, the application filed under section 265-K of the 

Cr.P.C.  could  not  be  entertained.  With  the  approval  of  the  learned 

Special  Court,  Mr  Raza  Bashir,  ASC,  vide  notification  dated  26-08-

2019, was appointed to represent the Accused. It is relevant to note 

that initially Mr Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr ASC, was appointed as 

Prosecutor under the Act of 1976 vide notification dated 04-12-2013. 

Pursuant  to  nominations  made  by  the  latter,  a  team  of  lawyers  was 

appointed  vide  notifications,  dated  09-12-2013  and  27-01-2014 

respectively.  Mr  Muhammad  Akram  Sheikh,  Sr  ASC,  tendered  his 

resignation  on  03-07-2018.  The  other  members  of  the  prosecution 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-8- 

team  were  de-notified  by  the  Federal  Government  vide  notification 

dated 23-10-2019. On 24-10-2019, the de-notified prosecution team 

appeared  before  the  learned  Special  Court  and  submitted  additional 

written arguments. A perusal of the order, dated 24-10-2019, shows 

that  the  learned  Special  Court  directed  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of 

Interior to appear on the next date of hearing to explain under which 

provision of law had the notification, dated 23-10-2019, been issued 

and the prosecution team de notified. The order further shows that the 

learned counsel appointed to represent the Accused had submitted an 

application for adjournment on medical grounds, which was accepted. 

It was noted that a last opportunity was being afforded to the learned 

defence counsel. On the next date of hearing the Secretary, Ministry 

of  Interior  appeared  before  the  learned  Special  Court  and  explained 

the reasons for de-notifying the prosecution team. It appears from the 

order,  dated  19-11-2019,  that  the  learned  Special  Court  was  not 

satisfied  with  the  explanation.  The  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior 

requested the granting of some time to enable the Federal Government 

to appoint and notify Prosecutor (s). This request was not acceded to 

and  28-11-2019  was  fixed  as  the  date  for  the  announcement  of  the 

judgment.  

4. 

Mr Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, learned Additional Attorney General, 

has argued that the prosecution has a pivotal role in the scheme of the 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-9- 

Act of 1976. He has taken us through the various provisions of the Act 

of  1976  in  support  of  his  contention  that  judgment  cannot  be 

announced  by  the  learned  Special  Court without  giving  a  reasonable 

opportunity  to  the  prosecution.  In  this  regard  he  has  specifically 

referred to clause (f) of section 6 of the  Act of 1976. He has further 

argued that the prosecution also has a right to a fair trial and that the 

provisions of the Act of 1976 explicitly give various statutory rights for 

ensuring  effective  prosecution  of  an  accused.  It  is  the  case  of  the 

Federal Government that in the absence of a notified Prosecutor or a 

prosecution team, as the case may be, proceedings initiated under the 

Act of 1976 cannot continue. After de notification of the previous team 

of  prosecutors  on  23-10-2019,  the  Federal  Government  was  in  the 

process of appointing and notifying Prosecutor (s) but  did not do so, 

having  regard  to  the  order,  dated  24-10-2019  because  the  learned 

Special  Court  had  summoned  the  Secretary,  Interior  to  explain  why 

the notification dated 23-10-2019 was issued. Surprisingly, it has been 

argued  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Government  that  the  constitution  of 

the  learned  Special  Court  suffers  from  serious  flaws  and  that  the 

complaint was filed by an un-authorized person.   

5. 

Barrister Salman Safdar has stated that he is aggrieved in 

his personal capacity because he could not have been removed after 

his  power  of  attorney  was  entertained  and  accepted  by  the  learned 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-10- 

Special Court nor was such a direction given by the august Supreme 

Court. He has further argued that the august Supreme Court had not 

restrained the learned Special Court from deciding the application filed 

under section 265-K of the Cr.P.C. It is his contention that instead of 

deciding  the  application,  the  learned  Special  Court  vide  order,  dated 

12-06-2019, concluded that it could not be entertained in the light of 

the judgment of the august Supreme Court.   

6. 

The  learned  Additional  Attorney  General  and  Barrister 

Salman Safdar have been heard and the record perused with their able 

assistance. 

7. 

We  are  beseeched  with  an  unprecedented,  unique  and 

extra  ordinary  situation,  which  is  obvious  from  the  facts  highlighted 

above.  The  Federal  Government  and  the  prosecution  have  a  pivotal 

role  under  the  scheme  of the  Act  of  1976,  so  much  so  that  a  Bench 

consisting of fourteen Hon'ble Judges of the august Supreme Court in 

the  case  titled  ‘Gen.  (R)  Pervez  Musharraf  v.  Nadeem  Ahmed 

(Advocate),  etc.’  [PLD  2014  SC  585]  has  held  that  the  discretion  to 

direct a trial relating to the offence of high treason exclusively vests in 

the Executive. As will become obvious later, the Federal Government 

and the prosecution have a fundamental role under the scheme of the 

Act of 1976. One of the aggrieved petitioners seeking judicial review is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-11- 

the  authority  authorized  to  file  a  complaint  and  to  prosecute  an 

accused  through  a  notified  prosecutor  or  team  of  prosecutors.  The 

grievance  essentially  is  in  the  context  of  statutory  rights  and 

procedural fairness or, in other words, the prosecution’s right to a fair 

trial. Moreover, the trial for the constitutional offence of high treason 

pending  before  the  learned  Special  Court  is  that  of  a  person  who  is 

alleged to have subverted the Constitution on November 3, 2007. The 

Accused is not the only party to this trial and the Federal Government 

is  an  equally  important  stakeholder.  These  petitions,  besides  raising 

questions about the jurisdiction of the learned Special Court to proceed 

and announce a judgment in the absence of a prosecutor appointed by 

the  Federal  Government,  is  essentially  regarding  the  assurance  that 

the  proceedings  ought  to  be  manifestly  seen  as  fair.  The  Federal 

Government, instead of filing a complaint relating to subversion of the 

Constitution  on  October  12,  1999,  chose  in  its  wisdom  to  initiate 

proceedings  for  the  offence  of  high  treason  relating  to  actions  which 

were  targeted  against  the  Judiciary.  Moreover,  the  actions  of  the 

Accused  taken  on  November  3, 2007  have  already  been  declared  as 

mala  fide  and  unconstitutional  by  the  august  Supreme  Court.  The 

foregoing reasons make the trial and the grievances in hand as unique 

and exceptional and thus placing a heavy burden to assure each party 

to the trial that they will be dealt with in a fair manner, having regard 

to the cardinal principles of due process and the right to a fair trial. It 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-12- 

is noted that in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, it is 

our onerous duty to ensure that none of the interested parties to the 

trial complain that the proceedings were otherwise than fair.  

8. 

It  is  unquestionable  that  the  right  to  a  fair  trial  is  the 

foundation  of  the  rule  of  law.  This  right  is  an  integral  part  of  and 

embedded in the constitutional right of due process guaranteed under 

Article 10A of the Constitution. The august Supreme Court in the case 

titled  ‘Altaf  Ibrahim  Qureshi  and  another  v.  Aam  Log  Ittehad  and 

others’ [PLD 2019 SC 745] has held that the right of hearing of a party 

to a lis is one of the fundamental principles of jurisprudence which has 

been guaranteed under Article 10A of the Constitution and that such a 

right  is  an  assurance  that  everyone  will  have  a  fair  trial  and  will  be 

dealt with in accordance with the principles of due process of law. In 

the case titled ‘Ishtiaq Ahmed v. Hon’ble Competent Authority through 

Registrar  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan’  [2016  SCMR  943]  the  august 

Supreme Court has elaborated the principles of right to a fair trial. The 

august Supreme Court has reiterated the importance of the principles 

of a fair trial in a plethora of precedent law. Reliance is placed on the 

cases of ‘Babar Hussain Shah and another v. Mujeeb Ahmed Khan and 

another’ [2012 SCMR 1235], ‘Suo Moto Action regarding allegation of 

business  deal  between  Malik  Riaz  Hussian  and  Dr.  Arsalan  Iftikhar 

attempting  to  influence  the  judicial  process’  [PLD  2012  SC  664].The 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-13- 

essence of fair trial is to assure to every party that he or she would be 

treated  fairly  and  justly  by  the  criminal  justice  system,  which  is 

impartial and independent. It essentially means that the trial relating 

to an offence would he heard in public by an independent and impartial 

Tribunal,  Court  or  Judge  and  within  a  reasonable  time.  In  a  criminal 

trial  the  two  most  important  parties  are  the  accused  and  the 

prosecution,  although  the  general  public  is  also  an  important 

stakeholder.  It  is  not  the  accused  alone  who  has  to  be  assured  the 

fairness  of  a  fair  trial  but  the  prosecution  must  have  the  same 

confidence. The principles of fair trial must be seen as promoting the 

principles  of  'equating  arms  on  both  sides'.  There  must  be  a  fair 

balance between the opportunities given to both the sides. It is equally 

important that every party to a trial has equal access to justice.  The 

principle  of  equality  of  arms  ensures  that  neither  side  ought  to  be 

procedurally disadvantaged. The right to a fair and proper trial is thus 

equally important for the prosecution as well. In a trial relating to the 

constitutional offence of high treason it is an even more onerous task 

to demonstrably assure an accused of fairness because at the end the 

latter  could  be  exposed  to  the  sentence  of  death.  Preserving  the 

integrity of the process that delivers a fair trial is equally important.          

9. 

The superstructure of the principles of fair trial is built on 

the  premise  that  justice  should  not  only  be  done  but  manifestly  and 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-14- 

undoubtedly  appear  to  have  been  done.  Every  litigant,  whether  an 

accused  or  the  prosecution,  must  have  confidence  regarding  the 

impartiality and independence of the adjudicator. It is not the mind of 

the adjudicator that is relevant but the impression that one may even 

erroneously develop has to be dispelled. The principles have been aptly 

described by Lord Denning, M.R., in the judgment titled ‘Metropolitan 

Properties Co.(F.G.C.)  Ltd.  V.  Lannon  and  others’  [{1968} 3 All  E.R. 

304] and the relevant  portion is reproduced as follows:- 

It brings home this point; in considering whether there was 
a real likelihood of bias, the court does not look at the mind 
of the justice himself or at the mind of the chairman of the 
tribunal,  or  whoever  it  may  be,  who  sits  in  a  judicial 
capacity.  It  does  not  look  to  see  if  there  was  a  real 
likelihood that he would, or did, in fact favour one side at 
the expense of the other. The court looks at the impression 
which  would  be  given  to  other  people.  Even  if  he  was  as 
impartial  as  he  could  be,  nevertheless,  if  right-minded 
persons would think that, in the circumstances, there was 
a real likelihood of bias on his part, then he should not sit. 
And  if  he  does  sit,  his  decision  cannot  stand:  see  R.  v. 
Huggins  (8);  R.  v.  Sunderland  Justice  (9),  per VAUGHAN 
WILLIAMS,  L.J.  Nevertheless,  there  must  appear  to  be  a 
real likelihood of bias. Surmise or conjecture is not enough: 
see  R.  v.  Cambrone  Justices,  Ex  p.  Pearce  (10);  R.  v. 
Nailsworth  Justices,  Ex  p.  Bird  (11).  There  must  be 
circumstances from which a reasonable man would think it 
likely or probable that the justice, or chairman, as the case 
may  be,  would,  or  did,  favour  one  side  unfairly  at  the 
expense  of  the  other.  The  court  will  not enquire  whether 
he  did,  in  fact,  favour  one  side  unfairly.  Suffice  it  that 
reasonable people might think he did. The reason is plain 
enough.  Justice  must  be  rooted  in  confidence;  and 
confidence is destroyed when right-minded people go away 
thinking; “the judge was biased.”” 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-15- 

10. 

The  august  Supreme Court,  in  the  case titled  ‘Federation 

of  Pakistan  v.  Muhammad  Akram  Sheikh’  [PLD  1989  SC  689],  has 

elucidated in detail the principle that justice should not only be done 

but manifestly and undoubtedly ought  and seem to have been done. 

In  the  same  judgment  the  exceptions  have  also  been  described  in 

detail. Reference is also made to the cases of ‘Government of N.W.F.P. 

through Chief Secretary and another v. Dr. Hussain Ahmed Haroon and 

others’ [2003 SCMR 104], ‘Suo Motu Case No.04 of 2010’ [PLD 2012 

SC 553] and ‘Asif Ali Zardari and another v. the State’ [PLD 2001 SC 

568].  It  is  only  because  of  the extra  ordinary  and  peculiar  facts and 

circumstances of this case that while exercising jurisdiction of judicial 

review under Article 199 of the Constitution we feel that it is inevitable 

to  go  an  extra  mile  so  that  every  party  to  the  lis  has  trust  and 

confidence that we will lean in favour of the principle that justice ought 

to  be  manifestly  and  undoubtedly  seen  to  be  done.    Whether  or  not 

these petitions should be allowed would require an examination of the 

provisions of the Act of 1976. 

11. 

The august Supreme Court in the case titled ‘Lahore High 

Court Bar Association and others v. General (R) Pervez Musharraf and 

others’ [2019 SCMR 1029] has observed and held that there cannot be 

more  grave  an  offence  than  high  treason  and  more  solemn  a 

proceedings  than  a  trial  relating  thereto  before  the  learned  Special 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-16- 

Court.  The Act  of  1973  provides  that  the  offence  of  high  treason,  as 

defined  in  Article  6  of  the  Constitution,  is  punishable  with  death  or 

imprisonment for life. The Act of 1976 was enacted to provide for the 

trial  by  a  special  Court  of  certain  offences  affecting  the  security, 

integrity or sovereignty of Pakistan or any part thereof, including the 

offence  of  high  treason  and  for  matters  connected  therewith.  The 

Special Court is defined under section 2(b) as meaning a court set up 

under section 4 ibid. The learned Special Court is, therefore, a creation 

of the Act of 1976 and has been explicitly established for the trial of 

the  offences  specified  in  section  3(1).  The  Federal  Government,  by 

notification in the official gazette, is empowered to set up one or more 

Special Courts composed of three persons each of whom is a Judge of 

a High Court and to nominate one of them to be the President of the 

Special  Court.  In  case  of  a  vacancy,  the  Federal  Government,  by 

notification  in  the  official  gazette,  appoints  another  person  to  fill  the 

vacancy. The discretion to initiate proceedings exclusively vests in the 

Federal Government as has been provided in section 5. It provides that 

the Federal Government shall forward to the Special Court, on behalf 

of the prosecution, a complaint in the form of a statement of the case 

to  be  tried  by  the  Court.  Section  5(3)(a)  empowers  the  Federal 

Government to submit an amended or additional statement of the case 

or  charge  at  any  time  before  the  judgment  is  pronounced.  Likewise, 

section 5(3)(b) empowers the Federal Government or the prosecution 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-17- 

to  submit  additional  names  of    accused  persons  or  witnesses  at  any 

subsequent stage of the prosecution evidence in the case. Section 6(f) 

explicitly provides that the learned Special Court shall, inter alia, hear 

the  prosecution  and  on  conclusion  shall  proceed  to  pronounce  the 

judgment.  The  Federal  Government,  under  section  7,  is  vested  with 

power to appoint the place or places for the Special Court to hold its 

sittings.  Sub  section  (1)  of  section  11  empowers  the  Federal 

Government  to  appoint  one  or  more  persons  to  conduct  the 

prosecution in a trial before the learned Special Court. Moreover, sub 

section (2) of section 11 vests the power in the Special Court to appoint 

a counsel for an accused person who is not represented, after taking 

into consideration the views of such an accused person. The person is 

engaged at the expense of the Federal Government.  

12. 

A  plain  reading  of  the  Act  of  1976  unambiguously  shows 

that the Federal Government and the prosecution have a pivotal role. 

The  trial  proceedings  under  the  Act  of  1976,  from  initiation  till 

conclusion,  are  dependent  on  the  presence  of  the  prosecution 

appointed  by  the  Federal  Government.  When  clauses  (a)  and  (b)  of 

section  5(3)  and  clause  (f)  of  section  6  are  read  together  it 

unambiguously  brings  out  the  legislative  intent  of  ensuring  that  the 

person appointed under section 11(1) conducts the prosecution till the 

judgment  is  pronounced.  The  Special  Court  cannot,  therefore, 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-18- 

pronounce the judgment without affording a reasonable opportunity of 

hearing to the appointed prosecutor. It is also important to give to the 

Federal  Government, 

through 

the  prosecution,  a 

reasonable 

opportunity before pronouncing the judgment, to exercise its options 

contemplated under clauses (a) and (b) of section 5(3). It is obvious 

from the language of the said clauses that this statutory power can be 

exercised  by 

the  Federal  Government  at  any 

time  before 

pronouncement  of  the  judgment.  The  Act  of  1976  read  as  a  whole 

unequivocally makes it obvious that the trial proceedings are entirely 

dependent  on  the  prosecution  and  that  in  its  absence  or  without 

hearing it, judgment cannot be announced.   

13. 

We have carefully perused the record and the judgment of 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  ‘Lahore  High  Court  Bar 

Association  and  others  v.  General  (R)  Pervez  Musharraf  and  others’ 

[2019 SCMR 1029]. The learned Special Court, despite having issued 

a  proclamation  and  declaring  the  Accused  as  an  absconder,  had  not 

denied  his  right  of  audience.  The  power  of  attorney  in  favour  of 

Barrister Salman Safdar was entertained and he was allowed to appear 

on  behalf  of  the  Accused till  passing  of  the  order,  dated 12-06-2019 

when  he  was  informed  that  he  could  no  longer  represent  his  client. 

However,  though,  the  Accused  was  represented  but  another  counsel 

was appointed to represent him under section 9. The audience of the 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-19- 

Accused was not denied till the passing of the impugned order, dated 

19-11-2019  i.e  when  the  pronouncement  of  the  judgment  was 

reserved. We also are of the opinion that the august Supreme Court 

had  not  restrained  the  learned  Special  Court  from  entertaining  or 

deciding  the  application  filed  under  section  265  K  of  the  Cr.P.C. The 

august  Supreme  Court  had  observed  that  if  the  Accused  fails  to 

surrender and does not appear on the next date of hearing then the 

learned  Special  Court  would  be  empowered  to  proceed  in  absentia 

under  section  9  of  the  Act  of  1976.  It  is  important  to  note  that  in 

paragraph  6  of  the  aforementioned  judgment,  the  august  Supreme 

Court has explicitly used the expression 'if he voluntarily chooses not 

to appear or join the proceedings' then the latter would lose the right 

to record his statement under section 342 of the Cr.P.C. We feel that, 

pursuant  to  the  directions  and  observations  of  the  august  Supreme 

Court,  the  learned  Special  Court  was  required  to  have  given  an 

opportunity  to  the  Accused  to  surrender  himself  and  appear  for 

recording his statement under section 342 of the Cr. P.C. If the latter 

had failed to do so and the learned Special Court was satisfied that the 

absence was voluntary then forfeiting the right of defence should have 

proceeded under section 9 of the Act of 1976 and in such an eventuality 

appointment of an advocate was not required because the Accused has 

already been declared as an absconder and his right to defend stood 

forfeited.  The  learned  Special  Court  in  such  an  eventuality  was, 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-20- 

therefore,  to  consider  whether  to  proceed  under  section  512  of  the 

Cr.P.C or pronounce judgment. If the latter option was to be exercised 

then  a  reasonable  opportunity  of  hearing  was  to  be  given  to  the 

prosecution  as  has  been  explicitly  provided  under  section  6(f).  As 

already  noted,  the  scheme  of  the  Act  of  1976  and  the  procedure 

prescribed  there  under  does  not  envisage  pronouncing  judgment 

without affording a hearing to the prosecution. In this case the main 

prosecutor  had  resigned  on  30-07-2018 while  the  other  members  of 

the  prosecution  team  were  de  notified  vide  notification  dated  23-10-

2019. It is, therefore, obvious that on 23-10-2019 the team of lawyers 

who  had  been  de-notified  were  not  authorized  to  submit  skeleton 

arguments nor additional arguments the next day. The learned Special 

Court vide order dated 24-10-2019 summoned the Secretary, Ministry 

of  Interior  to  appear  on  the  next  date  of  hearing  and  explain  under 

what  authority  of  law  had  the  notification  dated  23-10-2019  been 

issued.  However,  a  direction  was  not  given  to  appoint  another 

prosecutor. The next date of hearing was fixed on 19-11-2019 and in 

compliance  with  the  direction,  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior 

appeared and his explanation was not found satisfactory. His request 

for  allowing  some  time  for  appointing  a  prosecutor  was  also  not 

acceded  to  and  the  next  date  fixed  was  November  28,  2019  for 

pronouncing 

the 

judgment.  With  great  respect, 

the  Federal 

Government should have been afforded a reasonable time to appoint 

 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-21- 

a prosecutor. The pronouncement of judgment was subject to hearing 

the appointed prosecutor as contemplated under section 6(f) of the Act 

of 1976. It is implicit in the judgment of the august Supreme Court in 

the case of ‘Lahore High Court Bar Association and others v. General 

(R)  Pervez  Musharraf  and  others’  [2019  SCMR  1029]  that  the 

proceedings were to ensue in accordance with the procedure and the 

scheme  of  the  Act  of  1976.  The  requirements  prescribed  under  the 

provisions  of  the  Act  of  1976  are  obviously  to  ensure  procedural 

fairness  which  do  not  appear  to  have  been  followed  in  this  case. 

Moreover, the observations made in the aforementioned judgment of 

the august Supreme Court also do not appear to have  been adhered 

to.   

14. 

While  entertaining  these  petitions  which  create  an  extra 

ordinary situation, we were mindful of the fact that the learned Special 

Court  established  under  the  Act  of  1976  comprises  three  Hon’ble 

Judges of the High Court. The petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction 

of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  while,  with  great 

respect,   the learned Special Court is the creation of the Act of 1976 

and its Hon'ble members are not sitting  as Judges of the  High Court 

but as persona designata in view of the law laid down by the august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  ‘Mian  Jamal  Shah  v.  the  Member 

Election Commission, Government of Pakistan, Lahore, etc.’ [PLD 1966 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-22- 

SC 1]. Reliance is also placed on the cases of ‘Brothers Sugar Mills Ltd 

and  others  v.  Punjab  Cooperative  Board  for  Liquidation  and  others’ 

[2012  CLC  1369],  ‘Sartaj  v.  The  State  through  Deputy  Attorney 

General,  etc.’  [2012  PTD  1116],  ‘Asghar  Ali  and  another  v.  The 

State’[1999 SCMR 654]. Moreover, the amenability of the orders of the 

learned Special Court to the judicial review is implicit in the judgment 

of  the  august  Supreme  Court  titled  ‘Abdul  Hameed  Dogar  v.  Federal 

Government through Secretary M/o Interior and 2 others’ [PLD 2016 

SC 454]. We have also considered the ouster clause under section 12 

of the Act of 1976 and we have exercised jurisdiction under Article 199 

of  the  Constitution  because  we  were  satisfied  that  the  lis  is  covered 

within the scope of intervention by way of judicial review in the light of 

the principles and law enunciated the cases titled ‘Mian Jamal Shah v. 

the  Member  Election  Commission,  Government  of  Pakistan,  Lahore, 

etc.’ [PLD 1966 SC 1], ‘Yousaf Ali v. Muhammad Aslam Zia’ [PLD 1958 

SC 104], ‘Zafar Ul Ahsan v. The Republic of Pakistan (through Cabinet 

Secretary, Government of Pakistan)’ [PLD 1960 SC 113], ‘Kiramat Ali 

and another v. Muhammad Younis Haji and others’ [PLD 1963 SC 191] 

and‘Abbasia  Cooperative  Bank  (now  Punjab  Provincial  Cooperative 

Bank Ltd.) v. Hakim Rafiz Muhammad Gaus and 5 others’ [PLD 1997 

SC 3]. 

 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-23- 

15. 

The above are the reasons for our short order, dated 27-

11-2019, which is reproduced as follows:- 

“For  reasons  to  be  recorded  later,  we  allow 

Writ Petition No.4075/2019 filed by the Ministry of Interior 

and consequently set aside the impugned order, dated 19-

11-2019. The instant petition and W.P. No.4076/2019 are 

thus disposed-of in the following terms:- 

i. 

The  Federal  Government  is  directed  to 

notify  the  Prosecutor  or  a  team  of 

prosecutors,  as  the  case  may  be,  on  or 

before 05-12-2019. 

ii. 

The learned Special Court will fix a date for 

affording  a  reasonable  opportunity  of 

hearing  to  the  notified  Prosecutor  or  the 

prosecution team, as the case may be, as 

well  as  the  counsel  appointed  for  the 

accused  under  section  11(2)  of  the 

Criminal Laws Amendment (Special Court) 

Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as to the 

‘Act of 1976’). 

iii. 

The  learned  Special  Court  is  expected  to 

take into consideration the grounds raised 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4075/2019 

-24- 

in  the  application  filed  under  section  

265-K  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 

1898. The parties shall be at liberty to raise 

any other factual or legal ground.  

iv. 

The  learned  Special  Court  is  expected  to 

conclude  the  proceedings  expeditiously 

having regarding to the cardinal principles 

of fair trial.  

v. 

The  petitioner  in  W.P.  No.4076/2019, 

namely, Barrister Salman Safdar may, if he 

so  wishes,  assist  the  learned  counsel 

appointed  for  the  accused  under  section 

11(2) of the Act of 1976.” 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Luqman Khan/* 
30-11-2019. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
