Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.244 of 2018 

Noman Ahmed and 14 others 

VS 

Capital Development Authority, etc. 

Petitioners by 

: 

M/sZulfiqar  Abbasi,  Raja  Inaam  Amin  Minhas, 
Muhammad  Shoaib  Shaheen,  Ch.  Afrasiab  Khan, 
Adnan  Haider  Randhawa, Malik  Nasir  Abbas, Ghulam 
Murtaza  Watto,  Muhammad  Shakeel  Abbasi,  Qazi 
Ghulam  Dastagir,  Ahsan  Qureshi,  Ch.  WaqasZamir, 
Ali Nawaz Kharal, Mansoor Ahmed, Muhammad Umair 
Baloch,  Jahanzaib,  Muhammad  Rustum  Malik,  Qaiser 
Imam  Chaudhry,  Shaukat  Hayat  Khan,  Muhammad 
Latif  Saeed,  Khalil  ur  Rehman,  Shujaullah  Gondal 
Advocates. 

Respondents by 

: 

M/s Amir Latif Gill, Hafiz Arfat Chaudhry, Malik Javed 
Iqbal  Wains,  Muhammad  Anwar  Dar,  Jahangir  Khan 
Jadoon,  Muhammad  Nazir  Jawad,  Syed  Muhammad 
Shah,  Ghulam  Shabbir  Akbar,  Hussain  Haider 
Thaheem Advocates. 

Mr Naveed Ellahi, member (Estate) CDA. 
Mr Shafi Marwat, Director, CDA.  

Dr Satish Sharyar, DC, FGEHA. 
Mr Khan Zeb, AD, FGEHA. 

Date of Hearing 

:  04.06.2021. 

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.-  The most intrusive power of the 

State and a fundamental attribute of its sovereignty is its inherent power to 

condemn  private  property  and  transfer  its  ownership  to  the  government 

without  the  consent  of  its  owner.  The  abuse  of  this  inherent  power  by  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 2 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

State  through  its  agents,  i.e.  public  functionaries,  can  have  devastating 

consequences, so much so that human lives could be destroyed. The abuse 

of  this  sovereign  power  causes  gross  violations  of  human  rights  and  the 

constitutionally  guaranteed  rights, particularly in  the  case  of  those  who  are 

poor  and  belong  to  the  weaker  segments  of  the  society.  The  Capital  of  the 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  i.e.  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  has  been 

established  and  is  in  the  process  of  being  developed  pursuant  to  acquiring 

land  through  the  exercise  of  the  intrusive  power  of  eminent  domain.  The 

responsibility  of  the  State  to  protect  the  rights  of  citizens  whose  private 

properties  have  been  or  are  in  the  process  of  being  condemned  is  of 

paramount  importance.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  State  to  ensure,  through  its 

agents, that the citizens who are subjected to the power of eminent domain 

are treated in a just, fair and equitable manner. It is a constitutional duty of 

the  State  to  ensure  that  the  condemnation  of  private  properties  does  not 

result  in  its  confiscation,  rather  that  its  owners  are  justly  and  fairly 

compensated.  Regrettably,  what  has  transpired  during  these  proceedings 

unquestionably  establishes  that  the  State  and  its  functionaries,  instead  of 

protecting  the  citizens,  have  grossly  violated  their  guaranteed  fundamental 

rights through abuse of the power of eminent domain, inevitably having the 

effect  of  virtually  confiscating  their  private  properties.  The  victims  of  the 

abuse  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

have been subjected to unimaginable agony and trauma for decades and the 

human  cost  is  definitely  immeasurable.  The  grievances  raised  in  the 

petitions  in  hand  are  essentially  regarding  the  rights  of  those  citizens  who 

have  been  subjected  to  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain.  The 

facts  brought  on  record  during  the  proceedings  have  manifested  the  worst 

and  unthinkable  form  of  abuse  of  land  acquisition  or  the  power  of  eminent 

 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

domain of the State and the resultant grave violations of fundamental rights 

of the victims whose properties were or are in the process of being subjected 

to condemnation. Most of the  affected victims are stated to be  so poor  and 

weak  that  they  have  neither  the  means  nor  the  ability  to  fight  a  deeply 

corrupted  governance  system  which  does  not  favour  them.  Their  right  of 

access to justice is  denied because  the high cost of  litigation is out of  their 

reach  and  the  delays  caused  during  the  judicial  process  renders  any  relief 

illusory. Most of the victims are not even aware of their rights and thus they 

are vulnerable to be exploited because of an apparent collusion between the 

unscrupulous investors and the public functionaries. It was observed during 

the  proceedings  and has  become  obvious  from  the  material brought on  the 

record  that  the  victims  of  the  abuse  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain  have 

not been treated justly, fairly and as equal citizens of Pakistan. The way they 

have been treated by the public functionaries shows that as though to their 

extent  the  fundamental  right  which  guarantees  inviolability  of  dignity  of  a 

human  does  not  exist  in  the  Constitution.  The  public  functionaries  and 

institutions who owe to the people a fiduciary duty to safeguard their rights 

and  to  promote  their  welfare  have  themselves  become  beneficiaries  of  the 

property acquired by the State by exercising the power of eminent domain. 

Citizens  have  been  subjected  to  suffer  unimaginable  pain  and  agony  for 

decades.  Their rights have been violated by those who owe them a fiduciary 

duty  as  agents  of  the  State.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  public  functionaries  to 

guard  the  vulnerable  citizens  against  human  rights  abuse.  This  required 

taking  appropriate  steps  to  prevent,  investigate  punish  and  redress  such 

abuse  through  effective  policies,  legislation,  regulations  and  adjudication. 

The  petitions  in  hand  were  only  a  tip  of  the  iceberg  and  the  information 

brought  on  record  later  was  shocking  and  inconceivable  in  a  society  which 

 
 
Page - 4 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

claims  to  be  governed  under  the  Constitution.  The  human  cost  of  the 

acknowledged  abuse  of  eminent  domain  is  definitely  immeasurable.  The 

grave nature of violations of guaranteed fundamental rights and the State’s 

failure to protect the guaranteed rights of the citizens, particularly those who 

are most vulnerable, manifests absolute disregard of the public functionaries 

and the successive governments for their obligations under the Constitution 

of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  1973  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

'Constitution'). The acknowledged rights are being denied to those citizens 

who  are  poor,  weak  and  voiceless.  The  treatment  of  the  petitioners  and 

thousands  of  other  similarly  placed  agonized  and  tormented  citizens  on 

account of the abuse of the power of eminent domain of the State is indeed 

a  fraud  that  has  been  played  on  the  Constitution  and  the  guaranteed 

fundamental  rights.  The  Governments  are  established  to  accomplish  two 

fundamental  objects;  protection  of  the  people  and  promotion  of  their 

welfare.  As  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  later,  successive  governments 

have  been  instrumental  in  perpetuating  violations  of  fundamental  rights 

stemming from abuse of the power of eminent domain. Instead of promoting 

welfare of the citizens, policies have been formulated to benefit the powerful 

elite  at  the  expense  of  the  acknowledged  rights  of  citizens  and  public 

interest.  The  petitions  listed  in  ‘Annexure-A’  attached  hereto  have  raised 

questions  of  paramount  public  importance  in  the  context  of  abuse  of  the 

power of eminent domain and the resultant grave violations of fundamental 

rights.  It  has  highlighted  a  mindset  of  the  agents  of  the  State  i.e.  public 

functionaries  and  the  system  of  governance  which,  rather  than  serving  the 

actual  stakeholder,  the  people  of  Pakistan,  has  created  opportunities  that 

harm  the  rights  of  those  citizens  who  are  poor,  weak  and  vulnerable.  In  a 

nutshell,  the  proceedings  before  this  Court  have  brought  on  record  an 

 
 
Page - 5 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

unimaginable travesty of justice and the worst form of abuse of exercise of 

the  power  of  the  State  to  condemn  private  property.  This  Court  has  no 

hesitation in observing that the phenomena of governance that has prevailed 

in  the  Capital  of  Pakistan  for  the  past  many  decades  has  failed  to  protect  

the citizens and has instead benefited the privileged and the powerful elites 

at the expense of their rights.               

Manifestation  of  grave  violations  of  fundamental  rights  and 
inconceivable injustices:  

2. 

In order to highlight the nature of grievances raised by the petitioners, 

as  an  illustration  the  facts  relating  to  some  of  the  petitions  are  briefly 

discussed as follows;     

3. 

Abdul  Qudoos,  son  of  Sajawal  Khan,  petitioner  in  W.P.  No. 

4242/2017, has asserted that his brother, namely Liaquat, was a resident of 

village  Landa  Mastal,  Islamabad.  The  latter  owned  property  which  was 

acquired  by  the  Capital  Development  Authority  [hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  “CDA”]  in  1968.  The  brother  passed  away  in  1975  and  the  CDA 

informed  his  mother,  namely  Mst.  Ajaib  Jan,  that  she  was  entitled  to  the 

allotment  of  a  plot.  Consequently,  she  was  allotted  a  plot  in  Sector  I-10, 

Islamabad.  The  allotment  was  later  cancelled  and  another  plot  i.e.  plot  no. 

1083  in  Sector  I-14/4,  was  allotted  vide  letter  dated  21.08.1993.  The 

allotment  was  subsequently  cancelled.  The  petitioner  filed  W.P.  No. 

354/2015 which was disposed of vide order, dated 22.04.2015, pursuant to 

a  statement  made  on  behalf  of  the  CDA.  Despite  this  Court’s  direction  the 

grievance  was  not  redressed  and,  therefore,  the  petitioner  filed  Criminal 

Original  No.  33/2016  and  the  same  was  disposed  of  vide  order  dated 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 6 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

19.04.2016.  The  CDA  was  seeking  the  consent  of  the  petitioner  for  the 

allotment  of  a  plot  in  Sector  I-12.  The  offer  was  not  acceptable  because 

Sector  I-12  is  yet  to  be  developed.  The  petitioner,  therefore,  is  seeking  a 

direction  to  the  CDA  to  allot  a  plot  in  one  of  the  developed  sectors.  These 

facts have been admitted by  the CDA  in its written comments. The  entitled 

owner of the condemned property had passed away in 1975 and his mother 

Mst. Ajaib Jan has since been denied her right for more than four  decades. 

The litigation cost and the mental agony suffered by Mst. Ajaib Jan and her 

family  during  the  last  four  decades  are  besides  being  treated  unfairly, 

unjustly and contrary to the inviolability of her dignity. 

4. 

The  petitioner,  namely  Muhammad  Shabbir,  in  W.P.  No.  794/2019, 

had  earlier  filed  W.P.  No.  4177/2010  which  was  disposed  of  by  this  Court 

vide  order  dated  14.02.2017.  Several  other  petitions  were  also  disposed  of 

vide  the  same  order.  The  property  of  the  petitioner  was  situated  in  the 

revenue  estates  which were  acquired  for  developing  Sectors  H-16  and  I-17 

i.e.  Noon,  Bhattana  Kalan,  Sheikh  Pur,  Jhangi  Syedan,  Kot  Kalian,  Bajnial, 

Narehla and Lakhu. The  award was announced on 15.01.2009. The entitled 

claimants  were  not  paid  compensation  and  a  perusal  of  order  dated 

14.02.2017  of  this  Court  shows  that  in  response  to  a  query  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  CDA,  after  seeking  instructions,  had  conceded  that  at  the 

time  when  the  award  was  announced  i.e.  on  15.01.2009,  funds  were  not 

available. However, it is an admitted position that those who were influential 

did manage to receive compensation while the poor were ignored. This Court 

had,  therefore,  directed  the  CDA  to  pay  compensation  to  the  entitled  land 

owners  within  one  month  from  the  date  of  the  order,  failing  which  the 

claimants  would  be  entitled  to  get  themselves  de-notified  from  the  award. 

 
 
 
Page - 7 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

The order of this Court was assailed by the CDA and Civil Petitions No. 1790 

and  1859  to  1875  of  2017,  titled  “CDA  through  its  Chairman  and  others  v. 

Muhammad  Shabbir  and  others”  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated 

15.05.2018.  The  award  was  announced  on  15.01.2009  but  those  who  did 

not have influence remain uncompensated even after the lapse of more than 

a decade. It is noted that the CDA has informed that the market value which 

was assessed at the time of announcing the award was about Rs 0.8 million 

and  that  the  claimants  are  entitled  to  on  8%  per  annum  in  addition  to  the 

evaluated  market  value  in  2009.  Whether  this  would  amount  to  being 

'compensated' in terms of the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 23 

of the Constitution will be discussed later.       

5. 

The  petitioners  in  W.P.  No.  1027/2019,  assert  that  they  were 

residents  of  village  Dherak  Mohri,  Tehsil  and  District  Islamabad  and  their 

built-up properties were acquired through the award dated 16.09.1987. They 

have sought indulgence of this Court to direct the CDA to compensate them 

for  condemnation  of  their  properties.  The  CDA,  in  its  comments,  has  taken 

the  stance  that  the  objections  were  raised  by  the  Commissioner  CDA  and 

pursuant  thereto  the  Deputy  Commissioner  CDA  had  conducted  an  inquiry 

followed  by  passing    orders,  dated  18.07.1988  and  01.09.1988.  The  latter 

had  verified  the  rightful  claimants  but  the  CDA  challenged  the  orders  of  its 

own  Deputy  Commissioner  and  the  appeals  were  dismissed  by  the 

Commissioner  (Appeals)  CDA  vide  order  dated  15.05.1990.  The  CDA  filed 

review  petitions  and  they  too  were  dismissed vide  order dated  28.11.2003. 

In the meanwhile, the National Accountability Bureau [hereinafter referred to 

as  the  “NAB”]  initiated  investigations.  A  meeting  between  the  Chairman 

NAB and the Chairman CDA was held on 02.11.2007 and, pursuant thereto, 

 
 
 
 
Page - 8 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the main award of built-up properties was cleared with the direction to take 

over possession of the acquired land and release the benefits of the entitled 

affectees. Reference was filed by the NAB i.e. Reference no. 13/2007 and on 

conclusion  of  the  trial  all  the  accused  were  acquitted  by  the  learned 

Accountability Court vide judgment dated 11.12.2014. Despite suffering the 

rigors  of  criminal  trial  and  the  genuine  status  having  been  verified  by  the 

CDA itself, the condemned property owners remain uncompensated.  

6. 

The petitioners in W.P. No. 1237/2019, assert that they are legal 

heirs  of  Mst.  BibiGul  Fatima,  who  owned  property  in  villages  Harno  and 

Thanda Pani, Tehsil and District Islamabad, which was acquired in 1975. The 

mother,  without  being  compensated,  passed  away  in  1977.  Their  mother’s 

name appeared in the award. A Scrutiny Committee constituted by the CDA 

approved and recommended the allotment of a plot in 2011. The petitioners 

had  also  approached  the  Wafaqi  Mohtasib  (Ombudsman)  [hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  “Ombudsman”]  and  the  complaint  was  disposed  of 

pursuant to an undertaking given on behalf of the CDA. 

7. 

The  ancestors  of  the  petitioners  in  W.P.  No.  3106/2019  had 

settled  in  village  Bekhar  Fateh  Bux,  Tehsil  and  District  Islamabad.  The 

properties  were  acquired  in  1985.  The  Scrutiny  Committee  constituted  by 

the  CDA  had  declared  the  petitioners  as  entitled  for  compensation  but  the 

Bureau filed Reference no. 21/2007 against them and 83 other citizens. The 

petitioners  and  other  accused  were  acquitted  by  the  learned  Accountability 

Court  vide  judgment  dated  11.12.2014.  The  status  of  the  petitioners  as 

claimants has not been disputed by the CDA in its written comments.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 9 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

8. 

The  petitioners  in  W.P.  No.  1194/2019  assert  that  they  were 

affected by the awards dated 02.05.1985 and 16.09.1987, respectively. The 

written  comments  filed  by  the  CDA  are  evasive  but  ironically  a  stance  has 

been taken that the 'adult male descendants' were compensated.  

9. 

Muhammad  Arshad  Khan,  petitioner  in  W.P.  No.  963/2019, 

asserts  that  land  owned  by  him  and  his  father  in  village  Sangjani,  District 

Islamabad was acquired for the construction of Khanpur Dam. The land was 

acquired  vide  award  dated  30.01.1991.  The  petitioner  asserts  that  he  has 

been  running  from  pillar  to  post  since  30.01.1991,  but  his  right  is  being 

refused.  The  CDA,  in  its  written  comments,  has  acknowledged  that  the 

allotment  file  of  the  petitioner  was  pending  but  it  could  not  be  processed 

because the then Capital Administration and Development Division had, vide 

letter  dated  18.05.2016,  imposed  a  ban.  It  has  been  further  stated  that  in 

2017  fresh  SOPs  were  issued  and  that  the  petitioner  has  been  asked  to 

complete the formalities.  

10. 

The  petitioners  in  W.P.  No.  3638/2020  claim  that  they  are 

permanent residents of village Sanyari Sandhuri and that they had inherited 

properties owned by their ancestors. They are seeking a direction to the CDA 

to implement decisions taken in the 12th meeting of  its Board meeting held 

on  25.07.2016.  The  land  was  acquired  for  establishing  the  Army  General 

Headquarters  in  Sector  E-11.  The  relevant  position  of  the  decision  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 10 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

reproduced as follows:  

“Discussion: 

Deputy  Director  General  L&E  presented  the  Summary  and 

Disseminated the following information to the board. 

 Issues pertaining to handing over possession of E-

10  and  D-11  to  GHQ  due  to  encroachments/new 

constructions  within  the  specified  area  are  being 

addressed  and  estimate  of  BUPs  has  been 

determined  as  approximately  7000  plots  of  size 

25x50ft. 

 Survey  of  two  villages  ‘Parri/Senyari’  that  fall 

within the specified area have been completed for 

BUPs  while  village  Chauntra  is  still  left  to  be 

surveyed jointly by CDA and GHQ. 

 Two sub-sectors of H-16 have been earmarked for 

resettlement of affectees of DCI land. 

 In compliance of the directive of prime Minister to 

resolve  the  issue  of  compensation  mutually  by 

CDA and GHQ a high level meeting was conveyed 

and it was decided that GHQ will partly contribute 

in  lieu  of  land  compensation  and  rehabilitation  of 

affectees  of  sector  E-/D-11  to  the  tune  of  Rs.4.5 

billion.  This  contribution  of  GHQ  in  subsequent 

meetings  has  been  enhanced  on  the  request  of 

CDA  due  to  inflation  and  cost  of  compensation  to 

 
 
 
 
Page - 11 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the  tune  of  Rs.$billion  for  acquisition  of  land  and 

Rs.2  Billion  for  the  Development  of  two  sub-

sectors of H-16. 

 Other  modalities shall  be  followed  as  described  in 

Para 4 of the summary.” 

The  CDA  has  submitted  a  report  but  it  does  not 

appear  to  be  satisfactory.  It  has  taken  a  stance 

which is contrary to the above reproduced decision 

taken  in  the  12th  meeting  of  the  Board.  There  is 

nothing  on  record  to  confirm  that  after  the 

decisions taken in the 12th meeting a credible and 

transparent  survey  had  been  conducted 

to 

ascertain the rightful owners of properties.  

11. 

The response of the CDA in most of the cases remained evasive. 

This  Court  was  also  informed  that  the  record  relating  to  certain  acquired 

areas  had  been  taken  away  by  the  officials  of  the  National  Accountability 

Bureau  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "NAB")  and  it  was  not  returned 

because  according  to  the  latter  it  has  been  misplaced.  It  had  become 

obvious to  this Court that grave  irregularities  had  been committed, causing 

unimaginable injustices and agony to the  genuine  affected owners who had 

been deprived of their properties due to exercise of land acquisition powers 

in an arbitrary and non-transparent manner under the Capital Development 

Authority  Ordinance,  1960  [hereinafter 

referred 

to  as 

the  “CDA 

Ordinance”]. The violations of fundamental rights appeared to be of such a 

grave  nature  that  this  Court  would  have  failed  in  its  constitutional  duty  by 

looking the other  way. The victims were obviously those who belong to the 

 
 
 
 
Page - 12 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

weak  and  vulnerable  segments  of  the  society  and  who  could  not  afford  to 

enforce their rights through the costly litigation process and because of the 

complex  mess  created  by  the  public  functionaries  solely  on  account  of  bad 

governance and for other extraneous reasons. It had also become obvious to 

this  constitutional  Court  that  the  governance  system  prevalent  during  the 

last  many  decades  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  has  not  favoured  the 

weak  and  destitute.  The  public 

functionaries 

themselves  created 

opportunities for corruption by abusing the power of eminent domain. Rather 

than being accountable for the grave harm they have caused to the citizens 

who  have  been  arbitrarily  deprived  of  their  private  properties,  the  victims 

are  being  blamed  for  committing  fraud.  Could  any  citizen  have  even 

attempted to commit a fraud if the public functionaries had served them in 

consonance with their fiduciary duty to protect their rights? The answer is an 

emphatic  no.  The  opportunities  are  created  by  the  public  functionaries 

themselves. The failure to timely redress the grievances of agonized victims 

is  obvious  because  their  rights  are  admitted  and  acknowledged.  The  CDA 

was,  therefore,  directed  to  submit  a  detailed  report  regarding  the  status  of 

admitted  claims  relating  to  citizens  affected  by  the  abuse  of  the  power  of 

eminent domain. The admitted facts brought on record are unimaginable and 

shocking for this Court, which has been established under the Constitution to 

enforce  and  protect  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens.  The  admitted 

facts are briefly recorded as follows; 

The admitted abuse of power of eminent domain in the Capital:  

12. 

The  CDA was  established  under  the  CDA  Ordinance  to  plan  and 

develop the Capital of Pakistan pursuant to a meticulously prepared ‘master 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 13 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

plan’ by experts after extensive deliberations. The ‘master plan’ was given a 

statutory backing under section 11 of the CDA Ordinance. The ‘master plan’ 

had  envisaged  that  the  entire  area  described  in  the  ‘Schedule’  of  the  CDA 

Ordinance would be acquired for establishing the Capital of Pakistan through 

the  exercise  of  the  States  power  of  eminent  domain.  After  promulgation  of 

the CDA Ordinance, the process for acquiring land was initiated and the first 

award was announced on 12.02.1961. In order to 'compensate' the owners 

of  the  condemned  properties,  various  policies  and  regulations  were  issued 

from  time  to  time  i.e.  Scheme  for  Allotment  of  Agriculture  Land  to  Persons 

Affected  by  Acquisition,  1965,  Rehabilitation  Policy,  1984,  The  Islamabad 

Displaced  Persons  Rehabilitation  Policy,  1996,  Land  Acquisition  and 

Rehabilitation  Regulations,  2007,  The  Land  Disposal 

in 

Islamabad 

Regulations,  1985,  Land  Disposal  in  Islamabad  Regulations,  1988,  The 

Islamabad  Land  Disposal  Regulations,  1993  and  Islamabad  Land  Disposal 

Regulations, 2005. According to the reports submitted by the CDA, total land 

measuring  304.62  square  kilometer  has  so  far  been  acquired  through 

respective  awards.  For  reasons  best  known  to  the  CDA,  a  practice  was 

adopted  at a  later  stage  to  acquire  land and  built up  properties  separately. 

The  awards  were  announced  separately  but  not  simultaneously.  The  total 

number  of  awards  announced  by  the  CDA  in  relation  to  acquiring  land  are 

527  while  in  case  of  built  up  properties  158  awards  have  been  notified.  In 

case  of  land  the  last  award  was  announced  on  23.06.2009  and  relating  to 

built-up properties on 06.07.2018. In some cases awards in respect of land 

were announced a decade ago but corresponding awards relating to built-up 

properties  have  been  delayed  and  have  not  been  finalized  as  yet.  This 

practice  of  announcing  separate  awards  has  created  insurmountable 

complications because it has defeated the essence of 'compensation'.  When 

 
 
Page - 14 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the  first  report  was  submitted  by  the  CDA  the  total  outstanding  amount 

regarding  the  admitted  claims  of  compensation  relating  to  awards  of 

acquisition  of  land  was  Rs.8.0224  billion.  This  outstanding  amount  was  in 

respect  of  awards  which  were  announced  from  1967  till  the  last  award 

announced in 2009. It is noted that the outstanding amount is based on the 

market  value  assessed  at  the  relevant  time  rather  than  the  current  rate. 

While the proceedings were pending before this Court, some payments were 

made  to  the  affected  persons  on  the  intervention  of  a  Commission  notified 

by  the  CDA,  but  on  the  basis  of  the  awards  which  had  been  announced 

decades  ago.  The  property  owners  whose  claims  were  admitted  have 

obviously  been  forced  to  receive  copper  for  gold  for  no  fault  of  their  own. 

This Court has been informed that most of the outstanding amount pertains 

to  awards  dated  02.12.2008  and  15.01.2009  respectively.  It  was  also 

informed  during  the  proceedings  that  the  CDA  had  announced  awards  on 

28.04.1985  for  acquisition  of  land  to  develop  sectors  F-12  and  G-12.  Both 

the  sectors  have  now  been  handed  over  by  the  Federal  Government  to  the 

FGEHA  for  development  and  allotment  of  plots  to  members  of  specified 

groups.  The  FGEHA  has  recently  reassessed  the  market  rate  and 

consequently it has been increased from an average of Rs 11000/- to more 

than  Rs  7  million.  Such  increase  establishes  the  fact  that  there  has  been 

exponential  increase  in  the  market  value  of  the  properties  which  were 

acquired  in  1985.    The  total  outstanding  amount  yet  to  be  paid  to  the 

property  owners  in  the  case  of  acquired  built  up  properties  is  Rs.73.538 

million. The most alarming admitted claims are in respect of commitment of 

allotment  of  plots  to  the  affected  citizens  based  on  the  principle  of  land 

sharing.  It  is  acknowledged  and  admitted  that  the  outstanding  number  of 

plots yet to be allotted to those who were subjected to condemnation of land 

 
 
Page - 15 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

is 5080 (five thousand and eighty). These admitted claims relate to awards 

which  were  announced  between  30.12.1968  and  02.12.2008.  Likewise,  in 

the  case  of  built  up  properties  4659  (four  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty 

nine)  plots  are  admitted  to  be  allotted  pursuant  to  announcing  various 

awards from 28.01.1967 till 06.07.2018. The admitted position, therefore, is 

that  the  CDA  acknowledges  the  right  of  allotment  of  10739  (ten  thousand 

seven  hundred  and  thirty  nine)  plots  to  those  who  have  been  deprived  of 

their private properties. Regrettably, this figure may even be higher because 

of the admitted position that some record is missing while no credible survey 

has been conducted in certain areas.  The CDA has taken a stance that two 

sectors  have  been  reserved  for  allotment  of  plots  to  the  affected  citizens 

i.e.I-12  and  I-14.  Sector  I-12  is  yet  to  be  developed.  However,  both  these 

sectors  are  not  those  which  have  a  high  demand.  It  is  interesting  to  note 

that  while  the  admitted  rights  of  the  affected  property  owners  were  being 

denied,  during  the  same  period  a  large  number  of  plots  were  allotted  at 

throw away prices to employees of the CDA, including those who had served 

as  Chairmen and members of the Board. Plots were created for them in the 

open  spaces  and  green  areas  in  the  most  sought  after  developed  sectors. 

Plots  were  also  allotted  to  public  functionaries  of  specified  groups  including 

selected privileged media persons and lawyers at prices that were far lower 

than  the  market  rate.  23844  plots  were  allotted  to  the  employees  and 

officials of the CDA while the share of the other privileged groups was 7127 

plots against nominal payments. The abuse of the power of eminent domain 

was  further  highlighted  when  this  Court  was  informed  that  the  CDA  had 

entered  into  purported  settlement  arrangements  illegally  and  without  the 

consent of all the affected claimants. In this regard reference was made to a 

purported  settlement  arrangement  relating  to  properties  acquired  in  the 

 
 
Page - 16 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

revenue estate/village Kurri. The CDA admits that the arrangement is to the 

effect  that  only  'male  heirs'  were  declared  to  be  eligible  and  entitled  for 

compensation.  It  is  also  admitted  that  such  an  arrangement  is  being 

opposed by the female heirs because they were not privy to the settlement. 

In  response  to  a  query,  the  CDA  official  could  not  give  any  plausible 

explanation for such an arrangement because it was obviously repugnant to 

the injunctions of Islam and the constitutionally guaranteed rights. It is also 

acknowledged that many affected citizens had been unnecessarily subjected 

to  the  travails  of  criminal  trials  because  NAB  had  initiated  proceedings 

regarding  alleged  corruption  and  corrupt  practices  and  irregularities 

committed  by  officials  of  the  CDA.  The  affected  citizens  were  ultimately 

acquitted and the acquittals have attained finality.  

13.  The  above  admitted  facts  establish  gross  violations  of  fundamental 

rights  of  property  owners  who  were  subjected  to  abuse  of  the  power  of 

eminent domain. They have and continue to suffer because they don't have 

the ability and means to enforce their acknowledged rights. Thus they do not 

have  access  to  justice.  Keeping  in  view  the  magnitude  of  the  violations  of 

fundamental  rights,  this  Court,  vide  order  dated  07.05.2019,  had  directed 

the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior  and  the  Chairman  CDA  to  probe  into  the 

unexplained  and  inordinate  delay  in  compensating  the  affectees  of  land 

acquisition in the Islamabad Capital Territory. This Court had also appointed 

Mr  Asad  Umer,  Member  National  Assembly  (now  a  Federal  Minister),  Mr  Ali 

Nawaz  Awan,  Special  Assistant  to  the  Prime  Minister/  Member  of  the 

National Assembly and Raja Khurram Nawaz, Member of National Assembly, 

as  amici  to  assist  this  Court.  The  CDA,  vide  notification  dated  14.05.2019, 

 
 
 
Page - 17 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

 had formed a Commission consisting of the following:  

i. 

M Asad Umar, MNA, Member, 

ii. 

M. Ali Nawaz Awan, MNA, Member, 

iii. 

Raja Khurram Nawaz, MNA, Member, 

iv. 

Secretary Interior Division, Member. 

v. 

Chairman, CDA, Member/Secretary of the Commission. 

14.  The reports of the Commission were submitted from time to time and 

some of the recommendations were also approved by the Board of the CDA. 

The Commission had indeed endeavored to redress the grievances but they 

also appeared to be helpless because of the complex issues created by bad 

governance and an ineffective executing agency. Moreover, the Commission 

urged  this  Court  to  give  its  opinion  on  certain  legal  issues  such  as  the 

consequences  of  delay  in  payment  of  admitted  compensation.  The 

Commission  had  managed  to  achieve  some  progress  because,  due  to  its 

intervention,  development  work  in  Sector  E-12  was  initiated  after  several 

decades.  During  the  proceedings  Mr  Ali  Nawaz  Awan,  Member  National 

Assembly  and  Special  Assistant  of  the  Prime  Minister,  had  informed  this 

Court that the Directorate of Land and Rehabilitation, and other departments 

of the CDA which were responsible for resolving the hardship and grievances 

of  the  affected  property  owners  had  not  been  made  fully  functional.  In 

response to a query the CDA had informed that officials were reluctant to be 

posted  because  of  the  fear  of  being  exposed  to  proceedings  by  NAB  and 

other  prosecution  agencies.  This  Court,  vide  order  dated  15.01.2020,  had, 

therefore,  directed  the  Board  of  the  CDA  to  ensure  that  the  relevant 

departments  were  made  functional.  However,  despite  sincere  endeavors  of 

 
 
 
 
Page - 18 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the members of the Commission, thousands of affected citizens could not be 

compensated.  Those  who  were  paid  outstanding  amounts  were  also  not 

'compensated' for their lost properties because it was based on assessment 

of market value made decades ago.       

Grievances in WP No 244/2018 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘E-12 
Petition’): 

15. 

The petitioners in W.P. No. 244/2018 are aggrieved that despite 

payment  of  consideration  and  allotment  of  plots  in  Sector  E-12  in 

1988/1989,  no  development  work  had  been  initiated  and  thus  they  were 

deprived of enjoying their properties. The Sector could not be developed by 

the CDA because the latter was unable to compensate the affected property 

owners.  However,  pursuant  to  directions  given  by  this  Court  progress  was 

made and development work has now been partially initiated. 

Grievances  in  WP  No  3450/2020  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 
'FGEHA petition’):   

16. 

The  petitioners  in  W.P.  no.  3450/2020  are  owners  of  properties 

in the area which is being acquired to develop Sectors F-14 and F-15 by the 

Federal Government Employees Housing Authority [hereinafter referred to as 

the “FGEHA”]. They are aggrieved because the latter is refusing to enforce 

the  negotiated  settlement  which  had  attained  finality  between  the  parties. 

The  terms  and  conditions  were  approved  by  the  Executive  Board  of  the 

FGEHA  in  its  6th  meeting  held  on  12.08.2020.  The  relevant  portion  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 19 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

reproduced as follows:  

“99.   

The  land  of  the  said  sectors  measuring  9242 

Kanals  and  09  Marlas  was  acquired  by  the  Land  Acquisition 

Act  1894  @  Rs.2,  070,000  per  kanal  (F-14)  &  Rs.2,530,000 

per kanal (F-15) for allotment of plots to FGE employees and 

other  specified  groups  vide  awards  dated  15.11.2016  & 

28.09.2017  respectively.  The  layout  plan  of  sector  F-14  has 

also been approved by the CDA and planning of F-15 is under 

process with FGEHA planning wing.  

100.   

Most  of  the  land  affectees  (more  than  300) 

challenged  the  above  said  awards  before  Civil/Referee  court 

at Islamabad by filing reference petitions u/s. 18  of the land 

acquisition  Act, 1894  for  enhancement of  land  compensation 

up 

to  Rs.6,000,000/-  per  kanal  which  are  pending 

adjudication.  Further  the  acquisition  proceedings  were  also 

challenged  by  the  land  affectees/locals  in  Islamabad  High 

Court through a numbers of writ petitions titled ‘Malik Bashir 

Ahmed  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  etc.’  The  Honorable 

Islamabad High Court (Single Judge) while accepting the said 

writ petition vide order dated 23.10.2017 and decided that in 

the  presence  of  CDA  Ordinance  1960  which  is  Special  Law, 

the  Land  Acquisition  Act  1894  is not  applicable  in Islamabad 

and CDA has the exclusive jurisdiction, further observed that 

acquisition  does  not  constitute  a  valid  public  purpose  and  it 

has  become  State  Largees.  Intra  Court  Appeals  (16) 

 
 
  
 
Page - 20 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

No.364/2017  title  ‘FGEHF  VS  Malik  Bashir  Ahmad  etc’  were 

filed by the Housing Foundation in the Islamabad High Court 

which was also dismissed on 25.09.2018. 

101.   

The  Housing  Foundation,  therefore,  was  left  with 

no  other  option  but  to  file  CPLAs  in  the  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan. The honorable Supreme Court on 06.12.2018 while 

granting the leave pass the following order: 

“In  the  meantime,  the  operation  of  the 

impugned  judgment  (s)  is  suspended,  any 

acquisition  would  be  subject  to  the  final 

decision  of  the 

instant  cases  an  d  any 

construction  raised  from  today  onwards  shall 

be at the risk and cost of the person (s) doing 

so”. 

102.   

A number of hearing in the august Supreme Court 

took  place  and  final  arguments  were  advanced  by  both  the 

parties  on  14.01.2020  and  the  Supreme  Court  reserved  the 

judgment. Since then the parties are waiting even after lapse 

of  more  than  six  months.  During  the  course  of  proceedings 

before  the  before  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  a  settlement 

agreement  was  arrived  at  between  the  parties.  Draft 

settlement  agreement  was  approved  in  the  referred  EB 

meeting  dated  21.10.2019  for  further  submission  in  the 

court.  The  same  again  presented  in  the  last  Board  meeting, 

whereby  the  EB  directed  to  have  opinion  of  the  Cabinet 

Steering Committee on F-14/15 under the Secretary Cabinet. 

 
 
Page - 21 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

The  Cabinet  steering  committee  endorsed  the  settlement 

agreement  and  proposed  to  present  before  the  Executive 

Board  again.  The  salient 

features  of 

the  settlement 

agreement are as under:- 

a. For  all 

the  affectees/landowners 

the  rate  of 

compensation  of 

land 

in  sector  F-14  will  be 

Rs.2,070,000/-  per  kanal  +  15%  land  acquisition 

charges  and  interest  as  per  section  34  of  land 

acquisition  act,  1894  till  date  of  payment  and  the 

rate  of  compensation  of  land  in  sector  F-15  will  be 

Rs.25,30,000/-  per  kanal  +  15%  Land  Acquisition 

Charges  and  interest  as  per  section  34  of  land 

acquisition  act,  1894  till  date  of  payment.  Whereas 

demand of the land owners for compensation of land 

for F-14 is Rs.33,00,000/- per kanals and for F-15 is 

Rs.38,00,000/- per kanals as approved in the 5th E.B 

meeting  held  on  21.10.2019,  which  was  agreed  by 

the Chair.  

b. The  land  owners/affectees  of  Sector  F-14/15  shall 

withdraw  all  the  reference  petitions  filed  U/s  18  of 

the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  1894  for  enhancement  of 

compensation. 

c. This  agreement  will  be  submitted  in  the  Supreme 

Court with the request by both the parties to dispose 

of  the  CAs  No.1476  to  1485/2018  filed  by  Federal 

Government  Housing  Foundation  titled  ‘FGEHF  vs 

 
 
Page - 22 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

Malik  Ghulam  Mustafa  etc.’  as  prayed 

for, 

accordingly.  

d. No  further  litigation  would  be  instituted  by  both  the 

parties  with  regard  to  any  issue  of  land  acquisition, 

enhancement of price of land and BUPs pertaining to 

sector  F-14/15 

in 

future  and 

the  committee 

constituted  by  the  affectees/locals  of  the  area  shall 

hand  over  peaceful  possession  of  land  and  BUPs  to 

develop 

the  housing  scheme  on  payment  of 

compensation of land/BUPs as settled in the revised 

draft 

agreement/settlement. 

The 

following 

committee 

from 

the  affectees/locals  shall  be 

responsible for peaceful possession. 

1.  Syed Sibit-e-Hassan Shah. 

2.  Syed Inayat Ali Shah. 

3.  Malik Muhammad Rafique S/o Malik  

  Bashir Ahmed.  

4.  Malik Sajjad Mehmood, Chairman of UC 39. 

5.  Malik Rizwan Ahmad 

6.  Malik GhulamJillani S/o Malik Ghulam 

Sarwar. 

7.  Mr. Zulfiqar Hussain Bhutto S/o Khan Gul. 

8.  Mr. Muhammad Ilyas S/o Fazal Illahi. 

9.  Mr. Batish Mehmood S/o Muhammad Gulzar. 

10.Malik Iftar Mehmood From Mira Akku. 

11.Mr. Naseer Ahamd Malik S/o Noor  Ahmed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 23 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

e. The  settlement  will  be  submitted  in the  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan for making it rule of the court in consultation with 

Ministry of Law and Attorney General of Pakistan.  

f. In  case  of  a  landowner  with  a  land  holding  of  at  least  4 

kanals  or  more  on  20.05.2015,  such  land  owner  opt  for 

land  sharing  instead  of  cash  compensation  as  mentioned 

above in the following manner.  

i.  The  land  sharing  formula  will  be  terms 

that  a  developed  plot  of  1  kanal  shall  be 

allotted  to  such  land  owner/affectee  for 

every  four  kanals  of  land  acquired  from 

him  and  other  land  owner/affectee  for 

every  two  kanals  of  land  acquired  from 

him 10 Marlas plot will be allotted to him. 

ii. it  is  the  obligation  of  such  landowner  to 

provide  4  kanals  and  2  kanals  of  lands 

free from all encumbrances.  

iii. 

In  the  above  case  the  cost  of 

development  shall  be  borne  by  such 

landowners.  

iv.  It  has  also  been  agreed  that  only  the 

land  within  F-14  and  F-15  area  will  be 

shared  with  such  landowners.  All  the 

religious  places  Graveyards,  Mosques, 

Imam Bargah, Janazgah and other similar 

 
 
Page - 24 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

places  shall  be  excluded 

from 

the 

acquisition as mentioned in the awards. 

v. The  compensation  of  BUPs  will  be  made 

on the current schedule rate fixed by the 

PWD  department  and  the  cutoff  date  for 

structure  would  be  for  31.12.2017  for 

Sector F-14 and 31.12.2018 for F-15/3 as 

approved  in  the  5th  E.B  meeting  held  on 

21.10.2019,  which  was  agreed  by  the 

Chair.  

vi.  As  per  list  of  120  affectees  of  Dhoke 

Sawayan and Baba Budah to be provided 

by  the  aforementioned  committee  of 

affectees  those  who  are  Affectees  or 

Dwellers, whose Dwelling House has been 

acquired,  will  be  allotted  one  residential 

plot  of  size  25x50  in  sector  G-15/3 

(subject  to  availability)/Thallian  whereas 

affectees  demand  is  only  G-15/3.  Such 

allotment  will  be  subject  to  the  following 

conditions.  

a)  Only one Dwelling House owned by 

affectees  will  qualify  for  the  above 

compensation,  and  no  other  built  up 

property  (BUP)  will  qualify  for  the 

above  mentioned  benefit.  Other  BUP 

 
 
Page - 25 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

will  be  compensated  through  cash 

payment as per policy.  

b)  Only  one  residential  plot  will  be 

allotted 

to  a 

family  unit  of 

Affectees/Dweller. 

c)  Affectees  or  Dweller  means  a 

person  who 

is  an  old  genuine 

resident  of  the  area  being  acquired, 

having  his  name  or  his  forefathers 

names  in  the  voter  list  of  year  1996 

and  has  a  built  up  property  in  form 

of  dwelling  house  on  piece  of  land 

being acquired.  

vii.  It  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the 

affectees  committee/representative  of  the 

affectees to sign the settlement agreement 

as  settled  above  from  the  affectees/locals 

of Sector F-14/F-15.”  

The  decision  was  subsequently  affirmed  by  the  Executive  Board  in  the  7th 

meeting held on 02.09.2020.  

17. 

The 

learned  counsel 

for 

the  FGEHA  and 

the  Deputy 

Commissioner  had  appeared.  They  have  not  denied  the  above  settlement 

and  the  decisions/approvals  by  the  Executive  Board  of  the  FGEHA.  The 

minutes  of  the  6th  and  7th  meetings  of  the  Executive  Board  are  admitted. 

However, they have taken a stance that the agreed terms and conditions of 

 
 
 
 
Page - 26 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the  settlement  were  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  august  Supreme  Court. 

However,  they  could  not  produce  any  order  whereby  the  apex  Court  may 

have given such a direction. A plain reading of the decision approved by the 

Executive  Board  clearly  shows  that  the  agreed  terms  had  been  finalized  by 

both the parties and that the FGEHA wanted that it should be made a rule of 

the court by the august Supreme Court. This was obviously not required and 

in any case, since the parties had negotiated a settlement and had reached 

an  agreement,  a  courts  approval  for  its  execution  was  not  a  precondition. 

Having  reached  a  settlement  agreement  both  the  parties  were  bound  to 

perform their respective obligations.  

18. 

It is noted that earlier some of the affected property owners had 

challenged  the  acquisition  proceedings  and  the  petition  was  allowed  by this 

Court vide a judgment rendered in the case titled “Malik Bashir Ahmad and 4 

others v. Federal Government of Pakistan through Secretary Cabinet Division 

and  6  others”  [PLD  2018  Islamabad  68].  Later  a  learned  Division  Bench  of 

this Court affirmed the aforementioned judgment in the case titled “Federal 

Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation  and  others  v.  Malik  Ghulam 

Mustafa  and  others”  [PLD  2019  Islamabad  1].  However,  the  FGEHA 

challenged  the  judgments  of  this  Court  and  they  were  set  aside  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court  vide  judgment,  dated  19.10.2020,  passed  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court  in  Civil  Appeals  no.  1476  to  1485  of  2018,  titled 

“Federal  Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation,  Islamabad,  etc.  v. 

Malik  Ghulam  Mustafa  and  others”[hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “FGEHA 

Judgment”]  by  holding  that  land  within  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

could  validly  be  acquired  under  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  1894  [hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  “Land  Acquisition  Act”].  It  was  also  held  that  land 

 
 
 
 
Page - 27 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

acquired  for  FGEHA  was  for  a  public  purpose.  The  learned  counsel  for  the 

FGEHA  has  suggested  that  the  portion  regarding  land  sharing  formula  be 

referred  to  a  Referee  judge.  He,  however,  could  not  give  any  plausible 

explanation  as  to  why  a  conclusively  agreed  and  approved  settlement 

agreement arrived at through a negotiated settlement should be referred to 

another forum.     

19. 

The  learned  counsels  who  had  represented  the  CDA  had 

appeared along with one of the Members of the Board. They could not give 

any  plausible  explanation  for  the  inordinate  delay  in  compensating  the 

legitimate  affected  property  owners.  They  have  taken  the  plea  that  an 

affected land owner is only entitled to payment of interest in case of delayed 

payment.  They  have  referred  to  section  32-A  of  the  CDA  Ordinance  in 

support of the stance that for delay of compensation 8% per annum is paid. 

It has not been disputed that the award announced for acquisition of land in 

order to develop sector H-16 could not be executed because funds were not 

available  with  the  CDA.  It  has  been  candidly  conceded  that  officials  are 

reluctant  to  be  posted  to  those  departments  which  are  responsible  for 

resolving the disputes and redressing the grievances of the property owners 

who have been affected by the exercise of the power of eminent domain.  

20. 

The  learned  counsels  have  been  heard  and  the  record  perused 

with their able assistance.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 28 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

Opinion of the Court: 

21. 

One of the most important and basic fundamental right of every 

human  being  is  the  right  to  own  property.  Every  sovereign  State  has  the 

power to expropriate private property for the benefit of the people. But the 

abuse  of  this  intrusive  power  by  the  agents  of  the  State  has  a  profound 

impact  on  the  lives  of  humans.  The  admitted  facts  described  above 

unambiguously  establish  and  demonstrate  the  extent  of  the  abuse  of  the 

power  of  eminent  domain  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  and  the 

resultant loss and damage to the affected citizens. Mst. Ajaib Jan’s example 

is  sufficient  to  demonstrate  grave  violations  of  rights  and  the  apathy  of 

public functionaries towards those who have been deprived of their property 

rights.  Her  son  passed  away  more  than  three  decades  ago  without  being 

justly compensated. Indeed, Mst. Ajaib Jan does not belong to a class having 

the  privilege  to  be  able  to  enforce  her  admitted  and  acknowledged  right  to 

be allotted a plot. Her other son was compelled to bear the cost of litigation. 

In the end and after decades she was offered a plot in a sector which is yet 

to  be  developed.  The  plot  was  committed  to  her  son  as  compensation  for 

condemnation  of  his  property  more  than  three  decades  ago  so  that  he  and 

his  family  could  resettle.  After  his  death  the  right  of  his  mother  was 

acknowledged but she remains uncompensated till  the filing of the  petition. 

While  an admitted  right was being  denied to  a legitimate victim of eminent 

domain,    those  who  were  to  give  effect  to  this  right  were  benefitting  by 

allotting  plots  to  themselves  at  throw  away  prices,  which  included  the 

Chairmen  and  members  of  the  Board.  The  agony,  trauma,  frustration  and 

suffering  which  Mst.  Ajaib  Jan  and  other  members  of  her  family  have  been 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 29 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

subjected  to  is  definitely  beyond  imagination  and  a  fraud  on  the 

constitutionally  guaranteed  rights.  The  agents  of  the  State,  i.e.  the  public 

functionaries,  have  treated  her  in  such  a  manner  that  her  constitutionally 

guaranteed  right  of  inviolability  of  dignity  has  become  illusory  for  her.  The 

pain  and  agony  that  she  must  have  suffered  cannot  be  comprehended  nor 

can it be compensated. But, ironically, she is not alone. There are more than 

ten thousand citizens whose right to be allotted plots in lieu of expropriation 

of property rights is acknowledged but they have not been treated as equal 

citizens. The acknowledged vested rights of some were created decades ago. 

Many may have passed away hoping that one day the State would come to 

their  rescue.  Widows,  orphans  and  destitute  citizens  are  amongst  victims 

who  are  suffering  solely  because  the  power  of  eminent  domain  has  been 

abused.  The  CDA  admits  and  acknowledges  that  there  are  thousands  of 

citizens who are yet to be paid cash compensation. Their rights were created 

long  ago.    At  the  time  when  the  initial  report  was  submitted  an  amount  of 

almost Rs 8 billion was outstanding. This figure was not based on the current 

market  values  but  had  been  assessed  at  the  time  when  the  respective 

awards  were  announced,  mostly  decades  ago.  What  if  they  are  paid  the 

outstanding  amounts  now  in  addition  to  8%  per  annum?  Would  that  be  a 

just compensation and in consonance with the fundamental right guaranteed 

under  Article  24  of  the  Constitution?  Could  the  CDA  have  entered  into  a 

settlement  agreement  with  male  heirs  to  the  exclusion  of  the  females? 

Should  the  victims  be  condemned  and  punished  for  the  opportunities  of 

corruption created by the public functionaries? The CDA admits that records 

relating to some of the acquired areas are missing. The Commission notified 

during  these  proceedings  also  appeared  to  be  helpless  to  redress  the 

affected  aggrieved  citizens  and  to  enforce  their  acknowledged  rights.  The 

 
 
Page - 30 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

CDA  officials  fear  being  prosecuted  by  the  NAB  and  other  prosecution 

agencies  and,  resultantly,  there  is  no  willingness  to  be  part  of  the 

departments  which  are  responsible  to  enforce  acknowledged  rights  of  the 

affected citizens. The facts highlighted during these proceedings are not only 

alarming  but  present  an  abysmal  state  of  governance.  The  questions, 

therefore,  that  are  to  be  answered  by  this  Court  are  of  paramount 

importance;  what  are  the  rights  of  property  owners  who  were  exposed  to 

the  power  of  eminent  domain  and  how  can  the  acknowledged  rights  be 

granted  to  them;  whether  an  award  loses  its  efficacy  if  the  admitted 

claimants  are  not  compensated  within  a  reasonable  time  and  in  the 

meanwhile  there is exponential rise in  market values ;  if  the answer  to the 

last  question  is  in  the  affirmative  then  whether  it  is  mandatory  to  reassess 

the  market  value  in  order  to  compensate  the  affected  citizen;  how  can  the 

citizens  whose  vested  rights  are  acknowledged  be  compensated  for  their 

loss;  and  lastly,  the  duty  of  the  State  and  its  agents  towards  the  affected 

citizens.  

22. 

It  is  noted  that  the  State  has  delegated  its  invasive  power  of 

expropriation or eminent domain to two entities within the Islamabad Capital 

Territory i.e. the CDA and the FGEHA. Both exercise this power on behalf of 

the  State.  The  CDA  for  the  purposes  of  planning  and  development  of  the 

Capital while the FGEHA to establish housing schemes for selected specified 

groups.  This  Court  has  been  informed  that  officers  and  employees  of  the 

NAB have also been included as one of the specified groups. But the source 

of power exercised in both the cases to acquire private property rights is the 

same  i.e.  the  inherent  sovereign  power  of  the  State  of  compulsory 

acquisition for public purpose. Whether the power is exercised by the CDA or 

 
 
 
 
Page - 31 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the  FEGHA,  both  act  as  agents  of  the  State.  In  both  cases  the  eminent 

domain is exercised through the use of coercive police power that exclusively 

vests in the State. The protection of the rights of the affected owners of the 

properties becomes a onerous duty.    

Eminent Domain:  

23. 

As  already  noted  above,  the  power  of  eminent  domain  is  an 

inherent  attribute  of  the  sovereignty  of  a  State.  A  sovereign  State  derives 

this power because of its dominion over the land within its jurisdiction. The 

private property rights are thus not absolute. This is  based on the  principle 

that  public rights  take  precedence over private rights. The august Supreme 

Court  in  the  case  titled  “Fauji  Foundation  and  another  v.  Shamim  ur 

Rehman“ [PLD 1983 SC 457] has held that the power of eminent domain is a 

proprietary  aspect  of  sovereignty and  that  its  exercise  can  only  be  justified 

on the principle that private interests are subservient to public interest. The 

exercise of such an evasive power, whereby a citizen is stripped of the right 

of  enjoying  legitimately  acquired  private  rights,  is  definitely  profound.  The 

right  to  own  property  is  indispensable  for  a  citizen’s  security,  liberty  and 

freedom.  The  effect  of  expropriating  private  property  through  the  power  of 

eminent domain is disruptive to individuals and communities who may have 

settled  in  the  affected  areas  since  the  time  of  their  forefathers.  Homes  are 

lost  and  families  get  separated.  Established  businesses  are  uprooted  and 

farmers  are  made  landless.  The  attachment  to  religious,  cultural  and  social 

sites is irreparably harmed because such a loss cannot be compensated. The 

human cost of condemnation is enormous and in many cases immeasurable. 

Many  become  homeless  and  opportunities  of  earning  a  livelihood  are  lost. 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 32 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

Those  who  don't  possess  property  rights  are  in  a  more  disadvantageous 

position  because  under  the  law  they  cannot  be  compensated  for  their 

displacement. Those  who suffer the  most are the  poor and those  belonging 

to  the  weaker  segments  of  society.  But  the  exercise  of  this  power  is 

circumscribed  by  fulfilling  two  fundamental  duties;  firstly,  that  the  private 

property  is  condemned  only  for  a  public  purpose  and,  secondly,  that  the 

affected  owner 

is 

justly  and 

fairly  compensated.  The  expression 

compensation  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  later.  The  expressions  public 

purpose, public use and public interest are used interchangeably. The august 

Supreme Court, in the case titled “Fauji Foundation and another v. Shamim 

ur  Rehman“  [PLD  1983  SC  457],  has  observed  that  the  expression  'public 

purpose'  has  no  precise  and  rigid  meaning  except  that  it  should  have  the 

attribute  of  extending  a  benefit or  advantage  to  the  public  as  distinguished 

from the private interest of individuals. The obvious examples are acquiring 

land  for  building  public  roads,  parks,  dams,  utilities,  defense  purposes  etc. 

However,  complications  arise  when  later  use  of  acquired  land  for  public 

purpose  is  in  conflict  with  the  public  interest.  The  public  interest  will 

obviously prevail in the case of the use of the acquired land. If the use of the 

acquired  land  is  against  public  interest  then  it  establishes  the  fact  that  the 

power  of  eminent  domain  had  not  been  exercised  for  a  legitimate  public 

purpose. The most critical factor of this power is how the agents of the State 

exercise it. Good governance is pivotal for ensuring that on the one hand the 

rights  of  the  affected  property  owners  are  protected  while  on  the  other  the 

intended  acquisition  for  public  purpose  is  achieved.  It  places  a  heavy  onus 

on  the  agents  of  the  State  to  ensure  fair,  transparent  and  enforceable 

procedures  so  that  the  discretion  vested  in  the  public  functionaries  is  not 

abused.  If  the  process  is  unclear,  non-transparent  and  based  on  the 

 
 
Page - 33 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

arbitrary  exercise  of  discretion  by  the  executing  public  functionaries,  it 

creates opportunities for corruption and thus the power of eminent domain is 

abused. In  such an  eventuality  it  becomes  an  onerous  duty  of  the  State  to 

redress  the  grievances  of  each  individual  affected  land  owner.  The  affected 

land  owners  cannot  be  punished  for  the  wrongdoings  of  the  public 

functionaries.  The  poor  and  weaker  segments  of  the  society  would  thus 

require  special  assistance  and  attention  by  the  State  because  of  their 

vulnerability.  It  would  also  become  a  duty  of  the  State  in  the  case  of 

established abuse of the power and process of eminent domain to reach out 

to  the  affected  citizens  and  redress  their  grievances.  The  nature  of  the 

power of eminent domain and its disruptive consequences makes it a duty of 

the State to inform each individual of the latter's rights. In the case of abuse 

of the power of eminent domain it becomes the duty of the State to remedy 

the loss and damage caused to the affected citizen, rather than leaving the 

latter  to  the  mercy  of  a  costly  and  time  consuming  judicial  process.  The 

rights of property owners and the meaning of the expression 'compensation' 

will be discussed next. 

Rights  of  affected  property  owners  in  case of exercise of  the power 
of eminent domain;  

24. 

The preamble of the Constitution declares that it is the will of the 

people  of  Pakistan  to  establish  an  order  and  that  the  principles  of 

democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance and social justice, as enunciated by 

Islam, shall be fully observed. The preamble further declares that the order 

established  under  the  Constitution  shall  guarantee  fundamental  rights, 

including equality before law as well as social, economic and political justice. 

Article  2A  has  guaranteed  that  the  principles  and  provisions  set  out  in  the 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 34 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

Objectives  Resolution  are  to  be  treated  as  the  substantive  part  of  the 

Constitution. Article 4 explicitly guarantees to every citizen the right to enjoy 

the  protection  of  law  and  to  be  treated  in  accordance  with  law  as  an 

inalienable right. Article 4(2)(a) explicitly provides that no action detrimental 

to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person shall be taken 

except  in  accordance  with  law.  Article  9  provides  that  no  person  shall  be 

deprived  of  life  or  liberty  save  in  accordance  with  law.  Article  10-A 

guarantees  that  for  the  determination  of  civil  rights  and  obligations  or  in  a 

criminal charge against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial and due 

process. Article 11 declares slavery to be non-existent and forbidden.  Article 

14 guarantees that the dignity of a man and, subject to law, the privacy of 

home  shall  be  inviolable.  Article  18  guarantees  the  right to  enter  upon  any 

lawful profession or occupation and to conduct any lawful trade or business. 

Article  19A  guarantees  to  every  citizen  the  right  to  have  access  to 

information  in  all  matters  of  public  importance,  subject  to  regulations  and 

reasonable  restrictions  imposed  by  law.  Article  23  explicitly  guarantees  the 

right to every citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property subject to the 

Constitution  and  any  reasonable  restrictions  imposed  by  law  in  the  public 

interest.  Article 25 guarantees to all citizens of Pakistan that they are equal 

before law and entitled to equal protection of the law. All these fundamental 

rights are breached when the power of eminent domain is abused. Article 24 

is  of  paramount  importance  for  the  purposes  of  the  adjudication  of  the 

matter in hand and, therefore, the relevant portion is reproduced as follows: 

“24.  (1)   No  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  property 

save in accordance with law.  

(2)   No  property  shall  be  compulsorily  acquired  or 

taken possession of save for a public purpose, and save by 

 
 
 
Page - 35 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the  authority  of  law  which  provides  for  compensation 

therefor  and  either  fixes  the  amount  of  compensation  or 

specifies  the  principles  on  and  the  manner  in  which 

compensation is to be determined and given.” 

25. 

The Constitution, therefore, empowers the State to compulsorily 

acquire  or  to  take  possession  of  private  property  subject  to  fulfilling  two 

fundamental  conditions  i.e.  for  public  purpose  and  by  the  authority  of  law 

which  provides  for  compensation.  The  law  has  either  fixed  the  amount  of 

compensation  or  has  specified  the  principles  on  and  the  manner  in  which 

compensation is to be determined and given. The expression ‘public purpose’ 

has already been discussed above and recently the august Supreme Court in 

the  FGEHA  Judgment  has  declared  acquisition  for  establishing  housing 

societies by the FGEHA as public purpose. The acquisition of property under 

the CDA Ordinance is definitely public purpose because it is to establish and 

develop  the  Capital  of  the  country.  The  framers  of  the  Constitution  have 

explicitly  used  the  expression  ‘compensation’.  The  interpretation  of  this 

expression  is  crucial for  determining  the  rights  of  the  property  owners  who 

have been subjected to the power of eminent domain.  

26. 

The  Blacks  Law  (6th  Edition)  Dictionary  defines  the  expressions 

‘compensation’ and 'just compensation' as follows:  

“Compensation. 

Indemnification;  payment  of  damages; 

making  amends;  making  whole;  giving  an  equivalent  or 

substitute of equal  value. That which is necessary to restore  an 

injured  party  to  his  former  position.  Remuneration  for  services 

rendered, whether in salary, fees, or commissions. Consideration 

or price of a privilege purchased.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 36 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

Equivalent  in  money  for  a  loss  sustained;  equivalent  given  for 

property taken or  for  an injury done to  another; giving back an 

equivalent in either money which is but the measure of value, or 

in  actual  value  otherwise  conferred;  recompense  in  value; 

recompense  or  reward  for  some  loss,  injury,  or  service, 

especially  when  it  is  given  by  statute;  remuneration  for  the 

injury directly and proximately caused by a breach of contract or 

duty; remuneration or satisfaction for injury or damage of every 

description  (including  medical  expense).  An  act  which  a  court 

orders  to  be  done,  or  money  which  a  court  or  other  tribunal 

orders  to  be  paid,  by  a  person  whose  acts  or  omissions  have 

caused loss or injury to another, in order that thereby the person 

damnified  may  receive  equal  value  for  his  loss,  or  be  made 

whole  in  respect  of  his  injury.  Hughson  Condensed  Milk  Co.  v. 

State  Board  of  Equalization,  23  Cal.App.2d  281,  73  P.2d  290, 

292.  

“Just  compensation.Compensation  which  is  fair  to  both  the 

owner  and  the  public  when  property  is  taken  for  public  use 

through condemnation (eminent domain). Consideration is taken 

of  such  criteria  as  the  cost  of  reproducing  the  property,  its 

market  value,  and  the  resulting  damage  to  the  remaining 

property  of  the  owner.  The  Fifth  Amendment  to  the  U.S. 

Constitution provides that no private property shall be taken for 

public use, without “just compensation.” Within Fifth Amendment 

provision  that  private  property  shall not  be  taken  for  public  use 

without  just  compensation,  “just  compensation”  means  the  full 

monetary  equivalent  of  the  property  taken.  U.S.  v.  Reynolds, 

Ky., 397 U.S. 14, 90 S.Ct. 803, 805,25 L.Ed.2d 12. 

As  regards  property  taken  for  public  use,  the  term  is 

comprehensive  and  includes  all  elements,  Jacobs  v.  U.  S.,  Ala., 

290 U.S. 13, 54 S.Ct. 26, 78 L.Ed. 142; Metropolitan Water Dist. 

Of  Southern  California  v.  Adams,  16  Cal.2d  676,  107  P.2d  618, 

621,  but  does  not  exceed  market  value.  U.S.  v.  Waterhouse, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 37 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

C.C.A. Hawaii, 132, F2d, 699, 703. It means a settlement which 

leaves  one  no  poorer or richer  than  he  was  before  the  property 

was  taken.  U.  S.  ex.  Rel.  Tennessee  Valley  Authority  v.  Indian 

Creek  Marble  Co.,  D.C.  Tenn.,  40  F.Supp.  811,  818, 

819.Adequate  compensation.  State  v.  Hale,  Tex.  Civ.  App.,  96 

S.W. 2d 135, 141.Fair market value. Cameron Development Co. 

v. United State, C.C.A. Fla., 145 F.2d 209, 210. Full and perfect 

equivalent of the property taken. U.S. v. 2.4 Acres of Land, More 

or Less, In Lake County, III., C.C.A., III., 138 F2d 295, 297. It is 

the  fair  market  value  of  property  taken  at  time  of  taking, 

Danforth v. U.S., Mo., 308 U.S. 271, 60 S.Ct. 231, 236, 84 L.Ed. 

240;  plus  compensation  for  delay  in  payment,  Kieselbach  v. 

Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 317 U.S. 399, 63 S.Ct. 303, 

305, 87 L.Ed. 358; or consequential damages to the owner, In re 

Board  of  Water  Supply  of  City  of  New  York,  277  N.Y.  452,  14 

N.E.2d  789;  or  value  of  use  of  property  from  date  of  taken 

possession  to  date  of  judgment  if  possession  is  taken  by 

condemner prior to judgment. Los Angeles County Flood Control 

Dist.  V.  Hansen,  48  Cal.  App.  2d,  314,  119  P.2d.  734,  735.  It 

requires that the owner be put in as good position pecunairily as 

he  would  otherwise  have  been  if  the  property  had  not  been 

taken.  Almota  Farmers  Elevator  &  Warehouse  Co.  v.  U.S., 

Wash.,  93  S.Ct.  791,  794,  409  U.S.  470.Interest  is  recoverable 

in  eminent  domain  proceedings  as  part  of  “just  compensation” 

when  payment  is  not  contemporaneous  with  the  taking.  New 

Hampshire Water Resources Bd. V. Pera, 108 N.H. 18, 226 A.2d 

774, 775, 776. Market value at time of taking; i.e. highest price 

for which property considered at its best and most profitable use 

can  be  sold  in  open  market  by  willing  seller  to  willing  buyer, 

neither acting under  compulsion and both exercising reasonable 

judgment.  State  Highway  Commission  v.  American  Memorial 

Parks, Inc., 82 S.D. 231, 144 N.W.2d 25, 27. See also Adequate 

compensation; similar sales. 

On 

government’s 

cancellation 

of 

contract, 

“just 

compensation”  recoverable  consists  of  such  sum  as  in  court’s 

 
 
 
 
Page - 38 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

judgment  will  fairly    compensate  contractor.  Enright  v.  U.S.  73 

Ct. Cl. 416, 54, F.2d, 182, 190. It is the value of contract at time 

of  cancellation,  nor  profits  which  it  would  have  produced.  De 

Laval  Steam  Turbine  Co.  v.  U.S.  284  U.S.  61,  52  S.Ct.  78,  79, 

76 L.Ed. 168.” 

Precedent 
law 
‘compensation’: 

regarding 

interpretation  of 

the  expression 

27. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Jibendra  Kishore 

Achharyya  Chowdhury  and  58  others  v.  The  Province  of  East  Pakistan  and 

Secretary, Finance and Revenue (Revenue) Department, Government of East 

Pakistan”  [PLD  1957  SC  (Pak.)  9]  while  interpreting  Article  15  which  was 

para  material  to  Article  24  of  the  Constitution  reproduced  above  has  held 

and observed as follows:  

“It  is  clear  from  the  terms  of  this  Article  that 

property can be compulsorily acquired by the Government only 

for  a  public  purpose  and  under  a  law  which  provides  for 

compensation. Besides the necessity of the existence of a public 

purpose the Article imposes on acquisition the further condition 

that  the  law  under  which acquisition  is  made  must either itself 

fix the amount of compensation or state the principles on which 

and the manner in which compensation is to be determined and 

given. It  is  not  disputed  by  Mr.  Brohi,  and it appears  to  me  to 

be otherwise plain, that the word 'compensation' here is used in 

the sense in which it is used in the law relating to the exercise 

of  the  power  of  eminent  domain,  namely,  as  meaning  the 

market  value  of  the  property  acquired.  While  defining 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 39 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

compensation  Nichols  in  his  book  "Eminent  Domain",  1950 

Edition, Vol. I, states at pp. 28-29: 

"Compensation' as used in the constitutional provision as a 

limitation  upon  the  power  of  eminent  domain,  implies  a 

full  and  complete  equivalent  (usually  monetary)  for  the 

loss sustained by the owner whose land has been taken or 

damaged. 

"Many  of  the  State  constitutions  require  that  the  compensation 

shall  be  'just',  'reasonable'  or  'adequate',  but  these  words  are 

mere  epithets  rather  than  qualifications  and  add  nothing  to  the 

meaning. The phrase 'just compensation' means the value of the 

land taken and the damage, if any, to land not taken. More than 

this it does not imply. The adjective 'just' only emphasises what 

would be true if omitted,-namely, that the compensation should 

be the equivalent of the property." 

28. 

In  the  case  titled  “Malik  Aman  and  others  v.  Land  Acquisition 

Collector and others” [PLD 1988 SC 32] the august Supreme Court has held 

and observed as follows:  

“It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  the  factors  for  determination  of 

the  market  value  of  the  land  proposed  to  be  acquired  are  not 

restricted only to the time of issuance of the notification under 

section  4  of  the  Land Acquisition  Act or  any  period  prior  to  it, 

but  can  also  relate  to  the  period  in  future  (i.e.  to  period  after 

the issuance of notification under section 4 of the Act). It is for 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 40 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

this reason that the "potential value" of the land i.e. the use to 

which  it  can  be  put  in  future,  has  in  a  large  number  of  cases 

been  held  to  be  a  relevant  factor.  As  such  the  fact  that  long 

period  has  elapsed  between  the  issuance  of  notification  under 

section  4  of  the  Act  and  the  announcement  of  the  award 

coupled with the fact that during that period the prices of land 

or the property in question have risen sharply, is a factor which 

ought  to  and  should  have  been  taken  into  account  while 

determining the value of the land in dispute for the purpose of 

compensating the owner.” 

29. 

In the case titled “Province of Sindh through Collector of District 

Dadu  and  others  v.  Ramzan  and  others”  [PLD  2004  SC  512]  the  august 

Supreme  Court  reaffirmed  the  above  principles  enunciated  in  the  case  of 

Malik Aman supra and observed and held as follows:  

“This  Court  had  also  taken  notice  of  the  fact  that  the 

announcement of award is some times unreasonably delayed 

after the issuance of Notification under section 4 of the Act. 

In Malik Aman's case, the period that had elapsed was seven 

years.  Obviously  any  escalation  in  the  value  of  property 

during such period is a potential value of land which must be 

taken into consideration. 

Similar  view  was  taken  by  this  Court  in  Land 

Acquisition  Collector  Abbottabad  v.  Muhammad  Iqbal  (1992 

SCMR  1245  at  1255-K).  In  the  case  of  Pakistan  Burmah 

Shell  (1993  SCMR  1700),  it  was  once  again  reiterated  that 

 
 
 
 
Page - 41 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

consideration  of  market  value  at  the  time  of  Notification 

under  section  4  of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  was  merely  one 

of the modes for ascertaining the market value and was not 

absolute  yardstick 

for  assessment  of  compensation. 

Numerous  matters  to  be  considered 

for  determining 

compensation  were  elaborately  laid  down  by  this  Court  in 

Murad  Khan's  case  (1999  SCMR  1647)  which  was  again 

relied  upon  in  Nisar  Ahmed's  case  (PLD  2002  SC  25).  The 

crux  of  the  matter  is  that  mere  classification  or  nature  of 

land  may  be  taken  as  relevant  consideration  but  not  as 

absolute  one.  An  area  may  be  `banjar'  or  `Barani'  but  its 

market  value  may  be  tremendously  high  because  of  its 

location,  neighbourhood,  potentiality  or  other  benefits.  All 

these factors, therefore, cannot be ignored. 

Our  attention  is  invited  to  a  recent  judgment  of  this 

Court given in the case of Hyderabad Development Authority 

PLD  2002  SC  84  where  the  Court  has  held  that  the  crucial 

date  for  determination  of  market  value  is  the  Notification 

under  section  4(1)  of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act.  We  do  not 

disagree  with  it  because  that  verdict  pertains  to  the 

determination  of  `market  value'  and  not 

to 

the 

determination of the compensation. The question of potential 

value was considered even in that ruling but was not granted 

because  the  landowner  had  not  proved  the  same,  being  a 

question of fact.” 

 
 
 
Page - 42 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

30. 

The august Supreme Court, in the above judgment, has explicitly 

drawn  a  distinction  between  determination  of  market  value  and 

determination  of  compensation.  It  has  been  held  that  market  value  at  the 

time of issuance of a notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act 

was  only  one  of  the  modes  for  ascertaining  the  market  value  and  not  an 

absolute yardstick of assessment of compensation. 

31. 

In  the  case  “Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  v.  Shaukat  Ali 

Mian and others” [PLD 1999 SC 1026] a larger Bench of the august Supreme 

Court  has  quoted  with  approval  and  has  affirmed  the  opinion  of  Justice 

Muhammad  Taqi  Usmani  (Member)  from  the  judgment  of  the  Shariat 

Appellate  Bench  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  ‘Qazalbash 

Waqf and others v. Chief Land Commissioner, Punjab, Lahore [PLD 1990 SC 

99] and the same is reproduced as follows:  

“It would be pertinent to reproduce para.4 from the opinion 

of  Justice  Muhammad  Taqi  Usmani  (Member),  which  reads  as 

follows: 

 یربج ہضواعم اک سا ےہ یہر اج یل ےس صخش یسک یتسدربز زيچ وج نيم یراديرخ یربج
 قباطم ےک (                                     ) خرن یرازاب ےک ےش سا ںيم خيرات ےک یراديرخ
 ہگج سج ےن تعيرش ہک ےہ یکچ وہ حضاو تاب ہي ےس ثحب یسک رپوا ہکنويک 'ےئاج ايک نيعم
  اي "تميق" روا ۔ےہ ید رارق مزﻻ یگيئادا یک "نامض"  اي "تميق" ںاہو ےہ ید تزاجا یک یراديرخ
 ےس حرط یک مکاح یسک ضحم روا ۔ےہ یگيئادا قباطم ےک "خرن یرازاب" بلطم اک ںونود "نامض"
ادبتسا

۔اتکس اج اہک ںيہن "نامض" اي "تميق" وک نيعت ےک ہضواعم (                        ) رپ روط ید

 ادا هتاس هتاس ےکسا اي ےلہپ ےس ےنيل ہضبق اک ےش ہبولطم ہضواعم ہي قباطم ےک خرن یرازاب
ات رکز لباق ےسج روا ،وہ ريزگان رپ روط یماظتنا وج ريخات یلومعم ینتا ہتبلا ےئاج ايدرک
 ہن ريخ
 ۔ےہ یتکس اج یهجمس لخاد ںيم یہ "هتاس هتاس" ےئاج اهجمس 

 یک یسک هو ہک ےہ اتکس اج ايد رايتخا ہي اعرش وک زاجم مکاح هتاس ےک تياعر لمکم یک طئارش نا

۔ےل ديرخ رپ روط یربج تيکلم 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 43 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

The legal position seems to be that no person can be deprived of 

his property even under any Acquisition Law for  public purposes 

without payment of compensation which should be based on the 

market rate and not at the rate fixed by the authority, which has 

acquired  or  which  is  instrumental  in  acquiring  the  property 

involved.”  

32. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “NWFP  through 

Collector,  Abbottabad    Land  Acquisition  and  others  v.  Haji  Ali  Asghar  Khan 

and others”[1985 SCMR 767] had enhanced the rate of compensation on the 

basis of the above principles.  

33. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Land  Acquisition 

Collector and others v. Mst. Iqbal Begum and others” [PLD 2010 SC719] has 

held and observed as follows: 

"The  principles 

laid  down 

for  determination  of 

compensation 

reflect 

anxiety 

of 

law-giver 

to 

compensate  those  deprived  of  property  adequately 

enough  so  as  to  be  given  gold  for  gold  and  not  copper 

for  gold."    Various  factors  have  to  be  taken  into 

consideration  i.e.  the  size  and  shape  of  the  land,  the 

locality  and  its  situation,  the  tenure  of  property,  the 

user,  its  potential  value,  and  the  rise  or  depression  in 

the value of the land in the locality and even in its near 

vicinity.  In  our  view  real,  proper  and  potential  value, 

keeping  in  view  all  the  relevant  factors  have  been 

determined and it is unexceptionable.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 44 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

34. 

In  the  case  titled  “Province  of  Punjab  through  Land  Acquisition 

Collector and another v. Begum Aziza”[2014 SCMR 75] the august Supreme 

Court has held that the market value is normally taken up as one existing on 

the  date  of  notification  under  section  4(1)  of  Land  Acquisition  Act  1894 

under the principle of willing buyer and willing seller, while potential value is 

the  value  to  which  similar  land  is  put  to  any  use  in  the  future.  Thus,  while 

determining  the  quantum  of  compensation,  the  exercise  may  not  be 

restricted  to  the  time  of  the  notification  issued  under  section  4(1)  of  the 

Land  Acquisition  Act  1894  but  the  future  value  of  land  may  be  taken  into 

account.  The  last  two  judgments  above  were  recently  quoted  and  followed 

by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Sarhad  Development 

Authority  NWFP  (Now  KPK)  through  COO/CEO  (Officio)  and  others”[2020 

SCMR 265].The august Supreme Court, in the case titled “Province of Punjab 

through Collector, Bahawalpur and others v. Sh. Hassan Ali and others”[PLD 

2009  SC  16],  has  highlighted  the  principles  and  law  regarding  various 

factors to be taken into consideration while determining a fair compensation.  

35. 

In 

the  case 

titled 

“Murad  Khan  v.  Land  Acquisition 

Collector”[1999  SCMR  1647]  the  august  Supreme  Court,  after  considering 

the  precedent  law,  has  summarized  the  factors  required  to  be  taken  into 

consideration for  determining the  amount of  consideration  and  the  relevant 

principles  for  the  purposes  of  adjudication  of  the  matter  in  hand  are 

reproduced as follows; 

 “(viii) 

In 

determining 

the 

quantum 

of 

fair 

compensation  the  main  criterion  is  the  price  which  a 

buyer  would  pay  to  a  seller  for  the  property  if  they  had 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 45 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

voluntarily entered into the transaction. 

(ix)  The  measure  of  fair  compensation  is  the  value  of 

the  property  in  open  market  which  a  seller  voluntarily 

entering  into  a  transaction  of  sale  can  reasonably 

demand from a purchaser...this means that Court has to 

determine  the  value  of  the  land  in  the  open  market  at 

the relevant time on the assumption that the notification 

of acquisition did not exist.” 

36. 

Reliance  is  also  placed  on  the  cases  titled  “Province  of  Punjab 

through Land Acquisition Collector v. Begum Aziza” [2014 SCMR 75], “Land 

Acquisition  Collector,  Abbottabad  v.  Gohar-ur-Rehman  Abbasi”[2009  SCMR 

771],  “Air  Weapon  Complex  through  DG  v.  Muhammad  Aslam  and  others” 

[2018  SCMR  779]  wherein  the  principle  of  a  willing  purchaser  and  willing 

buyer at arm’s length transaction in an open market without any compulsion 

has been affirmed. 

37. 

The  framers  of  the  Constitution  have  expressly  used  the 

expression 'compensation'. It is obvious from a plain reading of Article 24 of 

the  Constitution  and  the  above  discussed  precedent  law  that  the  power  to 

compulsorily  acquire  property  is  subject  to  the  duty  to  'compensate'  the 

affected  owner.  Compensation  is  based  on  the  principle  of  equivalence, 

which  essentially  has  the  meaning  of  restoring  an  injured  party  to  his/her 

former  position  or,  in  other  words,  to  give  an  equivalent  for  the  loss 

sustained.  Neither  should  the  affected  party  be  enriched  nor  impoverished. 

The duty of the State is to put the owner of the condemned property in the 

same position as the latter was before. The quantum of compensation must 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 46 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

be  equivalent  to  the  injury  or  loss  suffered.  In  the  context  of  eminent 

domain  it is implicit in the expression 'compensation'  that  the injured party 

is at least put in a position as the latter was before so that an opportunity to 

rehabilitate or resettle is not lost. The august Supreme Court, in the case of 

Kishore Achharyya Chowdhry, supra, has quoted with approval the meaning 

of 'compensation' as full and complete equivalent for the loss sustained. It is 

implicit  in  the  principle  of  equivalence  that  copper  cannot  be  an  equivalent 

compensation  for  gold. Compensation  will  be just and fair if it is equivalent 

to  the  loss  suffered  due  to  property  being  taken  by  the  State  for  public 

purpose.  In the  words  of  the  philosopher  Robert  Nozick,  'Full compensation 

is  an  amount  that  is  adequate,  although  only  just  adequate,  to  make  the 

concerned party say he feels happy, not unhappy, about what happened'. It 

is  not  necessary  that  every  affected  person  would  feel  happy  even  if  what 

has  been  offered  is  just  and  adequate.  But  the  adequacy  must  meet  the 

requirements  of  the  principle  of  equivalence.  Equivalence,  therefore,  is  the 

foundational  principle  for  ensuring  the  compensation  to  be  just,  fair  and 

equitable.  An  unjust  and  unfair  compensation  will  render  the  compulsory 

acquisition  as  confiscatory.  In  such  an  eventuality  the  person  who  has 

suffered  the  loss  would  be  compelled  to  take  the  burden  of  the  public  for 

whose  benefit  the  latter's  property  is  taken  by  the  use  of  the  power  of 

eminent  domain.  The  nature  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain  is  such  that 

the  parties  do  not  have  an  equal  bargaining  power.  The  imbalance  is 

enormous because a citizen is subjected to the sovereign power of the State. 

The citizen is at the mercy of how the power will be exercised by the agents 

of  the  State.  The  fundamental  right  guaranteed  under  Article  24  of  the 

Constitution  can  by  no  stretch  of  the  imagination  be  construed  as 

empowering the State to exercise its power of eminent domain to confiscate 

 
 
Page - 47 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

private  property  for  public  purpose.  Such  exercise  of  power  will  be  grossly 

arbitrary.  The  affected  person  must  be  'compensated'  and  the  expression 

must  be  given  strict  construction  because  of  the  profound  consequences  in 

case of abuse of the power of eminent domain and the  imbalance in power 

to  negotiate.  A  full  Bench  of  the  august  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  titled 

“Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  v.  Shaukat  Ali  Mian  and  others”  [PLD 

1999  SC  1026],  has  quoted  with  approval  the  concept  of  compulsory 

acquisition in Islam which requires determination of market value and makes 

it  mandatory  to  compensate  an  affected  party  for  the  loss  promptly,  either 

before or  at the time of taking possession of  the  property. Only such delay 

would be justified if it does not exceed the time necessary for completion of 

administrative formalities for taking the property. If the delay is on the part 

of  the  State  and  during this  period  the  value  of  the  property  has  increased 

then  the  earlier  determined  market  value  would  lose  its  efficacy  because 

then it would not compensate the loss but rather become confiscatory. If the 

argument  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  CDA,  that  the  affected  land  owners 

whose  properties  were  acquired  through  awards  announced  in  2008  and 

2009  are  only  entitled  for  the  delayed  payment  at  the  rate  of  8  %  per 

annum in addition to the market value determined more than a decade ago, 

then  this  Court  would  be  affirming  confiscation  of  the  acquired  property 

rather  than  protecting  and  enforcing  the  fundamental  right  guaranteed 

under  Articles  9,  23  and  24  of  the  Constitution.  It  is  an  admitted  fact 

conceded  before  this  Court  that  funds  were  not  available  when  the  awards 

had  been  announced  in  2008  and  2009.  Most  of  the  outstanding  admitted 

amount  stems  from  these  two  awards.    The  CDA  acknowledges  that  the 

affected  citizens  could  not  be  compensated  due  to  its  own  failing.  Such  an 

exercise  of  power  of  eminent  domain  was  definitely  a  fraud  upon  the 

 
 
Page - 48 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

constitutionally guaranteed rights of the citizens. It is noted that the average 

market  value  determined  in  2008  and  2009  was  Rs  0.8  million  per  kanal. 

This Court has been informed that recently, in the case of land acquired by 

the CDA in 1985 and handed over to the FGEHA for developing sectors, that 

the latter has reassessed and enhanced the market rate exponentially.. 

38. 

The august Supreme Court, in the case titled “Province of Sindh 

through  Collector  of  District  Dadu  and  others  v.  Ramzan  and  others“  [PLD 

2004  SC  512],  has  drawn  a  distinction  between  determination  of  market 

value  and  compensation.  This  distinction  is  crucial  and,  in  the  same 

judgment, the apex Court had taken notice of the fact that escalation of the 

value of property during the period of unreasonable delay should have been 

taken  into  consideration.  It  is  a  fundamental  right  of  a  person  who  has 

suffered loss and injury due  to exercise of the power of eminent domain to 

be 'compensated' and not merely paid the market value assessed at the time 

when  the  property  was  acquired  under  the  relevant  law.  Any  other 

interpretation  of  the  CDA  Ordinance  or  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  would  be 

ultra vires the  fundamental right guaranteed under  Article 24 read with the 

other enabling provisions of the Constitution. The power of the State to take 

private  property  compulsorily  cannot  be  exercised  in  a  manner  that  it  

becomes  confiscatory.  The  right  to  be  compensated  on  the  basis  of  the 

principle  of  equivalence  is  implicit  in  the  fundamental  rights  guaranteed 

under Articles 24 and 23 of the Constitution. No law empowering the agents 

of  the  State  to  compulsorily  acquire  private  property  can  be  construed  in 

such a manner that it would lead to empowering them to confiscate private 

property. It is the duty of the relevant agency, in case of lapse of inordinate 

delay from the time the award was made, to reassess the market value and 

 
 
 
 
Page - 49 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

promptly compensate the affected person so that the latter is compensated 

on the basis of the principle of equivalence. It is, therefore, declared that the 

State can legitimately exercise the power of eminent domain and condemn a 

private  party  against  'compensation'  on  the  basis  of  the  principle  of 

equivalence.  Acquisition,  otherwise,  would  be  unconstitutional  because  it 

would  become  confiscatory.  The  payment  of  market  value  or  giving  the 

benefit  of  rehabilitation  must  be  prompt  because  inordinate  delay  would 

result in loss of efficacy of the market value determined long ago.   

39. 

It is the right of every person whose  property is intended  to be 

taken to be dealt with fairly, justly, equitably and in accordance with law. It 

is implicit  in this  right that  the  duty of  the  public  functionaries  is  to  ensure 

that  the  market  value  is  determined  in  a  transparent  manner.  The 

procedures  and  policies  should  be  clear,  predictable  and  enforceable.  The 

adoption  of  the  principles  of  good  governance  is  of  paramount  importance 

for ensuring that the affected person does not lose confidence in the system. 

The  august  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  titled  “Province  of  Sindh  through 

Chief Secretary and 8 others v. Syed Kabir Bokhari“  [2016 SCMR 101], has 

held  that  it  is  the  obligation  of  the  government  and  its  departments  to  act 

justly  and  fairly  towards  the  citizens  and  if  the  latter  suffers  any  loss  or 

injury  on  account  of  illegal  and  unlawful  conduct  then  there  is  a 

constitutional duty  to compensate the  citizen. In the case titled “Habibullah 

Energy  Limited  and  another  v.  WAPDA  through  Chairman  and  others“  [PLD 

2014  SC  47]  it  has  been  observed  that  the  basis  of  discretionary  power  of 

State  functionaries  is  the  delegation  of  authority  by  the  principal  i.e.  the 

people  of  Pakistan.  It  has  been  further  observed  that  the  legal  authority  is 

derived  from  such  fiduciary  relationship  and  when  such  fiduciary  duty  is 

breached,  the  authority  of  the  State  to  administer  and  enforce  the  law  is 

 
 
 
Page - 50 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

eroded.  The  State  functionaries  and  instrumentalities  stand  in  a  fiduciary 

relationship to the people. In the case titled “Muhammad Yasin v. Federation 

of Pakistan and others“ [PLD 2012 SC 132] it has been observed that public 

functionaries are first and foremost fiduciaries and trustees for the people of 

Pakistan and, while performing the functions of their office, they can have no 

interest  other  than  the  interest  of  the  people  of  Pakistan.  This  fiduciary 

obligation and duty is breached when public functionaries abuse their power 

and  exercise  discretion  in  an  arbitrary  manner.  Unfair  non  transparent 

procedures lead to inequitable compensation. During one of the hearings the 

Deputy  Commissioner  FGEHA  and  representative  of  the  CDA  were  asked 

regarding  the  criterion  applied  for  determination  of  the  market  price.  They 

informed that the  DC rates and  the  values recorded in the revenue records 

are  relied upon. It is not disputed that the DC rates nor  values recorded in 

the revenue records reflect the actual market rates of the properties. Neither 

the  CDA  Ordinance  nor  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  bars  appointing  an 

independent commission consisting of expert valuation experts to assist the 

authority in its exercise to determine fair and just market value. Regrettably, 

as  is  evident  from  the  above  described  admitted  facts,  the  governance 

system in the Islamabad Capital Territory is in such an abysmal state that it 

has  become  a  duty  of  the  public  functionaries  to  take  extraordinary 

measures  in  order  to  ensure  transparency,  fairness  and  credibility  of  the 

process.  This  is  of  paramount  importance  because  most  of  the  affected 

persons are poor and belong to the weaker segments of the society and are 

not  even  aware  of  their  rights.  They  do  not  have  the  means  to  seek 

professional advice or bear the cost of litigation.  

40. 

It  is  settled  law  that  the  main  criterion  for  determination  of 

 
 
 
 
Page - 51 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

market value is the price which a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller if 

they were to enter the transaction voluntarily and at arms-length. As already 

noted above, in the case of eminent domain there is an obvious imbalance in 

the bargain power. The agency, whether in this case the CDA or the FGEHA, 

as the case may be, act as agents of the State to exercise the extraordinary 

power  attributable  to  its  sovereignty  i.e.  compulsory  land  acquisition  or 

eminent  domain.  Since  they  act  as  agents  of  the  State  to  exercise  this 

power,  they  are  simultaneously  under  a  constitutional  duty  to  protect  the 

rights  of  the  citizens  who  are  likely  to  be  affected.  The  parties  are  not  on 

equal footing to exert influence over the other because the executing agency 

has to its advantage  the  use  of police and the coercive  power of the State. 

It, therefore, becomes an onerous duty of the public functionaries to achieve 

the  intended  purpose  with  great  care  so  that  the  rights  of  the  citizens  are 

not  harmed.  It  thus  becomes  a  duty  to  initiate  the  process  of  meaningful 

negotiations  before  resorting  to  the  inherent  coercive  power  of  the  State. 

The good faith of the public functionaries to negotiate with the citizens must 

be  demonstrably  obvious  from  the  proceedings  and  the  record.  The  august 

Supreme Court, in the FGEHA Judgment, has highlighted the need for having 

a uniform compensation mechanism. The apex Court has explicitly observed 

that  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  'remains  a  remnant  of  colonial  times  that 

should  have  been  timely  amended  to  cater  to  our  evolving  socio  economic 

circumstances.  Therefore,  such  overhaul  becomes  necessary  in  light  of  the 

shortcomings  of  the  current  scheme  of  land  acquisition  with  respect  to 

compensation  and  matters  incidental  thereto'.  The  CDA  Ordinance  also 

incorporates  a  scheme  of  acquisition  similar  to  the  Land  Acquisition  Act. 

These  shortcomings  make  it  an  even  more  onerous  duty  of  the  public 

functionaries involved in the process of compulsory acquisition affecting the 

 
 
Page - 52 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

rights of the citizens to demonstrably show fairness, transparency and good 

faith. A direct resort to the coercive power of the State in a non-transparent 

manner  would  thus  be  in  breach  of  the  fiduciary  duty  which  the  public 

functionaries  owe  the  citizens.  The  imbalance  of  power  to  negotiate  also 

entails  a  duty  of  the  State  to  inform  the  likely  affected  citizen  of  his/her 

rights regarding 'compensation'. A process of meaningful negotiations ought 

to be a pre-condition for resorting to the use of the powers vested under the 

relevant law. If the negotiation process fails then it is the duty of the public 

functionaries  to  proceed  fairly,  justly,  adopting  transparent  procedures  and 

having  regard  to  the  rights  of  the  affected  citizens.  However,  if  the 

negotiations are successful and the amicable settlement has been approved 

by the executing agency then it would be binding on the parties, particularly 

the  agent  of  the  State,  because  of  its  superior  power  to exert influence.  In 

the  case  in  hand  it  was  appreciable  on  the  part  of  the  FGEHA  to  have 

earnestly made an effort to reach a negotiated settlement. It was successful 

and  the  terms  were  approved  by  the  competent  forums.  The  FGEHA  now 

cannot avoid the concluded and approved commitments and doing so would 

be  a  breach  of  fiduciary  duty  towards  the  affected  citizens  because  it  is 

exercising the power of the State.   

41. 

Another most important right of a citizen who is subjected to the 

power  of  eminent  domain  is  the  latter's  inviolability  of  dignity.  Every  such 

citizen  must  be  treated  with  respect.  It  is  an  onerous  duty  of  the  public 

functionaries to protect the rights of the citizens, particularly when they are 

weak  and  belong  to  the  vulnerable  segments  of  the  society.  It  becomes  a 

duty of the State not only to protect such citizens because of the enormous 

human  cost  of  the  exercise  of  eminent  domain  but  to  reach  out  to  such 

 
 
 
 
Page - 53 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

citizens  when  there  are  signs  of  its  abuse.  It  imposes  a  duty  on  the  public 

functionaries  to  resolve  and  redress  the  grievances  of  the  victims  of  the 

abuse of the power of eminent domain. Most of the citizens affected by the 

exercise  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain  are  poor  and  their  properties  in 

rural  areas  are  subject  to  compulsory  acquisition.  In  a  society  where  more 

than  24%  of  the  population  lives  under  the  poverty  line,  the  duty  of  the 

public  functionaries  to  protect  their  rights  becomes  more  crucial.  They 

deserve respect and special attention from the agents of the State because 

their  private  property  rights  are  compulsorily  taken  away  for  a  public 

purpose. As the august Supreme Court, in the case of the FGEHA Judgment 

has  observed,  the  enforced  compulsory  acquisition  law  is  a  remnant  of  a 

colonial past and greater care is required to ensure that the mindset of the 

agents  of  the  State  is  changed.  This  regrettably  does  not  appear  to  have 

been  observed  in  the  proceedings  before  this  Court.  Citizens  have  been 

gravely wronged and they have not been treated as they should have been 

in a society governed under the Constitution. The CDA is neither willing nor 

has  the  capacity  to  enforce  the  acknowledged  vested  rights  of  citizens.  It 

was  astonishing  for  this  Court  when  a  worthy  member  of  the  National 

Assembly  and  a  Special  Assistant  to  the  Prime  Minister  informed  that  the 

departments  of  the  CDA  responsible  for  redressing  the  grievances  of  the 

affected citizens were not fully functional. This reflects a colonial mindset of 

those  who  have  a  fiduciary  duty  towards the  citizens  to  protect  their  rights 

and to serve them as servants of the State.  

The FGEHA: 

42. 

The  FGEHA  has  been  established  under  the  FGEHA  Act,  2020 

[hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “FGEHA  ACT”]  and  the  object  of  its 

 
 
           
 
Page - 54 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

promulgation,  as  described  in  the  preamble,  is  to  establish  the  FGEHA  for 

the  purposes  of  planning  and  development  of  housing  schemes  for  serving 

and retired Federal Government employees and other specified groups. The 

composition of the Executive Board has been described in section 4 while its 

powers  and  functions  in  section  5.  Section  12  empowers  the  FGEHA  to 

acquire  land  or  any  interest  in  land  for  the  purposes  of  the  Authority  and 

that  it  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  acquisition  for  public  purposes  within  the 

meaning  of  the  applicable  Land  Acquisition  Act  or  any  other  prevailing  law 

for the said purposes and as per policy of the Federal Government. The land 

acquired  by  FGEHA  vests  in  the  Authority  in  accordance  with  section  17. 

Section  19  provides  for  a  right  of  appeal  or  review  of  a  final  order  of  the 

Deputy Commissioner before the Executive Board. The FGEHA Act has been 

declared  intra  vires  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  FGEHA  Judgment. 

The  beneficiaries  of  the  schemes  of  the  FGEHA,  includes  all  those  who  are 

involved  in  the  process  of  land  acquisition.  The  Deputy  Commissioner  and 

members  of  the  Executive  Board  have  a  direct  or  indirect  interest  and  the 

FGEHA  acts  as  an  agency  of  the  State  when  it  exercises  the  power  of 

eminent  domain.  The  fiduciary  duty  of  the  FGEHA  towards  those  who  are 

subjected to the exercise of this inherent power of the State becomes more 

onerous. Moreover, under the FGEHA Act the final authority in the context of 

compulsory  acquisition  of  land  is  the  Executive  Board  because  a  right  of 

appeal  or  review  lies  before  it.  The  decision  of  the  Executive  Board  is, 

therefore, final. It is noted that in the case of the FGEHA greater care has to 

be  exercised  in  the  context  of  fairness  and  transparency.  Any  negotiated 

settlement  with  the  affected  property  owners  is  binding  on  the  FGEHA 

because of its superior status to negotiate as an agent of the State, since it 

is  vested  with  the  power  to  compulsorily  acquire  private  properties.  In  the 

 
 
Page - 55 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

FGEHA Petition the petitioners are affected property owners who had entered 

into negotiations pursuant to terms offered by the FGEHA. The land sharing 

formula  is  applied  by  the  CDA  as  well  and,  therefore,  it  has  remained  a 

legitimate mode of compensation for the acquisition of land in the Islamabad 

Capital territory. However, the FGEHA, despite its superior bargaining power, 

had  voluntarily  entered  into  a  negotiation  process,  which  indeed  was 

appreciable  and  in  consonance  with  the  duty  of  an  agency  empowered  to 

exercise  the  power  of  eminent  domain  on  behalf  of  the  State.  After  the 

negotiations  the  agreed  terms  were  placed  before  and  approved  by  the 

Executive Board in its meeting held on 21-10-2019. It was then approved by 

the  Cabinet  Steering  Committee  for  F-14/15,  chaired  by  the  Secretary 

Cabinet.  It  was  thereafter  placed  before  the  Executive  Board  in  its  6th 

meeting  and  was  accordingly  approved.  Later  the  decision  was  affirmed  in 

the 7th meeting of the Executive Board. The terms and conditions have been 

reproduced above. The settlement was unequivocal and entered into by the 

parties  voluntarily.  There  was  no  dispute  left  to  be  decided  by  any 

competent  court.  The  settlement  was  so  unambiguous  that  the  FGEHA 

wanted  it  to  become  a  rule  of  the  Court  by  the  august  Supreme  Court. 

However,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  FGEHA  has  not  placed  any  order 

whereby  the  apex  Court  may  have  made  such  a  negotiated  settlement 

subject  to  approval.  The  settlement  was,  therefore,  binding  on  both  the 

parties and they were and continue to be bound by its unambiguous agreed 

terms  of  settlement.  The  FGEHA,  having  entered  the  settlement  voluntarily 

despite  having 

the  superior  bargaining  power,  cannot 

refuse 

its 

implementation  unless  the  other  party  fails  to  fulfill  its  obligations.  The 

refusal  on  the  part  of  the  FGEHA  is  arbitrary  and  contrary  to  its  fiduciary 

duty towards the affected land owners. 

 
 
Page - 56 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

Conclusion: 

43. 

The  above  admitted  and  acknowledged  vested  rights  had 

accrued  in  favor  of  the  affected  property  owners  long  ago,  in  most  of  the 

cases  decades  ago.  They  were  to  be  compensated  for  the  loss  rather  than 

being  treated  in  a  manner  that  would  result  in  confiscation  of  their 

properties.  Their  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  have  definitely  been 

violated.  Who  is  responsible  for  the  unimaginable  agony  and  suffering  they 

have  been  exposed  to?  They  are  regrettably  victims  of  a  deeply  corrupted 

governance  system.  The  public  functionaries,  rather  than  serving  the 

citizens, have usurped their rights and caused unimaginable  pain and harm 

to  them.  The  CDA  has  failed  to  enforce  the  acknowledged  and  admitted 

vested  rights  which  were  created  long  ago.  There  were  no  funds  available 

and yet awards were announced in 2009 and 2008. The CDA has taken the 

stance  that  the  affected  persons  are  entitled  to  only  8%  per  annum  in 

addition  to  the  market  value  determined  more  than  a  decade  ago.  It  has 

also been admitted by the CDA that during this period there was exponential 

increase  in  the  market  value.  There  could  not  have  been  a  more  classic 

example  of  travesty  of  justice  and  violation  of  constitutional  guaranteed 

rights  because,  while  about  eleven  thousand  affected  citizens  were  waiting 

for  the  allotment  of  plots,  some  since  1968,  more  than  twenty  thousand 

plots  were  allotted  at  throw  away  prices  to  employees  and  officials  of  the 

CDA. including its Chairmen and members of the Board. They created plots 

for  themselves  in  sought  after  sectors  but  denied  the  vested  acknowledged 

rights of citizens who were deprived of their private properties. The abuse of 

 
 
          
 
 
 
Page - 57 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

the  power  of  eminent  domain  stands  established.  Records  are  missing  and 

innocent  property owners were  made to  suffer the  travails of criminal  trials 

for  no  fault  of  their  own.  The  public  functionaries,  who  had  created 

opportunities for corruption through abuse of the power of eminent domain 

by  adopting  unclear  and  non-transparent  processes,  have  caused  loss  and 

damage  to  citizens  whose  vested  rights  are  admitted  and  acknowledged. 

Most  of  them  are  poor  and  belong  to  the  weaker  segments  of  the  society. 

They have not been treated as equal citizens by the agents of the State i.e 

the  public  functionaries.  It  is  ironic  that  in  a  society  governed  by  the 

Constitution  they  need  special  attention  and  assistance.  The  successive 

governments have failed them and, before they lose faith in the system and 

the  rule  of  law,  it  has  become  inevitable  to  enforce  their  vested  rights 

without further delay. Who would redress their grievances? The proceedings 

before  this  Court  has  established  that  the  CDA  does  not  have  the  capacity 

nor  the  will  to  ensure  that  acknowledged  rights  are  enforced.  The  elected 

representatives,  belonging  to  the  party  in  the  Federal  Government,  were 

appointed  as  amici  by  this  Court  and  notified  by  the  CDA  and  despite  their 

commitment seemed to be helpless because of the mismanagement and bad 

governance prevailing within the CDA. It is not a recent phenomenon but a 

result of decades of neglect and apathy of the successive governments in the 

past  several  decades,  otherwise  vested  rights  created  in  1968  would  not 

have  been  denied  till  today.  The  Federal  Government,  interpreted  by  the 

august Supreme Court as meaning the worthy Prime Minister and members 

of  the  Federal  Cabinet,  has  a  crucial  statutory  responsibility  and  function 

under  section  5(2)  of  the  CDA  Ordinance.  It provides  that  the  Board  of  the 

CDA shall be guided on questions of policy by such directions as the Federal 

Government  may  from  time  to  time  give.  The  CDA  has  failed  in  its 

 
 
Page - 58 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

obligations  towards  the  citizens  who  have  been  irreparably  harmed  and 

denied  enforcement  of  their  acknowledged  rights  for  decades.  It  is, 

therefore, the duty of the Federal Government to formulate a policy and give 

directions  to  the  CDA  regarding  enforcement  of  admitted  rights  of  the 

citizens  and  ensure  that  the  power  of eminent  domain is  not  abused  in the 

future.  Likewise,  the  land  acquisition  by  the  FGEHA  and  the  subsequent 

execution of schemes thereon has been explicitly made subject to the policy 

of  the  Federal  Government  under  section  14  (1)  of  the  FGEHA  Act.  It  is, 

therefore, a statutory responsibility and duty of the Federal Government that 

there  is  no  abuse  of  the  power  of eminent domain  exercised  by the  FGEHA 

under the FGEHA Act. The refusal of the FGEHA to implement the settlement 

terms  and  conditions  with  the  affected  property  owners  is  illegal  and 

arbitrary.  

44. 

For  the  above  reasons  the  FGEHA  Petition  is  allowed  and  it  is 

declared that the negotiated settlement approved by the Executive Board of 

the  FGEHA  in  its  6th  meeting  is  binding  and,  therefore,  the  parties  are 

committed 

to  perform 

their  respective  obligations.  The  settlement 

agreement reproduced  above  meets  the  requirements  of  just  compensation 

in  the  context  of  Article  24  of  the  Constitution.  The  Federal  Government 

shall, therefore, ensure that the settlement agreement is implemented.  

45. 

All  the  other  petitions  are  disposed  of  by  declaring  and 

directing as follows:  

a) 

The  power  of  compulsory  acquisition  or  eminent 

domain  has  been  abused  by  the  CDA  by  denying  to  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 59 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

affected property owners their acknowledged vested rights 

as  described  above.  It  is  a  constitutional  and  statutory 

duty  of  the  CDA  and  the  Federal  Government  to 

'compensate’  all  the  affected  citizens  whose  rights  stand 

admitted and acknowledged.   

b) 

Every  affected  citizen  who  was  subjected  to  the 

power  of  compulsory  land  acquisition  and  whose  right  to 

either  allotment  of  plot  or  payment  in  monetary  terms  is 

acknowledged  by  the  CDA  has  a  constitutional  right  to  be 

'compensated' without further delay based on the principle 

of  equivalence,  otherwise  it  will  be  confiscatory  and  in 

violation  of  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  Articles 

9, 23 and 24 of the Constitution. 

c) 

It  is  a  statutory  and  constitutional  duty  of  the 

Federal  Government  to  formulate  a  policy  regarding 

enforcement of acknowledged vested rights of the affected 

citizens  who  were  subjected  to  the  power  of  eminent 

domain  but  have  not  been  compensated  despite  lapse  of 

inordinate  delay.  The  Federal  Government  will  give  such 

directions  to  the  CDA  as  are  necessary  to  enforce  the 

acknowledged vested rights.   

d) 

The  Federal  Government  shall  cause  a  probe  to  be 

conducted  regarding  failure  on  the  part  of  the  CDA  to 

enforce  the  acknowledged  vested  rights  and  hold  those 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 60 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

officials  accountable  who  were  responsible  for  causing 

unimaginable  agony  and  trauma  to  the  citizens  whose 

vested right to be compensated has been acknowledged.  

e) 

The  market  values  determined  through  awards 

announced  before  2010  have  lost  their  efficacy  and 

payment  made  on  the  basis  thereof  is  likely  to  have 

confiscatory effect even if it is in addition to 8% per arum. 

No  property  can  be  legitimately  condemned  by  exercising 

the  power  of  eminent  domain  if  the  owner  is  not 

'compensated'.  It  has,  therefore,  become  mandatory  to 

reassess  the  market  values  in  a  fair  and  transparent 

manner  to  avoid  the  likelihood  of  confiscatory  effect, 

followed by prompt payment directly to the affected owner 

of  the  property.  The  reassessment  of  market  value  has 

already been done by the FGEHA.  

f) 

The  Federal  Government  shall  formulate  a  policy  to 

enforce  the  acknowledged  vested  right  of  allotment  of 

plots to more than ten thousand  affected property owners 

without further  delay and shall  give such directions to the 

CDA  or  any  other  authority  as  would  be  necessary  in  this 

regard.  

g) 

The  Federal Government shall direct the  CDA  to  put 

in  place  an  effective  mechanism  and  provide  an  exclusive 

forum  for  redressal  of  the  grievances  of  the  affected 

 
 
 
 
  
Page - 61 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

property  owners  whose  right  to  be  compensated  is 

acknowledged.  Each  will  be  dealt  with  fairly,  justly  and  in 

accordance  with  the  fundamental  right  guaranteed  under 

Article  14  of  the  Constitution.  In  order  to  prevent 

exploitation  of  the  affected  person,  whose  right  stands 

acknowledged,  the  CDA  shall  endeavor  to  deal  with  the 

latter directly and not through third parties including power 

of attorney holders. It is the duty of the CDA to reach out 

directly  to  each  affected  citizen  who  has  been  denied  the 

acknowledged  right  of  compensation.    The  cases  of  the 

petitioners shall be scrutinized and dealt with in the light of 

policy formulated by the Federal Government.  

h)   The Federal Government, while formulating a policy, 

shall,  inter  alia,  prescribe  a  time  frame  for  effectively 

enforcing the acknowledged rights and give such directions 

to the CDA as may be necessary in this regard. This Court, 

however,  expects  that  the  acknowledged  rights  would  be 

enforced within a period of six months.  

i) 

The  Federal  Government  shall  formulate  a  uniform 

policy  regarding  the  acquisition  of  land,  determination  of 

market  value  or  giving  rehabilitation  benefit  in  case  of 

exercise  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain  by  the  CDA  or 

the FGEHA, as the case may. While formulating the  policy 

it shall be ensured that it is in consonance with the rights 

of  the  citizens  likely  to  be  affected  and  the  duties  of  the 

 
 
 
 
Page - 62 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

public  functionaries  towards  them,  as  highlighted  in  this 

judgment.  The  Federal  Government,  through  its  policy 

directions,  will  ensure  that  the  procedures  adopted  while 

exercising  the  power  of  eminent  domain  will  be  clear, 

predictable,  transparent  and  fair  so  that  opportunities  for 

corruption  are  not  created.  The  Federal  Government  may 

also  consider  directing  the  CDA  and  the  FGEHA,  as  the 

case  may  be,  to  issue  awards  for  the  acquisition  of  land 

and  built  up  properties  simultaneously  so  as  to  avoid 

insurmountable complications.   

j) 

The  Federal  Government  is  expected  to  review  the 

laws enforced in the Islamabad Capital Territory relating to 

compulsory  acquisition  with  the  object  of  protecting  the 

rights  of  the  citizens  who  are  subjected  to  the  inherent 

power of the State. This has become inevitable in the light 

of the observations made by the august Supreme Court in 

the FGEHA Judgment. The apex Court has emphasized the 

need of overhauling the laws with respect to compensation 

so  that  they  cater  to  the  evolving  socio  economic 

circumstances.  The  remnants  of  colonial  era  and  the 

mindset  of  the  public  functionaries  vested  with  the  power 

of eminent domain needs to be changed.  

k) 

The fundamental rights of the petitioners in the E-12 

Petition  have  also  been  violated.  They  were  issued 

allotment  letters  of  plots  in  1989  against  payment  of 

 
 
 
 
Page - 63 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

consideration.  The  sector  was  not  developed.  The  Federal 

Government  may,  therefore,  formulate  a  policy  regarding 

development of sectors in order to ensure that sector E-12 

is developed and possession of plots is handed over to the 

allottees without unnecessary delay.  

l) 

The  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior  is  directed  to 

place  copies  of  this  judgment  before  the  Federal  Cabinet 

i.e. the worthy Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet 

in  one  of  the  meetings  scheduled  to  be  held  within  two 

weeks from the date of receiving a certified copy.  

46. 

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a certified copy of 

this order to the Secretary, Ministry of Interior through a special messenger 

for compliance.       

Announced in open Court on 14-06-2021. 

   (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

            (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Approved for reporting.  

Tanveer Ahmed/* 

 
 
    
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 64 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

ANNEXURE-A 

1.    W.P No. 244/2018 

Noman Ahmed and 14 others v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc.  

2.    W.P No. 3450/2020  Malik Muhammad Riaz, etc. v. Federation of 
Pakistan, etc.  

3.    W.P No. 4242/2017  Abdul Qudoos v. Capital Development 

4.    W.P No. 794/2019 

Authority, etc.  
Muhammad Shabbir v. Capital Development 
Authority, etc.  

5.    W.P No. 1027/2019  Gulistan, etc. v.  Capital Development 

Authority, etc. 

6.      W.P No. 1237/2019  Syed Aftab Hussain Shah etc. v. Capital 

7.    W.P No. 3106/2019 

Development Authority, etc. 
Tariq Quddous,  etc. v. Capital Development 
Authority, etc. 

8.    W.P No. 1194/2019  Muhammad Azam, etc. v. Capital 

9.    W.P No. 963/2019 

10.  W.P No. 3638/2020 

11.  W.P No. 964/2011 

12.  W.P No. 345/2015 

13.  W.P No. 1142/2015 

Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Arshad Khan v. Capital 
Development Authority. 
Iftikhar Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 
Abdul Bashir Mir, etc. v. The Chairman, 
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
Zahid Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 
Fazal Hussain, etc. v. The Chairman, Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 

14.  W.P No. 1632/2017  Riaz  Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority. 

15.  W.P No. 3394/2018  Muhammad Liaquat, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

16.  W.P No. 4547/2019  Ch. Imtiaz Ahmed. v. Capital Development 
Authority, etc. 

17.  W.P No. 2232/2019  Muhammad Rasheed, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

19.  W.P No. 943/2017 

18.  W.P No. 3450/2020  Malik Muhammad Riaz, etc. v. Federation of 
Pakistan, etc. 
Ch. Afrasiab Khan. v. Capital Development 
Authority, etc. 
CDA Labour Union, through its General 
Secretary v. Capital Development Authority, 
etc. 
Iftikhar Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 

21.  W.P No. 3487/2020 

20.  W.P No. 243/2020 

22.  W.P No. 3376/2020  Hameed Hussain, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

23.  W.P No. 3489/2020  Muzafar Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

24.  W.P No. 3567/2020  Mst. Channi Bibi, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

25.  W.P No. 3164/2020  Syed Hassnain Kazmi, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

 
 
Page - 65 
W.P. No.244/2018. 

26.  W.P No. 3485/2020  Zulfiqar Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 

27.  W.P No. 3532/2020 

28.  W.P No. 14/2020 

29.  W.P No. 866/2020 

30.  W.P No. 591/2020 

Development Authority, etc. 
Tariq Zaman, etc. v. Capital Development 
Authority, etc. 
Mst. Zubeda Khanum v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Sarfraz, etc. v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 
Muhammad Saleem, etc. v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 

31.  W.P No. 3578/2020  Muhammad Yasin v. Capital Development 
Authority, etc. 
Jahangir Hussain Shah, etc. v. Capital 
Development Authority, etc. 

32.  W.P No. 3486/2020 

33.  W.P No. 3488/2020  Qadeer Hussain Shah etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

34.  W.P No. 3416/2020  Allah Dad Chughtai, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

35.  W.P No. 3484/2020  Syed Adnan Kazmi, etc. v. Capital 

Development Authority, etc. 

 
 
 
