             Form No: HCJD/C-121.     

                              ORDER SHEET 

       IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018 

Collector of Customs, MCC, Islamabad, etc.  

VS 

 Israr and others.  

       DATE OF HEARING:    12-01-2021.   

       APPLICANTS BY:       M/s M.D Shahzad and Ch. Talib 

Hussain, Advocates. 

RESPONDENTS  BY:       Barrister  Ahsan  Jamal  Pirzada 
and  Mr. 
  Muahmmad  Amin 
Feroze  Advocates.  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-    Through  this  judgment,  we 

intend  to  adjudicate  instant  Customs  Reference  and  Customs  

Reference  56/2018  titled  “Israr  and  others  VS  Customs 

Appellate  Tribunal,  etc”  filed  under  section  196  of  the  Customs 

Act,  1969  (“Customs  Act”)  and  the  questions  of  law  proposed 

for our consideration in the two references arising from the same 

judgment  of  the  learned  Customs  Appellate  Tribunal  dated 

05.07.2018 and the facts recorded in the said judgment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

2

2. 

The  facts  in  brief  are  that  applicants  in  Customs 

Reference  No.  56/2018  (to  be  referred  to  as  “applicants”  for 

purposes of this judgment) excluding applicant no. 2 intended to 

travel  from  Benazir  Bhutto  International  Airport  to  Dubai  via 

flight  no.  PA-210  on  02.06.2016.  After  they  reached  the 

departure lounge and had their luggage scanned through Airport 

Security Force (ASF) scanners, Customs Officials examined their 

bags  and  asked  about  their  contents.  Applicant  no.  1  (Israr  s/o 

Muhammad  Amin)  disclosed  the  presence  of  foreign  currency  in 

his  baggage.  Customs  Officials  found  foreign  currency  (Saudi 

Riyals  330,000/-  and  UAE  Dirhams  42,500/-)  in  his  bag,  seized 

the  foreign  currency  alleging  violation  of  sections  156(1),  157 

and 178 of the Customs Act, 1969 and also registered a criminal 

case  against  the  appellants  vide  FIR  No.  33/2016  dated 

02.06.2016.  

3. 

The  Customs  Officials  submitted  Seizure  Case 

No.33/2016  dated  02.06.2016  for  adjudication  before  the 

Adjudicating  Officer  seeking  action  under  sections  156(1)  and 

(8),  157  and  178  of  the  Customs  Act,  read  with  section  3(3)  of 

the Import & Export (Control) Act, 1950 for violation of sections 

2(s)  and  16  of  the  Customs  Act,  section  3(1)  of  the  Import  & 

Export  (Control)  Act,  1950  and 

the  Foreign  Exchange 

Regulations Act, 1947. At the time of seizure of foreign currency, 

Israr,  applicant 

in  Customs  Reference  No.  56/2018  and 

respondent  no.1  in  Customs  Reference  No.  48/2018  (to  be 

referred to as “applicant no.1” for purposes of this judgment) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

3

did not possess documentary evidence establishing procurement 

of  the  foreign  currency  from  an  authorized  dealer.  Customs 

Officials  arrested  applicant  no.  2/Peerzada  (to  be  referred  to  as 

“applicant  no.2” 

for  purposes  of 

this 

judgment)  on 

identification  by  applicant  no.  1  as  his  relative  who  had  handed 

him  the  foreign  currency.  Applicant  no.  2  was  not  traveling 

outside  Pakistan  and  was  present  outside  the  departure  lounge 

in order to see off his family members i.e. applicants no.1 and 3 

to 6.  

4. 

Applicants  no.1  and  2  were  issued  a  show  cause  notice 

(SCN) by Collector of Customs (Adjudication) under section 180 

of the Customs Act dated 05.08.2016 to “show cause as to why 

the recovered/seized foreign currency  should  not be confiscated 

and  why  penal  action  should  not  be  taken  against  you  under 

section  156(1)(8),  157  and  178  of  Customs  Act,  1969  for 

violation of above mentioned provisions of law.”          

5. 

Applicants  no.  3  to  6  moved  an  application  before 

the  Collector  of  Customs  (Adjudication)  to  be  impleaded  as 

necessary  and  proper  parties  for  being  joint  owners  of  the 

foreign  currency  seized  from  applicant  no.  1.  All  applicants  also 

filed a statement in response to the SCN stating, inter alia, that 

they  were  joint  owners  of  the  foreign  currency  seized  from 

applicant no.1, which was lawfully procured and owned by them, 

and the foreign currency was seized by Customs Officials on the 

basis that it was in excess of the quantum allowed by the State 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

4

Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  even  though  its  presence  was  correctly 

declared by applicant no.1 for purposes of sections 139 and 142 

of the Customs Act. 

6. 

Collector of Customs (Adjudication) passed Order-in-

Original  No.  38  of  2017  dated  09.03.2017  (“Order-in-

Original”)  wherein  it  was  noted  that  “the  single  issue  in  the 

case  is  whether  the  recovered  and  seized  currency  is  liable  to 

confiscation  under  law?”  The  Order-in-Original  held,  inter  alia, 

that  the  seized  foreign  currency  could  not  be  attributed  to  the 

applicants  as  at  the  time  of  seizure  applicant  no.1  was  alone, 

according to the seizing officer, and the names and particulars of 

persons  claiming  to  be  family  members  did  not  fall  within  the 

definition  of  family  members  as  per  CNIC  details,  and  held  that 

the  seized  foreign  currency  was  liable  to  confiscation  under 

sections 156(1) and (8), 157 and 178 of the Customs Act.s 

7. 

The  applicants  in  Customs  Reference  56/2018  then 

challenged  the  Order-in-Original  before  the  learned  Customs 

Appellate Tribunal and asserted, inter alia, that they were lawful 

and  joint  owners  of  the  seized  foreign  currency,  that  the 

presence  of  the  foreign  currency  was  disclosed  to  the  Customs 

Officials  and  not  concealed  thus  no  offence  could  be  made  out, 

and that the Order-in-Original was time barred as it was passed 

beyond  the  mandatory  period  prescribed  in  section  179  of  the 

Customs Act. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

5

8. 

  The  learned  Customs  Appellate  Tribunal  in  its 

judgment has reproduced the grounds for challenge taken up by 

the applicants and held the following: 

“Perusal  of  case  file  has  transpired  that  appellants 

have  annexed  copies  of 

their  E-Tickets  and 

passports  with  the  memo  of  appeal  which  supports 

the  version  of  the  applicants  and  makes  the 

prosecution story doubtful. The applicant no. 1 also 

produced the receipt of purchase of foreign currency 

along  with  affidavit,  whereas  no  counter  affidavit 

was  filed  by  the  department.  Therefore,  we  are 

inclined  to  partly  accept  the  appeal.  The  foreign 

currency is ordered to be released to the applicants, 

except  appellant  no.2  as  according  to  appellants’ 

version Mr. Peerzada son of Hazrat Gull only visited 

the  airport  to  see  off  his  relatives  and  was  not 

traveling  to  Dubai,  in  terms  of  permission  given  by 

the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  vide  notification 

No.F.E.1/2015-SB dated 1st June, 2015 i.e. a major 

person  is  allowed  to  carry  maximum  US$  10,000/- 

and  a  minor  from  5-18  years  is  allowed  to  carry 

maximum  US$  5000/-.  The  remaining 

foreign 

currency  shall  remain  confiscated  in  favor  of  the 

state.  The  impugned  Order-in-Original  No.  38/2017 

dated  09.03.2017  is  modified  to  the  above  extent 

only.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

6

9. 

The questions framed in References No. 48/2018 and 

56/2018 are as follows: 

Customs Reference No. 48/2018: 

1.  Whether  after  confession/admission  of  crime  in  subject 

case  by  accused  namely  “ISRAR”  (presently  respondent 

No.  1)  in  his  confessional  statement  dated  19.11.2016 

before  judicial  forum  i.e.  Judge  Special  Court  (Customs, 

Taxation  &  Anti-Smuggling)  Rawalpindi  can  change  his 

entire  plea  and  bring  four  more  respondents  as  his  co-

travelers for the want of releasing the confiscated money 

before  both  departmental  forums  i.e.  Collectorate  of 

Customs  (Adjudication)  and  Customs  Appellate  Tribunal 

Bench-II, Islamabad, if so under what law? 

2.  Whether  the  impugned  judgment,  dated  31.07.2018  of 

Customs Appellate  Tribunal  Bench-II,  Islamabad  is  result 

of  negligent  and  conscious  overlooking  of prevailing  laws 

specially  when  confession  has  been  made  before  a 

competent 

judicial 

forum 

i.e.  Judge  Special  Court 

(Customs,  Taxation  &  Anti-Smuggling)  Rawalpindi,  by 

accused, mentioning himself as “single carrier” in subject 

criminal  case  i.e.  No.  33/2016  dated  02.06.2016  under 

criminal  procedure  code  of  Pakistan  and 

is  also 

derogatory  and  against  the  law  under  section  2(s), 

section 156(1),(8) of Customs Act, 1969. 

Customs Reference No. 56/2018: 

1.  Whether  the  learned  Customs  Appellate  Tribunal  was 

correct  in  partially  allowing  appeal  under  section  194 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

7

where  it  stands  proven  that  the  show  cause  notice  is  a 

result of mala fide intentions and ulterior motives and the 

case was false and fabricated? 

2.  Whether in  case  of non-filing  of counter  affidavits  by  the 

respondent  department  before  the  learned  Appellate 

Tribunal,  the  contents  of  the  affidavit  filed  by  the 

appellants  should  be  taken  to  be  true  in  terms  of  Order 

19 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908? 

3.  Whether  the  confiscation  can  be  affected  under  section 

2(s) of the Customs Act, 1969 read with sub-section 8 of 

section  156  where  it  is  not  a  case  of  smuggling  and  the 

goods  have  been  correctly  declared  in  terms  of  section 

139 of the Customs Act, 1969? 

4.  Whether the Order-in-Original No. 38 of 2017 is miserably 

time  barred  in  terms  of  section  179  of  the  Customs  Act, 

1969? 

5.  Whether the seized goods are liable to be released as the 

issuance  of  show  cause  notice  under  section  180  was 

barred  in  terms  of  sub-section  2  of  section  168  of  the 

Customs Act, 1969?   

10. 

We note that the learned Customs Appellate Tribunal 

neither  adjudicated  the  question  (i)  whether  confiscation  could 

be  affected  under  section  2(s)  read  with  section  156(8)  of  the 

Customs  Act,  given  that  presence  of  foreign  currency  was 

disclosed  to  Customs  Officials  and  consequently  this  was  not  a 

case  of  attempt  to  smuggle,  and  (ii)  whether  the  Order-in-

Original  was  issued  beyond  the  mandatory  period  prescribed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

8

under  section  179(3)  and  (4)  of  the  Customs  Act  and  therefore 

of no legal effect. 

11. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  applicants  in  Reference 

No. 56/2018 stated that the SCN was issued on 05.08.2016 and 

the  Order-in-Original  was  issued  on  09.03.2017,  which  was 

beyond the 120-day mandatory period prescribed for issuance of 

such  order  under  section  179(3)  of  the  Customs  Act,  and  that 

neither  the  said  period  was  extended  by  the  Collector  after 

recording reasons in writing as required by the Customs Act nor 

the  Federal  Board  of  Revenue  exercised  its  power  to  grant  an 

extension  under  Section  179(4)  of  the  Customs  Act.  He  has 

placed  reliance  on  “Javed  Iqbal  VS  Director  General  of 

Intelligence  and  Investigation,  FBR,  Karachi”  [2017  PTD  (Trib) 

2357] wherein the learned Customs Appellate Tribunal held that 

orders  passed  by  the  adjudicating  authority  beyond  the 

mandatory  period  prescribed  in  section  179(3)  of  the  Customs 

Act  suffered  from  grave  legal  infirmity  and  were  ab  initio  illegal 

and  of  no  legal  effect.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  department 

has  not  controverted  the  factual  or  legal  submissions  made  by 

the learned counsel for the applicants in this regard. 

12. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  applicants  has  further 

submitted that a case of attempt to smuggle cannot be brought 

home  to  the  applicants  as  in  the  instant  case  there  was  no 

concealment  of  foreign  currency  and  the  said  currency  was 

recovered  and  seized  after  disclosure  by  applicant  no.1  to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

9

Customs  Officials  that  he  possessed  foreign  currency  which 

formed part of the content of his baggage, and there existed no 

“intent”  to  smuggle  foreign  currency  outside  Pakistan.  The 

learned  counsel  for  the  applicants  further  submits  that  the 

foreign  currency  was  seized  from  applicant  no.1  at  the  entry  of 

the departure lounge of the airport immediately after his luggage 

was scanned by FIA scanners and he had neither been issued a 

boarding  pass  for  an  international  flight  nor  had  he  passed  the 

immigration post and received an exit stamp on his passport and 

thus  it  could  not  be  said  in  any  event  that  he  had  taken  steps 

pursuant to an intent to smuggle foreign currency that could be 

termed  as  an  “attempt”  and  has  relied  on  Central  Board  of 

Revenue VS Khan Muhammad [PLD 1986 SC 192].   

13. 

Learned counsel for the Department has opposed the 

contentions  of  the  applicants  regarding  “intent”  and  “attempt” 

and  submits  that  presence  of  the  foreign  currency  in  the 

baggage of the applicants in excess of the limit prescribed by the 

State  Bank  of  Pakistan  at  the  time  they  entered  the  departure 

lounge  and  had  their  baggage  pass  through  the  ASF  scanners 

reflected  the  required  intent  to  smuggle  prohibited  amounts  of 

foreign currency outside Pakistan and constituted sufficient steps 

in  pursuance  of  such  intent  to  qualify  as  attempt.  Learned 

counsel  for  the  Department  has  placed  reliance  on  Collector  of 

Customs VS Khud-e-Noor [2006 SCMR 1609].  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

10

14. 

The  learned  counsels  have  been  heard  and  we  have 

perused the record with their assistance. 

15. 

The  case  against  the  applicants  is  that  of  “attempt” 

to  “smuggle”  currency  outside  Pakistan  within  the  meaning  of 

section  2(s)  of  the  Customs  Act,  beyond  the  limit  prescribed  by 

the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  which  is  a  breach  of  the  restriction 

under  section  16  rendering  such  currency  liable  to  confiscation 

under section 17 of the Customs Act. The relevant provisions of 

the Customs Act are as follows: 

2(s)  “smuggle”  means  to  bring  into  or  take  out  of  Pakistan,  in 

breach  of  any  prohibition  or  restriction  for  the  time  being  in 

force,  or  evading  payment  of  customs-duties  or  taxes  leviable 

thereon,  (i)  gold  bullion,  silver  bullion,  platinum,  palladium, 

radium,  precious  stones,  antiques,  currency,  narcotics  and 

narcotic  and  psychotropic  substances;  or  (ii)  manufactures  of 

gold  or  silver  or  platinum  or  palladium  or  radium  or  precious 

stones, and any other goods notified by the Federal Government 

in the official Gazette, which, in each case, exceed one hundred 

and  fifty  thousand  rupees  in  value;  or  (iii)  any  goods  by  any 

route other than a route declared under section 9 or 10 or from 

any place other than a customs-station and includes an attempt, 

abetment  or  connivance  of  so  bringing  in  or  taking  out  of  such 

goods;  and  all  cognate  words  and  expressions  shall  be 

construed accordingly; 

16.  Power  to  prohibit  or  restrict  importation  and  exportation  of 

goods.-  The  Federal  Government  may,  from  time  to  time,  by 

notification  in  the  official  Gazette,  prohibit  or  restrict  the 

bringing into or taking out of Pakistan of any goods of specified 

description by air, sea or land. 

17.  Detention,  seizure  and  confiscation  of  goods  imported  in 

violation  of  section  15  or  section  16.-  Where  any  goods  are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

11

imported  into,  or  attempted  to  be  exported  out  of,  Pakistan  in 

violation of the provisions of section 15 or of a notification under 

section  16,  such  goods  shall,  without  prejudice  to  any  other 

penalty to which the offender may be liable under this Act or the 

rules made there under or any other law, be liable to detention, 

for  seizure  or  confiscation  subject  to  approval  of  an  officer  not 

below the rank of an Assistant Collector of Customs, and seizure 

for confiscation through adjudication, if required.  

139. Declaration by  passenger or crew of baggage.- The owner 

of any  baggage  whether a passenger or a  member  of the  crew 

shall,  for  the  purposes  of  clearing  it,  make  a  verbal  or  written 

declaration of its contents in such manner as may be prescribed 

by  rules  to  the  appropriate  officer  and  shall  answer  such 

questions as the said officer may put to him with respect to his 

baggage  and  any  article  contained  therein  or  carried  with  him 

and  shall  produce  such  baggage  and  any  such  articles  for 

examination  1  [:]  2[Provided 

that  where 

the  Customs 

Computerized  System  is  operational,  all  declarations  and 

communications shall be electronic.] 

16. 

In this reference, which emanates from the exercise 

of adjudicatory authority by the Collector, we are concerned only 

with the confiscation of currency seized from the applicants and 

not  the  criminal  case  registered  against  the  applicants,  the 

proceedings  in  such  case  or  the  evidence  adduced  therein.  The 

proceedings  in  the  criminal  case  and  those  in  the  adjudicatory 

matter  are  independent  of  each  other.  We  can  therefore  only 

take  into  account  the  SCN,  the  Order-in-Original,  the  judgment 

of  the 

learned  Appellate  Customs  Tribunal,  the  material 

considered 

in  passing  such  adjudicatory  orders  and  the 

reasoning of such orders. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

12

17. 

We  however  note  that  as  the  actions  of  the 

applicants  leading  to  the  imposition  of  the  civil  sanction  of 

confiscation  under  section  17  of  the  Customs  Act  must  amount 

to  “attempt”  to  “smuggle”  for  purposes  of  section  2(s),  the 

ingredients  of  the  offense  must  exist  and  be  proved.  Whether 

the  Collector  imposes  the  sanction  under  section  17  or  pursues 

criminal  penalties  under  section  156  or  both,  the  difference 

really  is  that  in  the  former  case  the  Department  would  need  to 

establish  the  infraction  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  and  in  the 

latter beyond reasonable doubt.     

18. 

In  this  regard  we  are  guided  by  dicta  of  the  august 

Supreme Court in Asghar Ali vs State [PLD 2003 SC 250], where 

the accused were charged with attempt to smuggle currency and 

after exchange of gunfire Pakistani currency was recovered from 

them  and  also  foreign  currency  from  secret  cavities  of  their 

vehicle. The august Supreme Court observed the following:  

“The  petitioner  has  claimed  the  possession  of  Pak  currency  but 

denied  the  possession  of  foreign  currency  which  was  recovered 

from  the  secret  cavities  of  the  vehicle  in  which  the  petitioner 

and  his  companions  were  traveling.  Thus  the  part  of  the 

transaction  relating  to  recovery  of  foreign  currency  from  the 

secret  cavities of the  vehicle  would  constitute  an  offence  under 

section  156(1)(8)  of  the  Customs  Act,  1969  whereas  the  part 

relating to the recovery of Pak currency from the possession of 

the  petitioner  while  traveling  in  the  territory  of  Pakistan  would 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

13

not  be an  offence  under  the  Customs  Act,  1969,  therefore,  the 

seizure of Pak currency and registration of case under Customs 

Act, 1969 to the extent was illegal and consequently, the trial of 

the  petitioner  before  the  Special  Judge  Customs  and  also  the 

adjudication  proceedings  before  the  departmental  authorities 

would jurisdiction and illegal. 

It went on to hold that: 

“This is correct that the order of confiscation of the property in 

the adjudication proceedings is independent to the verdict given 

by the Special Court in the criminal case but the seizure of Pak 

currency  itself  being  illegal  and  without  jurisdiction,  the 

subsequent proceedings either on the criminal side of before the 

departmental  authorities  would  be  without  legal  authority.  The 

order of confiscation of Pak currency passed by the adjudicating 

authority  being  a  void  order,  was  of  no  consequence  and  must 

be  ignored.  The  facts  on  the  basis  of  which  the  order  was 

passed,  would  not  make  out  a  case  for  exercise  of  jurisdiction 

under Customs Act, 1969 and if is allowed to hold field, it would 

defeat the dictates of justice and law.”    

On  what  constituted  attempt  to  smuggle  the  august  Supreme 

Court observed the following: 

“The  attempt,  abetment  or  connivance  to  commit  offence  of 

smuggling  would  include  in  the  expression  “smuggle”  which 

being  an  offence,  is  punishable  under  the  provisions  of  the 

Customs  Act,  1969,  but  the  attempt  to  smuggle  has  not  been 

specifically  defined  in  the  said  Act.  The  intention,  preparation, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

14

attempt and completion of an act are the essential components 

of  an  offence  but  an  attempt  to  commit  an  offence  in  the 

criminal  administration  of  justice,  is  a  distinct  offence  which  is 

completed  if  in  consequence to  the  preparation,  an  overt act  is 

taken  to  commit  the  crime.  The  preparation  to  commit  an 

offence is devising or arranging the means and measures which 

are  necessary  to  commit  the  crime  but  the  decision  of  this 

mixed  question  of  law  and  fact  always  depends  upon  the 

circumstances of each case. In short the attempt to commit an 

offence  is  taking  of  steps  to  do  something  which  if  done  in  a 

criminal  offence  and  if  the  act  in  consequence  of  such  steps 

does not amount to a criminal offence, it is not an attempt…In a 

case  in  which  is  a  person  is  found  in  possession  of  smuggled 

goods it is for such person to explain the legal possession of the 

goods  but  in  a  case  in  which  the  possession  of  goods  is  legal 

and it is not at all required to be explained, the seizure of such 

goods  would  be  illegal  and  further  neither  the  burden  of  proof 

can  be  shifted  to  the  person  in  whose  possession  the  goods 

were  seized  not  a  presumption of  guilt  can  be  raised  in  such  a 

case  and  thus  the  act  of  the  taking  of  the  Pak  currency  by  the 

petitioner to the sea shore even if is presumed that he intended 

to smuggle it out of Pakistan would not constitute an offence of 

smuggling under Customs Act, 1969.”  

19. 

The issue of attempt to smuggle came up before the 

learned Sindh High Court in “Ehsan Elahi Malik VS State” [1980 

P Cr. L J 186]. This was a case that included a false declaration 

by the accused. The learned Sindh High Court held: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

15

“It  is  in  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  purchased  a  ticket  for 

going to Hong Kong, he checked-in at the Swiss Airline Counter, 

he was given the boarding card and the baggage tags and finally 

he was asked by the Customs Officer to make a declaration. In 

this  declaration  in  writing,  which  is  on  record  as  Exh.  31,  the 

appellant  suppressed  the  information  regarding  the  huge 

quantity  of  foreign  currency  in  his  possession  and  the  precious 

stones carried by him. Having regard to all these facts it is clear 

that  but  for  the  interception  by  the  Customs  Officials  the 

appellant  had  done  everything  in  his  power  to  take  out  of 

Pakistan  the  contraband  articles.  The  Court  is  entitled  to  infer 

the existence of a fact regard being had to the common course 

of  natural  events  and  human  conduct.  There  is  nothing  on 

record  to  indicate  that  the  appellant  could  have  retracted  his 

steps  from  the  commission  of  the  offence.  There  is,  therefore, 

no force in this submission that the evidence does not establish 

the case of attempt to smuggle.”   

The learned Sindh High Court adopted the “but for” test i.e. but 

for  the  intervention  of  state  authorities,  the  accused  was  near 

taking  the  penultimate  step  in  commission  of  the  offence  and 

there was no possibility of him retracting his steps. 

20. 

The  meaning  of  attempt  to  smuggle  was  then 

considered  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Central  Board  of 

Revenue VS Khan Mohammad [PLD 1986 SC 192]. This was the 

case  of  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  arrived  in  Pakistan,  in 

transit  to  UK,  through  Torkham  Land  Customs  Station.  He 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

16

travelled to Islamabad and the foreign currency in his possession 

was checked by Customs Officials at Islamabad. But he had left 

behind  visa  related  documents  in  Peshawar  and  thus  couldn’t 

continue  his  onward  journey  from  Islamabad.  He  returned  to 

Peshawar and booked a flight from Peshawar to Karachi. Before 

embarkation  on  his  flight  in  Peshawar,  he  was  intercepted  by 

Peshawar  Customs  Officials  and  foreign  currency  seized  from 

him. The august Supreme Court held the following in paragraphs 

8 and 9: 

“Attempt to smuggle has not been defined in the Act but clause 

(8)  of  section  156  makes  the  attempt  to  smuggle  also 

punishable  by  virtue  of  the  aforesaid  definition  of  the  word 

“smuggle”  which  is  inclusive  of  an  attempt  to  bring  in  or  take 

out  goods  coming  within  the  mischief  of  the  main  provisions. 

The  classic  analysis  of  the  course  of  conduct  of  a  culprit  from 

the stage of conception to consummation of crime has laid down 

four  distinct  stages,  namely,  (i)  intention,  (ii)  preparation,  (iii) 

attempt, and (iv) completed act. As observed by Sir H. S. Gour 

in  his  commentary  on  the  Penal  Law  of  India,  the  first  of  the 

aforesaid four stages, the Criminal Codes of all countries exempt 

from  punishment.  The  Penal  Code  of  Pakistan  punishes  the 

second stage of certain offences, by constituting them separate 

and  distinct  offences.  The  third,  namely,  attempt,  marks  a 

distinct  advance  in  the  development  of  criminality,  so  that  it  is 

punishable  everywhere.  Ordinarily  then,  law  allows  locus 

poenitentia  only  up  to  the  second  stage  after  which  it  regards 

the  development  of  the  scheme  as  too  far  advanced  to  remain 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

17

unpunished. But this has led, as the reports of cases indicate, to 

an  important  question as to  when the  preparation ends  and an 

attempt begins…” 

“The  case  in  which  mere  preparation  to  commit an  offence  has 

not  been  made  punishable  presents  the  problem  to  determine 

whether the act or omission committed by the culprit constitutes 

merely preparation or amounts to attempt. Often times in such 

cases the transition between what is preparation and an attempt 

is so gradual as to be imperceptible. The preparation to commit 

an  offence  consists  in  devising  or  arranging  the  means  and 

measures  necessary  for  the  commission  of  the  offence.  It 

implies the taking of previous measures necessary for the crime. 

But  it  is  difficult  to  give  an  abstract  definition  of  the  term 

“attempt”,  in  a  juridical  context,  for  it  is  largely  a  mixed 

question  of  law  and  fact  depending  upon  the  circumstances  of 

each  particular  case.  Lord  Parker,  C.J.,  in  Devey  v.  Lee  has 

pointed  out  that  the  term  has  been  described  variously  in  the 

authorities but he has preferred to adopt the definition given in 

Stephen’s  Digest of the Criminal  Law,  5th  Edition  (1894), which 

is as follows: 

“An  attempt  to  commit  a  crime  is  an  act  done  with  the 

intent to commit that crime, and forming part of a series 

of  acts  which  could  constitute  its  actual  commission  if  it 

were not interrupted.” 

“Another definition  referred to  in  this  case  was  from  Archbold’s 

Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, which reads as under: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

18

“It  is  submitted  that  the  actus  reus  necessary  to 

constitute an attempt is complete if the prisoner does an 

act which is a step towards the commission of the specific 

crime,  which  is  immediately  and  not  merely  remotely 

connected  with  the  commission  of  it,  and  the  doing  of 

which cannot reasonably be regarded as having any other 

purpose than the commission of the specific crime.” 

“It  seems  that  the  modern  view  of  attempt  does  not  make  it 

necessary that the interruption which aborts the consummation 

of the crime should be the penultimate act for the completion of 

the crime. 

“9. Applying the aforesaid principles to the present case we are 

of the firm view that the acts done by the respondent before he 

was  intercepted  at  Peshawar  Airport  did  not  constitute  attempt 

to  smuggle  the  alleged  foreign  currency  out  of  Pakistan  but  at 

best the stage reached was that of mere preparation to commit 

that  offence.  As  already  discussed  even  if  there  is  undoubted 

evidence  of  intention  to  commit  the  offence  on  the  part  of  the 

offender  and  of  preparation  to  carry  out  that  intention  the  law 

does  not  make  the  person  entertaining  such  intention  or  doing 

such  acts  of  preparation  culpable,  so  far  as  the  offence  of 

smuggling is concerned. Because there is always in such cases a 

possibility of change of mind or locus poenitentia to give up the 

prosecution  of  the  criminal  intent  beyond  the  stage  of 

preparation. We, therefore, agree with the learned Judges of the 

High  Court,  that  the  mere  act  of  boarding  internal  flight  from 

Peshawar  to  Karachi  was  not  an  act  of  such  an  approximate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

19

nature  as  would  amount  to  an  attempt  to  smuggle,  although  it 

might constitute preparation to commit that offence.”   

21. 

The matter of smuggling of currency came up before 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Collector  of  Customs  VS  Khud-e-

Noor  [2006  SCMR  1609]  that  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Department  also  relied  upon.  However,  the  said  case  is 

distinguishable,  as  it  turned  on  illegal  possession  of  currency. 

There  the  receipts  produced  by  the  accused,  to  establish 

purchase  of  currency  from  money  changers  during  trial  for  the 

offence  under  section  156(1)(8)  read  with  section  2(5)  of  the 

Customs Act, were found to be fake.  

22. 

Attempt  has  been  defined  in  Black’s  Law  Dictionary 

as follows: 

“An overt act that is done with the intent to commit a crime but 

that falls short of completing the crime. Attempt is an inchoate 

offence distinct from the intended crime. Under the Model Penal 

Code,  an  attempt  includes  any  act  that  is  a  substantial  step 

toward  commission  of  a  crime,  such  as  enticing,  lying  in  wait 

for,  or  following  the  intended  victim  or  unlawfully  entering  a 

building  where  a  crime  is  expected  to  be  committed.  Model 

Penal Code S 5.01” 

23. 

Advanced  Law  Lexicon,  Reprint  2009,  has  defined 

“attempt”  while  reproducing  dicta  from  laws  reports,  and  the 

relevant part is as follows: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

20

“…an  intention  to  do  a  thing  combined  with  an  act 

which falls short of the thing intended. 

“Preparation  to  commit  an  offence  is  not  attempt. 

Covert  or  overt  acts  preceding  to  committing  an  offence 

with  an  intention  to  commit  the  offence  amount  to 

attempts.  Intention  to  commit  a  particular  offence,  some 

act  necessarily  done  towards  the  commission  of  the 

offence  and  proximity  of  such  act  to  the  intended  result 

constitute  ‘attempt’.  State  of  Maharashthra  v.  Mohd. 

Yakub, AIR 1980 SC 1111, 1115, 1114, 1117.”  

24. 

While  defining  “attempt”  the  learned  Lahore  High 

Court  held  the  following  in  Abdul  Salam  VS  State  [PTCL  1984 

(CL) 29]: 

“An act, in order to be a criminal attempt, must be immediately, 

and  not  remotely,  connected  with  and  directly  tending  to  the 

commission  of  an  offence.  Merely  to  make  preparations  for  the 

commission of an offence is distinct from an attempt to commit 

the  offence…  In  order  to  constitute  an  attempt,  there  has, 

therefore,  to  be  some  overt  act  on  the  part  of  the  offender 

which  if  not  frustrated,  would  lead  to  the  commission  of  the 

offence.”  

25. 

In  the  instant  matter,  the  question  before  us  is 

twofold:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

21

a.  has the department been able to establish intent on part of 

the  applicants,  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  to  smuggle 

foreign currency out of Pakistan;  

b.  in  the  event  that  intent  has  been  established  or  can  be 

inferred from the record, did the applicants take a series of 

steps  in  pursuit  of  their  criminal  intent  that  falls  beyond 

the  domain  of  preparation  and  had  crystalized  into  an 

attempt, where there was “no possibility of change of mind 

or  locus  poenitentia  to  give  up  the  prosecution  of  the 

criminal  intent  beyond  the  stage  of  preparation”  in 

accordance  with  the  test  laid  out  by  the  august  Supreme 

Court in Khan Mohammad’s case.   

26. 

Criminal  law  as  a  general  matter  is  not  forgiving  of 

those  who  act  in  ignorance  of  the  law  and  hence  the  maxim 

ignotantia  juris  neminem excusat (ignorance of the law excuses 

no  one).  But  exclusions  to  this  general  rule  exist,  especially 

when there is ignorance or mistake as to civil law. The argument 

is  that  if  the  purpose  of  law  is  to  punish  individuals  for 

culpability, it would be unfair to punish a person who acts under 

the  belief  that  the  conduct  is  not  criminal  or  without  the 

knowledge that it is criminal.  

27. 

The  question  of  mistake  of  law  or  mistake  of  fact  is 

even more germane when it comes to specific intent offences or 

inchoate  offences,  such  as  “attempts”,  where  there  is  no  actual 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

22

damage  inflicted  on  another  individual  or  the  society,  and 

punishment  is  meted  out  for  possessing  a  guilty  mind  and  for 

taking  actions  inspired  by  such  mind,  in  the  interest  of  public 

policy motivated by the deterrence theory of punishment and the 

recidivism  theory  of  punishment:  to  deter  legally  reprehensible 

conduct and protect society against a possible recurrence of the 

defendant’s harmful conduct. 

28. 

However,  deterrence 

is 

ineffective 

if 

the  act 

projected  as  an  attempt  to  commit  a  crime  is  for  want  of 

knowledge  regarding  the  wrongfulness  of  the  act.  Ignorance  of 

law not being an excuse is based on the logic that individuals are 

aware  of  the  natural  consequences  of  their  actions  and  if  their 

actions would lead to an injury to another, they ought to be able 

to  foresee  such  injury.  However,  in  a  case  such  as  the  present 

one involving the accusation of an attempt to smuggle currency, 

the  state  is  essentially  seeking  to  enforce  a  civil  right  against  a 

citizen  and  not  acting  to  protect  other  members  of  the  society 

from  a  direct  injury.  In  such  cases,  the  object  of  deterring 

attempt  is  inspired  not  by  the  interests  of  other  members  of 

society  from  being  protected  against  violence  or  harm,  but  by 

the collective interest of the society in enforcement of the law.  

29. 

In  relation  to  such  inchoate  offences,  especially 

involving  the  relationship  between  the  state  and  the  citizen  as 

opposed  to  relationship  inter  se  citizens,  the  state  has  an 

obligation to give a fair warning of the underlying prohibition to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

23

citizens,  which  would  then  make  any  defense  of  mistake  of  law 

or mistake of fact untenable. We see the state discharging such 

obligation  through  speed  limit  signs  on  roads  and  highways, 

together with warnings that the state is undertaking surveillance 

and  will  punish  those  who  do  not  comply  with  the  law.  This 

makes  abundant  sense  as  where  the  object  of  the  state  is  to 

encourage compliance with the law as opposed to letting citizens 

commit  actions  that  attract  punitive  measures  due  to  lack  of 

knowledge  or  negligence,  it  must  educate  the  citizen  instead  of 

seeking  enrich  itself  by  collecting  fines  or  confiscating  citizens’ 

property resulting from their mistakes or ignorance. 

30. 

When a person is charged with “attempt”, “the intent 

becomes  the  principal  ingredient  of  the  crime”,  argued  Lord 

Goddard CJ, in Whybrow [(1951) 35 Cr. App R 141]. An essential 

first step in making out an “attempt” offence is to show that the 

defendant intended to commit the proscribed wrong and had the 

necessary  knowledge  of  facts  and  circumstances.  Professor 

Andrew  Ashworth, 

in  summarizing 

the  debate  on 

the 

components  of  attempt,  notes  in  Principles  of  Criminal  Law  (3rd 

Edition),  “that  the  word  ‘attempt’  connotes  trying,  trying 

connotes  purposeful  behavior,  and  therefore  there  can  be  no 

such thing as a reckless or negligent attempt” (Ashworth; 464). 

And  thus,  in  jurisdictions  where  reckless  behavior  is  to  be 

criminalized, it is done so explicitly. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

24

31. 

With  regard  to  the  conduct  element  in  relation  to 

“attempt”  offences  there  exist  two  approaches:  a  fault-centered 

approach and an act-centered approach. From the stand point of 

fault-centered approach, an individual is guilty if he possesses a 

guilty  mind  and  when  he  takes  steps  in  pursuance  of  such 

criminal intent, he is liable to be punished. From the standpoint 

of  act-centered  approach,  law  should  require  an  unambiguous 

act  close  to  the  commission  of  the  crime  to  attract  penalty,  in 

order  to  protect  individual  liberty  and  agency  and  to  give  the 

individual  the  benefit  of  doubt  if  he  recedes  prior  to  the 

penultimate act and resiles from the criminal intent.  

32. 

The  test  laid  out  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Khan  Mohammad’s  case  follows  the  act-centered  approach  and 

calls  for  imposition  of  penalty  only  once  the  accused  crosses  a 

stage  in  pursuit  of  the  crime  where  the  intent  to  commit  such 

crime  is  manifest  and  the  penultimate  step  leading  to  its 

happening  is  imminent.  The  test  laid  out  for  us  to  follow 

comprises two limbs: one, there must exist intent to commit the 

offence  of  smuggling,  which  cannot  be  assumed  or  inferred  but 

must  be  established  by  the  state  on  a  balance  of  probabilities; 

and  two,  steps  must  have  been  taken  in  pursuit  of  such  intent, 

which  if  not  interrupted  by  the  state,  made  the  commission  of 

the offence imminent, and were interrupted at a time before the 

penultimate  step  when  there  existed  no  possibility  of  the 

accused receding from the commission of the offence.      

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

25

33. 

Intent in relation to an “attempt to smuggle” foreign 

currency  at  an  airport  may  be  established  in  one  of  two  ways: 

there can be a mis-declaration by an individual traveling outside 

Pakistan establishing dishonest intent; or intent may be inferred 

in view of the facts and circumstances of the case where there is 

positive  evidence  of  concealment  of  foreign  currency  coupled 

with  other  attendant  circumstances.  However,  no  objective  test 

can  be  employed  to  presume  intent  to  commit  such  offence 

merely  because  an  individual  arrives  at  the  airport  carrying 

foreign currency in excess of the limit prescribed by the Federal 

Government or State Bank of Pakistan.    

34. 

An attempt to smuggle is not a strict liability offence 

and  the  state  is  under  an  obligation  to  establish  mens  rea.  For 

purposes of section 2(s) read together with sections 16 and 17, 

the Department would need to establish guilty mind on a balance 

of  probabilities.  In  the  absence  of  an  objective  test  for 

presuming  intent,  in  case  of  a  frequent  traveler  who  has  a 

history  of  declaring 

foreign  currency  which  confirms  his 

knowledge  of  the  law  and  the  permitted  legal  limit  of  foreign 

currency  that  can  be  carried  out  of  Pakistan  or  in  case  of  a 

repeat offender, together with positive evidence of concealment, 

it may be possible to establish intent on a subjective basis.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

26

35. 

But  the  possibility  of  mistake  of  law  or  mistake  of 

fact  cannot  be  ignored  altogether  in  the  absence  of  attendant 

circumstances.  Foreign  currency  is  not  a  prohibited  item  in 

Pakistan  just  like  Pakistani  currency.  The  laws  of  Pakistan  allow 

citizens to open  foreign currency accounts and own and  acquire 

foreign  currency  from  banks  and  authorized  dealers.  Likewise, 

possession  of  foreign  currency  is  also  not  an  offence,  unlike 

drugs or other proscribed goods. Whether or not an individual is 

liable  for  the  offence  of  attempting  to  smuggle  foreign  currency 

or confiscation of such currency under section 17 of the Customs 

Act, thus rests only on exceeding the quantum prescribed by the 

State Bank of Pakistan.  

36. 

It  is  not  unreasonable  to  assume  that  a  traveler, 

especially an infrequent or uninformed one, might not be aware 

of  the  limit  prescribed  by  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  at  a  given 

time.  And  even  a  frequent  traveler  might  suffer  from  a  mistake 

of fact regarding the quantum of foreign currency he is carrying. 

Given  that  this  is  a  matter  of  the  state  enforcing  a  civil  right 

against  the  citizen,  it  places  a  higher  burden  on  the  state  to 

disclose  the  limit  of  permissible  foreign  currency  that  can  be 

carried, so that neither the citizen falls within the shackles of law 

inadvertently  nor  the  state  unjustly  enriches  itself  due  to  a 

mistake  committed  by  the  citizen.  It  would  not  be  onerous  for 

the  state  to  require  every  international  traveler  to  make  a 

mandatory  disclosure  of  foreign  currency  on  a  form  that  states 

that  maximum  permitted  quantum  of  currency  that  can  be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

27

carried,  for  purposes  of  section  139  of  the  Customs  Act,  at  the 

time  of  check  in  or  at  the  immigration  counter  etc.  A  false 

declaration would then automatically infer guilty intent.  

37. 

The  element  of  conduct  required  to  constitute 

attempt  also  requires  consideration  in  view  of  the  test  in  Khan 

Mohammad’s  case.  The  mere  possession  of  foreign  currency  in 

excess  of  the  permitted  limit  in  the  luggage  of  a  passenger 

scanned  at  the  ASF  scanners  at  the  entrance  of  the  Departure 

Lounge  cannot  constitute  a  step,  in  pursuance  of  guilty  intent, 

that  makes  the  carrying  out  of  the  offence  imminent  or  can  be 

treated  as  having  crystallized  into  attempt.  At  this  stage  the 

passenger  has  not  checked  in  his  baggage  or  been  issued  a 

boarding  pass.  He  has  also  not  passed  the  immigration  counter 

and received an exit stamp on his passport. At  this stage, even 

in  presence  of  initial  intent  to  attempt  smuggling  of  foreign 

currency,  the  passenger  could  recede  and  return  excessive 

currency  to  someone  waiting  outside  the  Departure  Lounge,  as 

passengers  often  do  in  case  of  excess  baggage.  Even  in  case 

intent  can  be  inferred,  the  conduct  would  still  not  have  crossed 

the threshold of preparation and culminated into attempt.          

38. 

In  the  instant  case,  the  Department  has  failed  to 

establish  intent  in  view  of  the  record.  Applicant  no.1  disclosed 

the  presence  of  foreign  currency  to  Customs  Official  who  asked 

him about the content of his luggage next to ASF scanners. The 

currency  was  in  plain  sight  within  the  luggage  according  to  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

28

seizure  memo,  having  been  placed  amongst  “un-stitched 

clothes”.  Thus,  there  was  neither  any  mis-declaration  nor  any 

attempt to conceal the foreign currency in view of the facts and 

circumstances  of  the  case.  In  the  absence  of  intent  being 

established  by  the  Department,  the  question  of  confiscation  of 

currency on grounds of attempt to smuggle doesn’t arise.  

39. 

As  aforesaid,  the  possession  of  foreign  currency 

(receipts  for  acquisition  of  which  from  authorized  dealers  were 

produced  during  adjudication  proceedings)  at  the  entry  of  the 

Departure Lounge prior to checking in baggage and having been 

issued  a  boarding  pass  or  having  passed  through  the 

immigration  counter  along  with  any  handbag  that  contained 

excess  foreign  currency  that  the  passenger  had  refused  to 

declare  or  mis-declared,  cannot  be  deemed  a  stage  in  conduct 

that  qualifies  as  attempt  for  purposes  of  section  2(s)  read 

together  with  section  17.  Thus,  the  conduct  of  the  applicants  in 

the instant case also does not qualify the attempt test laid down 

in Khan Mohammad’s case.  

40. 

The  Order-in-Original  was  thus  void  as  the  conduct 

for  which  applicant  no.1  was  apprehended  did  not  satisfy  the 

ingredients  required  to  bring  home  the  case  of  attempt  to 

smuggle  foreign  currency  to  applicant  no.1  or  2.  In  failing  to 

observe  that  the  alleged  conduct  was  not  culpable  for  purposes 

of  section  2(s)  read  together  with  sections  16  and  17  of  the 

Customs  Act,  the  judgment  of  the  learned  Appellate  Customs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

29

Tribunal suffers from basic legal infirmity. The learned Appellate 

Customs  Tribunal  did  not  appreciate  that  the  state  cannot 

unjustly  enrich  itself  by  confiscating  the  property  of  citizens 

when  the  mandatory  ingredients  for  the  offence  of  “attempt  to 

smuggle”  do  not  exist.  The  learned  Appellate  Customs  Tribunal 

ought  to  have  released  the  confiscated  currency  and  set  aside 

the Order-in-Original for being void and of no legal effect.      

41. 

The question whether the timeline for issuance of the 

adjudicatory  order  after  issuance  of  a  show  cause  notice  as 

prescribed under section 179(3) of the Customs  Act is  directory 

or mandatory has been settled by this court in Irfanullah vs The 

Collector  of  Customs,  etc.  in  Customs  Reference  No.2/2017, 

being  guided  by  the  judgment  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

The  Collector  of  Sales  Tax,  Gujranwala  etc.  vs  M/S  Super  Asia 

Mohammad Din & Sons etc. (PTCL 2017 CL 736), in the following 

terms: 

9.  A  combined  reading  of  subsections  3  and  4  of  section  179 

restricts  the  power  of  the  adjudicating  officer  to  decide  or 

adjudicate  a  show  cause  notice  within  the  time  prescribed 

therein.  The  legislature  has  used  the  expression  ‘shall’.  The 

adjudicating officer has to decide a case within one hundred and 

twenty  days  from  the  date  of  issuance  of a  show  cause  notice. 

This  period  can  be  extended  by  the  Collector  for  a  period  not 

exceeding sixty days and that too for reasons that are required 

to  be  recorded  in  writing.  Moreover,  time  has  not  been 

prescribed  for  granting  an  extension  by  the  Federal  Board  of 

Revenue  under  subsection  4  of  section  179.  The  Board  while 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

30

exercising  this  power  in  relation  to  extending  the  time  has  to 

justify  same  on  the  basis  of  exceptional  circumstances  and  in 

the light of the law expounded by the august Supreme Court the 

power  is  not  unfettered.  It  is  further  noted  that  the  time  for 

adjudicating  a  show  cause  notice  was  introduced  for  the  first 

time by inserting the same through the Finance Ordinance 2000. 

42. 

We  have  carefully  examined  the  above  provisions  in 

juxtaposition to subsection 3 of section 36 of the Sales Tax Act, 

1990. We have not been able to find any distinguishing features 

between  the  two  provisions  so  as  to  distinguish  the  law  laid  by 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “The  Collector  of 

Sales Tax, Gujranwala, etc VS M/S Super Asia Mohammad Din & 

Sons etc” [PTCL 2017 CL 736]. Following the said principles and 

law we hold that the timelines prescribed under subsection (3) of 

section 179 of the Act of 1969 are mandatory and not directory. 

Moreover,  the  period  of  exclusion  provided  under  the  proviso, 

can also not exceed thirty days as has been held by the august 

Supreme Court while interpreting the provisions of section 36(3) 

of  the  Sales  Tax  Act,  1990.  The  power  of  the  Federal  Board  of 

Revenue  under  subsection  (4)  of  section  179  is  also  to  be 

interpreted in light of the aforesaid law laid down by the august 

Supreme  Court.  We,  therefore,  hold  that  this  power  is  also  not 

unfettered and that it ought to be exercised within a period of six 

months  from  the  date  when  the  time  period  provided  under 

section  179(3)  or  the  extension  granted  thereunder  has  lapsed. 

Moreover, the power exercised by the Federal Board of Revenue 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

31

under  subsection  4  of  section  179  to  grant  an  extension  has  to 

be  for  a  reasonable  time  i.e.  not  more  than  a  period  of  six 

months.   

43. 

The  question  of  the  Order-in-Original  being  time 

barred was raised before the learned Appellate Customs Tribunal 

but  was  not  considered  or  adjudicated.  In  view  of  the  ratio  of 

M/s  Squibb  Pakistan  Pvt.  Ltd  [PTCL  2017  CL  646]  and  the 

questions  framed  for  our  consideration  in  Reference  No. 

56/2018,  this  is  a  question  arising  out  of  the  judgment  of  the 

learned  Appellate  Customs  Tribunal.  The  fact  that  the  Order-in-

Original  was  issued  beyond  the  mandatory  adjudication  period 

prescribed  under  section  179(3)  is  not  disputed.  We  therefore 

find  that  the  Order-in-Original  to  be  of  no  legal  effect  on  this 

score as well.   

44. 

We  answer 

the  questions  raised 

in  Customs 

References  48/2018  and  56/2018  accordingly.  Office  is  directed 

to send this order to the learned Appellate Customs Tribunal and 

consequently  the  department  shall  release  the  currency  seized 

from the applicants in Customs Reference 56/2018 forthwith. 

   CHIEF JUSTICE 
                                                 JUDGE 

      (BABAR SATTR)  

Approved for reporting  

Saeed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
    Customs Reference No. 48 of 2018. 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
