JUDGMENT  SHEET.
TST AI\/IAEIAD HIGHCOTTPT IqT AI\/IAE[AT)
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P No.371/2019.

Saima Arshad etc

VS

Family  Judge  (East),  Islamabad
etc.

Petitioners  by: 

Ms.  Saira IGalid  Rajput,  Advocate.

Respondent  No.2 by: 

Mr. Sajjad Haider Malik, Advocate.

Date of Decision: 

28.10.2019.

:- Through  this writ petition, the

petitioners have  assailed the order  dated  17.09.2018, passed  by learned  Judge

Family Court, Islamabad,  whereby application for enhancement  of maintenance

allowance  was allowed  and  maintenance  allowance  of each minor has been

extended  from Rs.5,000/-  to Rs.8,000/-  per month  with  10%  annual increase.

2. 

Learned  counsel  for the petitioners contends that the petitioners have earlier

filed suit for recovery of maintenance,  which was decreed  vide judgrnent  & decree

dated  12.05.2006 and execution  is pending  before  the leamed Family  Court; that the

petitioners fited an application  for enhancement  of their maintenance  on the ground

that  respondent  No.2 has sufficient means to satisfy the decree while considering

the needs of present  petitioners,  who have now grown up as original  decree was

passed on 12.05.2006  at the rate of Rs.5,0001- per month for each  minor, which is

insufficient  at present  time; that the application  was contested  by the respondent

No.2 and the impugned order was passed  ex-parte,  whereby  maintenance  wum

increased to Rs.8,000/- per month for each  petitioner;  that the petitioners  are

aggrieved with  the impugned  order and challenge  the same  before  this Court.

3.  Conversely,  leamed counsel  for respondent  No.2  contends  that he was not

given  opportunity  of hearing  and he intends to contest the said application on merit,

however, he has drawn  attention of this Court  towards  the prayer clause of instant

vwit petition, in which  the petitioners  themselves  claim to set aside the impugned

order and prayed for remand  of the matter with direction  to decide  the application

on merit.

t

)

W.P No.37112019.

2

4. 

The petitioners' counsel  has been confronted with the prayer clause of writ

petition,  whereby learned  counsel for the petitioners under  instruction  of her clients

contends  that she has no objection if order passed by Family Judge  is set aside with

direction to decide question  of enhancement  of maintenance in accordance  with law

after  hearing  the petitioners and subject to recording of evidence.  Be that as it may.

Both the parties  have agreed  to contest enhancement  of the maintenance  application

before  the Executing Court after  submission of their evidence, therefore,  instant

writ petition  stands accepted,  the impugned  order  dated  17.09.2018  is hereby  set

aside. The matter  is remanded  to learned  Executing  Court  seized  with  the matter

and the parties  are directed  to appear  before  the said Court on 09.11.2019,  whereby

respondent  No.2 shall appear in person and submit his written reply to the

application, where-after Court is at liberty to proceed in accordance with law and if

the parties  are interested to submit  their evidence,  they  are permitted  to produce

such evidence. It is expected from  the Court to decide  the pending application

within period of 03 months.

RAnjm

(MOHSTN

JUDGE

