ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016 

Sikandar Ali alias Bhola 
VS
The State and another 

Appellant By:  
Complainant By:  Mr. Naseer Anjum Awan, Advocate 
State by:   

Mr. Asif Masood, Advocate. 

Mr. Hammad Saeed Dar, State Counsel 
alongwith Shah Nazar, Sub-Inspector.  

Date of Hearing:  

26.10.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J.:-  Through  this  consolidated 

judgment,  I  intend  to  decide  Criminal  Appeal  No.  50  of  2016,  Jail 

Appeal No.179 of 2016 and Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015, arising 

out of the same judgment dated 24.02.2016, passed by the learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad-West,  whereby  the appellant 

was  convicted  under  Section  302  (b)  P.P.C  and  awarded  sentence 

of life imprisonment as Tazir alongwith payment of Rs.5,00,000/- as 

compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  deceased  as  provided  under 

Section  544-A  of  Cr.P.C.,  in default  whereof, to  further  undergo six 

months S.I. The appellant was also extended benefit under Section 

382-B of Cr.P.C. 

2. 

Briefly  stated  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  the  application 

(Ex.PA),  a  Rapt  was  registered  at  Police  Station  Margallah, 

Islamabad,  wherein,  it  was  reported  that  the  deceased  Muhammad 

Asif  was  residing  alongwith  his  family  at  House  No.B-1/3,  Street 

No.5,  Sector  E-8,  Navel  Complex,  Islamabad,  and  was  performing 

duties as Driver in PNS Zafar. On 11.10.2012, at about 22:00 hours, 

after  closing  duties,  he  left  for  his  home.  His  wife,  Shazia  Kousar, 

had  gone  for  her  duty  in  the  morning  at  7:30  a.m.    Her  daughter 

namely, Faiza Bibi, at about 09:00 a.m., found her father dead. The 

deceased  was  shifted 

to  PNS  Hafeez  Hospital,  where,  on 

examination,  the  death  of  the  deceased  was  confirmed  with  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       2 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

observation  that  there  were  marks  of  violence  on  his  throat.  After 

conducting post-mortem and on receipt of report, criminal case was 

registered.  The  post-mortem  of  the  deceased  was  conducted  by 

PW-8,  Dr.  Muhammad  Farrukh  Kamal.  The  cause  of  death  was 

stated  unnatural  and  caused  by  strangulation,  trauma  to  testis  and 

neck  vessels.  On  identification  of  the  dead  body,  Fard  Shinakhat 

Laash  (Ex.PB)  was  prepared  and  regarding  receipt  of  dead  body 

(Ex.PC)  was  also  prepared  and  signatures  of  the  witnesses  were 

obtained  thereon.  The  last  worn  clothes  of  deceased  before  the 

post-mortem were also taken into possession through Ex.PE and six 

photographs  of  the  deceased  before  the  post-mortem  were  taken 

into  possession  through  recovery  memo  Ex.PF.  After  the  post-

mortem  and  necessary  investigations,  the  dead  body  was  handed 

over to  the legal heirs  of the deceased for its burial. After receiving 

the  post-mortem  report  (Ex.PG),  F.I.R  No.  521  of  2012  dated 

16.10.2012 was registered. PW-16, Investigation Officer, visited the 

place  of  occurrence  but  it  was  found  locked  because  the  family  of 

the  deceased  had  proceeded  to  their  native  town  for  burial  of  the 

deceased.  PW-16,  started  investigation,  recorded  statements  of 

Navel  Complex  Police  officials,  present  over  there.  On  18.10.2012, 

the  legal  heirs  of  the  deceased  came  back  to  their  house;  the 

Investigating Officer reached at the spot and recorded statements of 

witnesses.  PW-4,  Mst.  Faiza  Bibi,  is  the  daughter  of  the  deceased. 

While  recording  her  statement,  she  disclosed  the  fact  that  the 

appellant, Sikandar Ali, and her mother namely, Shazia Kousar had 

committed the murder of her father. Both the accused persons were 

arrested.  During  the  course  of  investigation,  on  19.10.2012,  the 

Investigating  Officer  took  into  possession  entry  data  of  the  Navel 

Complex alongwith copy of I.D. card of appellant (Ex.PD), which was 

for the house of deceased. On 30.10.2012, co-accused Shazia, led 

the  police  to  her  home  and  on  her  pointation,  the  police  took  into 

possession  a  pillow,  a  mobile  phone  alongwith  two  SIMs  through 

recovery memo “Ex.PFA”. On 29.11.2012, mobile data of the phone 

number of the co-accused Shazia and the mobile  phone number of 

the appellant was collected through recovery memo “Ex.PN”. During 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       3 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

the investigation, co-accused Shazia Kousar made disclosure of the 

commission  of  offence  and  later  on,  her  statement  under  Section 

164 Cr.P.C was recorded by the Assistant Commissioner, Magistrate 
1st  Class,  Islamabad.  During  investigation,  on  03.11.2012,  the 

accused,  Sikandar  Ali,  disclosed 

the  commission  of  offence 

committed by him and on his pointation, rope Ex.P7 was taken into 

possession  through  recovery  memo  Ex.PMM  and  prepared  un-

scaled site plan Ex.PQ. 

3. 

After  completion  of  the  investigation,  report/challan  under 

Section  173  Cr.P.C  was  submitted  before  the  learned  trial  Court. 

After fulfilling codal formalities by the learned trial Court, charge was 

framed  against  the  appellant/  convict  and  co-accused  Mst.Shazia 

Kausar, to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. In order to 

prove  the  guilt  against  them,  prosecution  examined  as  many  as 

seventeen  (17)  witnesses.  During  trial,  co-accused,  Shazia  Kausar 

disappeared; therefore, she was declared Proclaimed Offender. 

4. 

On  closure  of  the  prosecution  evidence,  statement  of  the 

appellant/convict  under  section  342  Cr.P.C  was  recorded,  wherein 

all  the  incriminating  evidence  recorded  in  his  presence  was  put  to 

him, he claimed innocence. However, he neither deposed on oath as 

per Section 340 (2) Cr.P.C nor produced any defence evidence. 

5. 

After  recording  evidence  and  hearing  arguments  of  the 

learned  counsel  for  the  parties,  the  learned  trial  Court  passed 

impugned  judgment  dated  24.02.2016,  whereby,  the  accused  was 

convicted and sentenced as mentioned above, hence this appeal. 

6. 

Learned counsel for  the  appellant/convict has contended that 

the  appellant  is  innocent,  he  has  falsely  been  implicated  in  the 

instant  case,  the  impugned  judgment  is  against  the  facts,  law  and 

record;  that  there  is  an  inordinate  and  unexplained  delay  in 

registration  of  the  F.I.R;  that  there  is  no  direct  evidence  to  connect 

the  petitioner  with  the  commission  of  the  alleged  offence;  that  the 

co-accused (Shazia Kousar) herself permitted for the post-mortem of 

the deceased; that no report with regard to administering poison was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
       4 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

brought  on  record.  The  statement  of  PW-4  is  not  natural  as  at  that 

time  she  went  to  her  college;  that  no  doctor  from  the  PNS  Hafeez 

Hospital,  was  examined;  that  the  crime  weapon  rope  (Rassi)  was 

allegedly  recovered  after  unexplained  delay;  that  the  case  of 

prosecution hinges upon circumstantial evidence with broken chain; 

that  the  complainant  has  not  mentioned  his  source  of  information 

while  reporting  to  the  police;  that  there  is  no  disclosure  of  the 

appellant;  that  there  is  no  truth  that  the  recovery  of  rope  was 

affected  on  the  pointation  of  the  appellant;  that  during  the  trial, 

original  record  of  the  PNS  Zafar  Gate  was  not  brought  before  the 

Court.  

7. 

Conversely, 

learned  State  counsel  assisted  by 

learned 

counsel for complainant vehemently opposed the contentions raised 

by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  and  contended  that  PW-4 

(Mst.  Faiza  Bibi),  when  found  her  father  in  dead  condition,  she 

informed  the  matter  to  the  office  where  her  father  was  performing 

duties on mobile phone; that at the first instance, the doctors of the 

PNS  Hafeez  Hospital  advised  for  the  post-mortem  of  the  deceased 

as there were marks of violation on the person of the deceased; that 

the post-mortem was conducted and concluded that the death of the 

deceased  occurred  due  to  strangulation;  that  on  the  day  of 

occurrence, the appellant was present at the house of the deceased; 

that no private  person without  admission  can  enter  the premises of 

the Navel Complex, Islamabad; that the appellant at PNS Zafar Gate 

got his entry leaving a copy of his CNIC with the information that he 

was going to the house of the deceased; that PW-4 (Mst. Faiza Bibi), 

is  an  eyewitness  of  the  occurrence,  who  saw  the  appellant  at  her 

home  before  the  commission  of  the  alleged  offence;  that  during 

investigation, the appellant disclosed the commission of offence i.e. 

murder  of  the  deceased  by  strangulation  with  a  white  colour  rope 

and  in  the  morning,  while  going  back,  he  threw  the  said  rope  near 

the  Navel  Complex  Gate  under  the  trees;  that  on  the  pointation  of 

the appellant, crime weapon i.e. rope was got recovered; that all the 

prosecution  witnesses  are  impartial;  that  no  ill-will  was  ever 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       5 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

suggested by the appellant to the witnesses; that on the pointation of 

the  co-accused,  pillow  was  also  recovered  beside  recording  her 

statement  under  Section  164  of  Cr.P.C;  that  the  medical  report 

confirmed  the  unnatural  death  of  the  deceased;  that  the  mobile 

phone data was brought on record, which proved the fact that there 

was conversation in between the appellant and the co-accused Mst. 

Shazia;  that  the  prosecution  has  proved  the  case  against  the 

appellant  beyond  any  shadow  of  doubt;  that  there  exists  no 

contradiction  in  the  statements  of  the  witnesses.  Lastly,  prayed  for 

dismissal of the appeal.  

8. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsels  for  the 

parties  and  have  perused  the  available  record  with  their  able 

assistance.   

9. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  PW-4,  the  daughter  of  the 

deceased,  while  present  at  home  at  about  09:00  a.m.,  found  her 

father in dead condition. She immediately informed the office of the 

deceased through cellular phone. Upon which, PW-14 (Asif Iqbal), a 

Medical Technician, serving at PNS Hafeez Hospital alongwith First 

Aid  Bag  in  ambulance,  reached  at  the  house  of  the  deceased  and 

shifted the dead body to PNS Hafeez Hospital whereafter, the matter 

was  reported  to  the  police  through  PW-1,  Zahoor  Ahmed,  Pati 

Officer,  at  Pakistan  Navy.  He  stated  that  doctors  present  on  duty, 

after  examination,  declared  him  dead  and  further  explained  that 

there  were  marks  of  violence  on  throat  of  the  deceased.  The  post-

mortem  of  the  deceased  was  necessary  for  ascertaining  the  cause 

of  death.  On  his  report,  a  rapt  No.37  under  Section  174  of  Cr.P.C 

(Ex.PR)  was  registered  in  the  Roznamcha  at  the  Police  Station 

Margallah,  Islamabad.  The  post-mortem  of  the  deceased  was 

conducted  by  PW-8,  Dr.  Muhammad  Farrukh  Kamal,  MLO/Deputy 

Director  PIMS,  Islamabad,  prepared  post  mortem  report  alongwith 

diagram  (Ex.PG)  and  death  certificate  (Ex.PK).  On  examination 

found the following injuries:-  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       6 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

EXTERNAL EXAMINATION.  
A  middle  aged  man  height  5  feet  6  inches  wearing  light 
green(Angori)  colour  shirt,  light  brick  red  shalawar  white 
vest, bleeding from mouth and nose, hair mustache beard 
grey and white.  

FOLLOWING  INJURIES  WERE  NOTED  ON  THE  BODY  OF 
THE DECEASED 
Injury No. 1.  

Scar Mark around neck 36 c.m. 9 c.m from right ear 
and 7 c.m. from left ear.  

Injury No. 2.  

Bruise on left side of forhead 1.5 x .5 c.m.  

Injury No. 3.  

Bruise 3 x 1 c.m. on neck below from right ear  

Injury No 4. 

Bruise mark on scrotum 2 x 2 c.m. on right side  

Injury No 5.  

Bruise on left of side of scrotum 2 x 2 c.m.  

Injury No. 6.  

Bruise  scrotum  near  ventral  and  base  of  Pnnis  3 
x 2 c.m.  
Rigor mortis and post mortem levedity present.  

INTERNAL EXAMINATION.   

Tracheae ruptured and damaged. Neck vessels and 
testis  traumatic.  Right  lung  and  left  lung  congested.  Mild 
bruise on forhead. All other organs were intact.  

DISPATCH MATTER TO CHEMICAL. EXAMINER.   

i. 
ii. 
OPINION  

Liver, spleen, kidney.  
Stomach, small intestines with contents.  

In  my  opinion  deceased  died  due  to  strangulation 
(asphyxia)  and  trauma  to  testis  and  neck  vessels, 
which  caused  death.  Opinion  regarding  sedation 
will  be  established  after  the  chemical  examiner 
report. All injuries were ante mortem in nature and 
sufficient  to  cause  death  in  ordinary  course  of 
nature. 

TIME BETWEEN INJURY AND DEATH  

Variable  1-2  or  few  minutes  (  5-15  minutes 
approximately) 

TIME BETWEEN DEATH AND POST MORTEM  

13-16 hours (approximately) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       7 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

10.  The 

Investigating  Officer,  PW-16 

(Mumtaz  Baig-ASI), 

examined  the  dead  body  and  prepared  Inquest  Report  (Ex.PS),  he 

prepared  application  for  post-mortem  of  the  deceased  and  handed 

over  it  to  CMO  PIMS  (Ex.PH),  prepared  Identification  Memo  of  the 

deceased  (Ex.PB),  taken  into  possession  the  last  worn  clothes  of 

the deceased through recovery memo (Ex.PT). On 16.10.2012, after 

receiving the post-mortem report (Ex.PG) from the MLO Dr. Farrukh 

Kamal,  on  the  basis  whereof  F.I.R  No.521  dated  16.10.2012  was 

registered under Section 302 P.P.C. The Investigating Officer visited 

the  place  of  occurrence  made  efforts  for  the  arrest  of  the  accused 

persons.  The  family  of  the  deceased  was  not  found  as  they  had 

proceeded to their native place for burial of the deceased, obtained 

specimen  of  internal  contents  of  the  deceased.  Photographs 

(Ex.P7/1-6)  of  the  deceased  were  taken  into  possession  through 

recovery  memo  Ex.PU;  prepared  site  sketch  of  the  place  of 

occurrence  through  draftsman  PW-9  (Amir  Shahzad),  recorded  the 

statements  of  witnesses  including  the  family  members  of  the 

deceased,  on  his  inspection  of  the  place  of  occurrence,  he  also 

prepared  un-scaled  site  plan  (Ex.PV);  arrested  the  co-accused 

Shazia  Kousar  on  23.10.2012  and  thereafter,  the  appellant  was 

arrested on 25.10.2012.  The entry  record  of  the  appellant Sikandar 

Ali in Navel Complex (Ex.PD) alongwith his I.D. card (Ex.PD-1) were 

taken into possession through recovery memo Ex.PE. Statement of 

medical  staff  of  Naval  Hospital  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  was 

recorded.  PW-9,  Amir  Shahzad,  handed  over  to  him  site  plan 

(Ex.PL/1-2); sent parcels to the Chemical Examiner Lahore. As per 

statement  of  PW-15,  Muhammad  Feroz  SI,  he  arrested  the  co-

accused  Mst.  Shazia  Kousar  after  recording  statement  of  her 

daughter PW-4 namely, Mst. Faiza Bibi. During investigation, she led 

the police and got recovered a pillow Ex.P4 and from inside therein, 

a  mobile  phone  Ex.P5  and  two  SIMs  Ex.P.6/1-2,  were  taken  into 

possession 

through 

recovery  memo  Ex.PF  and  during 

the 

investigations,  she  disclosed  the  fact  that  the  recovered  pillow  was 

used for placing it on the mouth of the deceased while the appellant, 

Sikandar Ali, strangulated the deceased by means of recovered rope 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       8 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

(Ex.P7).  On  31.10.2012,  statement  of  the  co-accused,  Shazia 

Kousar,  was  recorded  under  Section  164  Cr.P.C.  before  the  A.C 

(I.A) 

Islamabad.  On  03.11.2012, 

the  appellant  disclosed 

the 

commission  of  murder  of  the  deceased  and  on  his  pointation,  the 

crime  weapon  i.e.  rope  (Ex.P7)  was  got  recovered  and  was  taken 

into  possession  through  recovery  memo  Ex.PM  (after  rectification 

Ex.PMM).  

11. 

It  is  reflected  from  record  that  at  the  residence  of  the 

deceased  i.e.  House  No.B-1/3,  Street  No.5,  Sector  E-8,  is  situated 

within the Navel Complex, Islamabad, where no one can enter inside 

the boundary of the society, without permission of the staff deputed 

therein.  It  transpires  from  statement  of  PW-4  (Mst.  Faiza  Bibi)  that 

the  appellant  was  having  illicit  relations  with  her  mother,  the  co-

accused  (Shazia  Kousar).  The  appellant  often  visited  her  mother 

and  when  this  fact  came  into  knowledge  of  the  deceased  on 

16.09.2012,  he  expelled  the  appellant  from  his  house  and  warned 

him  with  the  wording  that  in  case  the  appellant  again  entered  his 

house, he will report the matter to the police and also threatened his 

wife  (Mst.  Shazia  Kouser)  that  if  she  contacted  the  appellant,  he 

would pronounce divorce to her. The above-said witness has further 

deposed that on 11.10.2012, the appellant came at their house and 

she was directed by her mother not to inform the matter to her father 

and  the  appellant  was  taken  inside  the  room.  The  presence  of  the 

appellant  inside  the  house  of  the  deceased  was  also  confirmed 

through  the  entry  data  (Ex.PD),  issued  by  the  Naval  Police, 

Islamabad. It reveals that on 11.10.2012, the appellant entered into 

the  Navel  Complex  through  Bahria  Gate  at  22:20  hours.  The  illicit 

relations  of  the  appellant  with  the  co-accused  Shazia  Kauser  was 

further  strengthened  by  PW-6,  Afzal  Mehmood,  who  had  deposed 

that  the  co-accused  Shazia  Kousar  was  working  for  the  last 

six/seven years as an Attendant  at Bharia College, Islamabad. She 

requested him to find a residence for the appellant, Sikandar Ali, and 

then he found out a residence for the accused, Sikandar Ali, in their 

neighbourhood.  On  the  fateful  day,  in  the  early  morning,  at  about 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       9 

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

07:15 a.m., wife of the deceased, co-accused Shazia Kousar left the 

house  for  going  to  her  job.  On  the  way,  at  the  same  time,  a 

colleague  of  the  deceased  namely,  Abdul  Ghafoor  (PW-5),  who 

always  used to  take  the  deceased  Asif  from  his  house  toward their 

job place, deposed that the accused Shazia asked him to go to the 

office alone because Asif (deceased) was not feeling well and would 

not be able to go to office that day, thereafter, PW-5 went to his duty 

alone.  This  fact  also  shows  the  malafide  on  the  part  of  the  co-

accused Shazia. On reporting the matter to the police by PW-1, the 

Investigating  Officer  prepared  Inquest  Report  (Ex.PS).  Column 

No.10 of the Inquest Report shows the signs of strangulation around 

the  neck  and  some  marks  of  injuries,  bruises  on  the  person  of  the 

deceased,  which  was  confirmed  by  PW-8,  Dr.Muhammad  Farrukh 

Kamal,  in  his  report  (Ex.PG)  and  post-mortem  report  (Ex.PH). 

Furthermore,  the  illicit  relations  between  the  co-accused  and 

appellant  are  also  verified 

through 

their  mobile  phone  data 

(CDR/record).  From  the  above  stated  circumstances  and  the 

evidence,  it  has  been  clearly  proved  that  the  appellant  had  illicit 

relations  with  the  co-accused,  Shazia  Kousar,  and  he  used  to  visit 

their house. It also revealed that on the last night of occurrence, PW-

4  witnessed  that  the  appellant  visited  their  house  and  her  mother 

took him inside the room. The confession of the appellant before the 

police was although not admissible in evidence, but the same led the 

police  to  discovery  of  facts  and  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence.  On 

his  pointation,  the  police  recovered  the  crime  weapon  i.e.  rope 

(Rassi) from a point, which was not known to the police. 

12. 

In  view  of  the  above,  it  is  proved  that  on  11.10.2012,  the 

appellant  remained  at  the  house  of  the  deceased  with  the  co-

accused Shazia. Although, the incident was unseen but the daughter 

of  the  co-accused  witnessed  that  the  appellant  entered  inside  the 

room  of  their  house  alongwith  the  co-accused  Shazia,  therefore, 

liability shifted on the shoulder of both the accused persons that they 

are responsible for the commission of murder of the deceased (Asif), 

as such, prosecution story regarding murder of deceased has been 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
       10   

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

justified by PW-4, Mst. Faiza Bibi. So far as the delay in registration 

of the F.I.R is concerned, in this regard, it was confirmed through the 

evidence  that  initially,  an  independent  person  namely,  Zahoor 

Ahmed,  PW1,  having  no  relations  with  any  of  the  party,  on  the 

directions of his officers reported the matter to the police, which was 

reduced into Rapt No.37 at Police Station Margallah, Islamabad, and 

after  conducting  of  post-mortem  report  and  confirmation  that  the 

death  of  the  deceased  was  unnatural  then  formal  F.I.R  was 

registered  against  unknown  persons.  The  delay  in  recording  of  the 

F.I.R and delay in recording statement of PW-4, Mst. Faiza has been 

reasonably explained by the prosecution as PW-4, when came back 

from their native village/place after burying the deceased there, she 

got recorded her statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C and explained 

the real facts.  

13. 

It  is  important  to  mention  here  that  the  above  said  PW-4, 

Faiza  Bibi,  is  the  real  daughter  of  the  deceased  and  of  the  co-

accused  (Mst.  Shazia  Kousar),  and  it  is  unimaginable  that  a 

daughter  can  level  such  type  of  heinous  allegations  against  her 

mother.  Statement  of  PW-4  (Mst.  Faiza  Bibi)  in  the  facts  and 

circumstances  of  the  instant  case  cannot  be  said  inimical  or  based 

upon  malafide.  The  statements  of  all  the  prosecution  witnesses 

stood truthful.  

14.  Record  further  reveals  that  statement  of  the  co-accused 

Shazia  Kousar  was  recorded  under  Section  164  Cr.P.C  before  the 

A.C (IA), Islamabad. The learned trial Court made its levelled best to 

procure  the  attendance  of  the  learned  Assistant  Commissioner  for 

recording of his statement but he failed to appear before the Court, 

therefore,  Reader  of  the  Court  has  produced  the  confessional 

statement (Ex.PZ). The statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C has not 

been  taken  as  piece  of  evidence  by  the  learned  trial  Court.  Even 

after  exclusion  of  the  said  statement,  there  are  other  corroborative 

pieces  of  evidence  on  record  through  which  the  prosecution 

established that the appellant was found present inside the house of 

the deceased. The Naval Complex Police of Islamabad handed over 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       11   

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

copy  of  CNIC  of  the  appellant  to  the  Investigating  Officer,  which 

further  confirmed  the fact that the appellant gave information to the 

Naval  Complex  Police  for  going  to  the  house  of  the  deceased, 

otherwise,  the  naval  police  had  no  ill-will  with  the  appellant  to 

produce  such  evidence.  The  record  of  the  Naval  Complex  shows 

only entrance date and time of the appellant, whereas, regarding exit 

time  shows  “not  confirmed”,  reason  behind  was  that  the  appellant 

without  receiving  back  his  copy  of  CNIC,  left  the  Naval  Complex. 

Recovery of pillow, which was used by the accused Shazia to place 

it  on  the  mouth  of  the  deceased,  one  mobile  phone  Nokia  and  two 

SIMs,  at  the  instance  of  the  co-accused  Shazia,  during  her  police 

custody  strengthens  the  prosecution  case.  However,  the  defence 

has  failed  to  rebut  the  evidence  produced  by  the  prosecution  even 

the  appellant  failed  to  produce  any  evidence  in  his  defence.  The 

facts and circumstances of the case and  evidence produced  by the 

prosecution, has established that the prosecution succeeded to link 

the incident with the appellant.  

15.  The first and important blinking piece of evidence in this case 

is the motive. The motive for the occurrence was that the appellant 

was abused and expelled from the house by the deceased Asif. Wife 

of the deceased namely, Mst. Shazia Kauser was also threatened by 

the  deceased  that  if  she  again  contacted  the  appellant,  the 

deceased  will  pronounce  divorce  to  her.  This  fact  was  proved  from 

the statement of PW-4. It is a settled law that capital punishment can 

be  awarded  on  the  basis  of  circumstantial  evidence  subject  to  the 

condition that it connect the accused persons with the commission of 

the  offence  and  it  appeals  to  logic  and  reasons  then  it  is  sufficient 

piece  of  evidence  to  connect  the  accused  with  the  commission  of 

offence.  Circumstantial  evidence is  one  of the mode  to  find  out the 

guilt  of  the  accused  person.  The  principle  of  law,  consistently  laid 

down by the superior Courts is that different pieces of such evidence 

have to make one chain, where one end of it touches the dead body 

and the other to the neck of the convict. In case of any missing link 

in  the  chain,  the  whole  chain  is  broken  and  no  conviction  can  be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       12   

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

recorded in crimes entailing capital punishment. This principle is fully 

attracted  to  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  instant  case. 

Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon  the  case  reported  as  “Nasir 

Javaid and another  VS  The State” (2016  SCMR  1144), wherein it 

has been held as under:- 

“This case, so to speak, hinges on circumstantial evidence. 
What  tempts  the  Court  to  believe  this  type  of  evidence  is 
the maxim that  men  may lie but circumstances can't.  We 
don't  nor  can  we  doubt  and  dispute  its  centuries  old  well 
tested  wisdom.  We  rather  use  it  as  a  touchstone  for 
assessing  and  evaluating  the  evidentiary  worth  of  the 
circumstantial  evidence.  It  enables  us  to  reason  unknown 
from  the  known  if  the  circumstances  are  reported  fairly 
and  faithfully.  Deduction  about  the  guilt  of  the  accused 
could  well  be  drawn  from  the  circumstances  as  are  well 
authenticated.  But  where  the  circumstances  so  reported 
are tinkered and tampered with, or contrived and conjured 
up,  they  cannot  be  accepted  without  careful  and  critical 
analysis.  Circumstantial  evidence  can  form  basis  of 
conviction  if  it  is  incompatible  with  the  innocence  of  the 
accused  and  incapable  of  explanation  upon  any  other 
reasonable hypothesis than that of this guilt. The case thus 
has to be analyzed and adjudged in this perspective.” 

In the case reported as “Sh. Muhammad Amjad v. The State” (PLD 

2003 SC 704), it has been held as under:- 

"According  to  the  standard  of  proof  required  to  convict  a 
person  on  circumstantial  evidence,  the  circumstances 
relied  upon  in  support  of  the  conviction  must  be  fully 
established  and  the  chain  of  evidence  furnished  by  those 
circumstances  must  be  so  complete  as  not  to  leave  any 
reasonable  ground  for  a  conclusion  consistent  with  the 
innocence  of  the  accused.  The  circumstances  from  which 
the conclusion of the guilt is to be drawn have not only to 
be  fully  established  but  also  that  all  the  circumstances  so 
established should be of a conclusive nature and consistent 
only  with  the  hypothesis  of  the  guilt  of  the  accused  and 
should  not  be  capable  of  being  explained  by  any  other 
hypothesis,  except  the  guilt  of  the  accused  and  when  all 
the circumstances cumulatively taken together should lead 
to the only irresistible conclusion that the accused alone is 
the perpetrator of the crime.” 

In  the  case  of  Hamid  Mahmood  and  another  VS    The  State  (2013 

SCMR  1314),  it  has  been  held  by  the  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan that:-  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
       13   

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

“Similarly, the nature of the evidence produced at the trial 
is  relevant  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the 
guilt or innocence of the accused and not sentenced to be 
awarded. No rule exists that the sentence of death cannot 
be awarded in the absence of direct ocular evidence, if the 
guilt  of  the  accused  has  been  proved  beyond  reasonable 
doubt through circumstantial and forensic evidence.” 

16.  The  august  Supreme  Court  in  case  titled  „Talib  Hussain  vs 

The State‟, 1995  SCMR  1538, has observed and held that in cases 

where  there  is  no  direct  evidence  to  show  in  what  manner  the 

offence  had  been  committed, 

the  Courts  must  examine 

the 

probabilities  in  the  light  of  indirect  evidence  of  the  injuries  on  the 

deceased, the  nature and condition  of the place  where  the incident 

took place, the articles secured found there, the motive for the crime 

and  the  other  surrounding  circumstances  proved.  Mere  occurrence 

of  circumstances  unless  based  on  proved  facts  is  not  enough  to 

draw  inference.  The  august  Supreme  Court  has  held  that  the 

coincidence should be un-designed and not manoeuvred or planted. 

Reliance  is  placed  on  „Talib  Hussain  vs  The  State‟,  1995  SCMR 

1538.  It  has  also  been  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  that 

capital  punishment  can  be  awarded  if  circumstantial  evidence  is 

strong  enough  to  persuade  the  Court  that  the  person  charged  with 

the  offence  has  committed  the  same.  The  circumstantial  evidence, 

however,  must  be  so  clear,  cogent  and  convincing  that  the  facts 

could not be accounted for or any other rational hypothesis could be 

arrived at other than the guilt of the accused. It has also been held 

that if the place of incident is a place where no witness was available 

and  the  accused  had  the  exclusive  knowledge  about  the  incident, 

the simpliciter denial on the part of the accused will not be sufficient 

to  nullify  the  circumstantial  evidence  of  the  nature,  which,  prima 

facie,  connects  him  with  commission  of  the  offence.  Reliance  is 

placed  on  “Muhammad  Latif  VS  The  State”  PLD  2008  SC  503, 

„Akbar Ali VS The State‟, 2007 SCMR 486, ‘Khurshid VS The State’, 

PLD 1996 SC 305, ‘Khuda Bukhsh VS The State’, 2004 SCMR 331 

and ‘Talib Hussain VS The State’, 1995 SCMR 1538.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
       14   

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

17.  From all the above said facts and circumstances of the case, 

no  material  contradictions  are  found  in  the  statements  of  the 

prosecution witnesses.  After a careful examination of the evidence 

produced by the prosecution, it reveals that the witnesses have fully 

supported  the  prosecution  case  and  the  medical  evidence  has 

confirmed  that  the  death  of  the  deceased  was  not  natural.  The 

witnesses  remained  unbiased, consistent  in material  aspects  of the 

case,  they  are  reliable  and  nothing  favourable  could  be  extracted 

during the cross-examination in favour of the defence. For securing 

the  ends  of  justice,  minute  and  careful  examination  is  required  by 

the  Court  to  carry  conviction  on  a  capital  charge,  in  a  case  of 

circumstantial evidence and the prosecution has to establish its case 

beyond any reasonable doubts.   

18. 

In view of the above, it is established that the prosecution has 

proved  its  case  against  the  accused  person  through  reliable  and 

trust  worthy  evidence.  Involvement  of  the  appellant/convict  in  the 

commission of the offence has been proved beyond any shadow of 

doubt  and  the  learned  trial  Court  has  appreciated  the  prosecution 

evidence in its true perspective and correctly convicted the appellant 

to which no exception could be taken by this Court. Having scanned 

the  entire  prosecution  evidence,  I  have  entertained  no  manner  of 

doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  prosecution  has  successfully  proved  the 

charge  of  homicidal  death  of  Muhammad  Asif  at  the  hands  of  the 

appellant  and his  co-accused beyond  shadow  of reasonable  doubt. 

All  these  facts  and  circumstances,  rule  out  the  possibility  of 

fabrication  and  consultation  prior  to  the  registration  of  the  crime 

report. The complainant and the other eyewitness remained firm and 

consistent on all material particulars of the incident including the role 

of the appellant, which is fully supported by the medical evidence.  

19.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  failed  to  point  out 

any illegality, irregularity, misreading, non-reading or any infirmity or 

defect in the impugned judgment passed by the learned trial  Court, 

calling for interference by this Court. The convictions and sentences 

awarded to the appellant are therefore, upheld. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       15   

“Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2016, 
Jail Appeal No.179/2016 
and 
Criminal Revision No.53 of 2015” 

20.   For  the  foregoing  reasons,  Criminal  Appeal  No.50/2016 

being  devoid  of  merits,  is  hereby  dismissed.  In  view  of  the 

findings  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.50  of  2016,  Jail  Appeal  No.179  of 

2016 has become infructuous, the same is disposed of accordingly. 

As  regards  Criminal  Revision  (Suo  Moto)  No.53  of  2015  is 

concerned,  I  have  gone  through  the  evidence  recorded  by  the 

learned trial Court and do not see any reason to further proceed with 

this  Criminal  Revision,  therefore,  the  same  is  accordingly  disposed 

of. 

(GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI) 

         JUDGE 

Announced in open court, on this 30th day of November, 2020. 

          JUDGE 

Approved for reporting 

Rana.M.Ift. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
