Crl. App. No.13-2012 

1 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.  : 

Criminal Appeal No.13-2012 

Rana Imran Latif 
VS    
The State  

Appellant by           :  Mr. Qaiser Imam, Advocate  
Respondent by      :  Mr. Sajjad Haider Malik, Advocate 

Date of hearing     : 

Mr. Yasir Barkat, State Counsel 
04.04.2017 

AAMER  FAROOQ  J.      This  appeal  is  directed  against 

judgment  dated  18.02.2012  in  case  FIR  No.228  dated  14.07.2009 

under  sections  501/502/506/409  PPC  &  Sections  7,  8  &  9  of 

Prevention  of  Electronics  Crimes  Ordinance,  2007  registered 

with P.S. Industrial Area, Islamabad.  

2. 

The case of the prosecution, against the appellant, is that in 

the  year  2009  he,  in  connivance  with  his  co-accused  Syed  Abid 

Hussain (P.O.), printed defamatory material, transferred the data 

of  complainant’s  family,  interpolated  the  same  by  misusing  it 

from the electronic system of NADRA and published the same.  

3. 

The  prosecution,  in  support  of  its  allegations,  produced 

four  witnesses  namely  Umar  Shahab  (PW-1),  Tanvir  Shahab 

(PW-2), Muhammad Sarfraz Malik (PW-3), Haibat Ullah (PW-4) 

&  Abdul  Sattar  (PW-5).  The  statement  of  the  accused  was 

recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C. and he denied the allegations 

leveled  against  him.  The  learned  trial  court,  vide  the  impugned 

 
 
 
 
Crl. App. No.13-2012 

2 

judgment,  acquitted  the  appellant  of  the  charges  under 

Prevention  of  Electronics  Crimes  Ordinance,  2009,  however, 

convicted him for the offence under section 501 PPC and he was 

accordingly  punished  with  Simple  Imprisonment  of  two  years 

with a fine of Rs.1,00,000/-, in default thereof, to further undergo 

three months imprisonment. Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. was 

also extended to the appellant.     

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  inter  alia,  contended 

that  the  prosecution  failed  to  prove  mensrea  required  for  the 

offence  in  question  hence  the  appellant  could  not  have  been 

convicted.  It  was  further  contended  that  the  definition  of 

defamation 

is  provided 

in  Section  409  PPC  and  under 

explanation  to  the  same,  the  statement  or  the  action  does  not 

amount  to  be  defamatory  unless  the  imputation,  directly  or 

indirectly,  in  the  estimation  of  others,  lowers  the  moral  or 

intellectual  character  of  that  person  or  lowers  the  character  of 

that person in respect to his caste or of his calling etc. In support 

of  his  contentions,  learned  counsel  placed  reliance  on  cases 

reported  as PLD 2001 Karachi 1151, 2013 P.Cr.LJ 1737 &  PLD 1996 

Lah. 410). 

5. 

Learned  State  Counsel,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the 

prosecution duly proved its case beyond reasonable doubt. It was 

further  contended  that  the  witnesses,  appearing  on  behalf  of 

Crl. App. No.13-2012 

3 

prosecution, 

specifically 

stated 

that 

the  appellant  had 

published/printed  defamatory  material  and  there  is  nothing  in 

the cross-examination, which shatters the same.  

6. 

The  submissions  made  by  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 

were heard and the record of the case examined with their able 

assistance.  

7. 

The appellant, at the material time, was the Chief Editor of 

Roznama  ‘Unity’,  ‘Urdu  Times’  &  ‘Sehpehr’.  The  charge  against 

him  is  that  he  allowed  printing  of  material  against  the 

complainant  and  his  family  which  was  defamatory  in  nature.  It 

has  also  been  alleged  that  he  interpolated  personal  data  of 

complainant’s family which he obtained in connivance with Syed 

Abid  Hussain  from  NADRA  and  after  distorting  the  same, 

published it. The prosecution, in support of its case, led oral and 

documentary  evidence.  In  this  behalf,  five  witnesses  including 

the  complainant,  tendered  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the 

appellant,  being  the  Chief  Editor  of  the  referred  Dailies,  started 

vilification  campaign  by  publishing  defamatory  news/remarks 

against  him  and  his  family  and  in  this  behalf,  obtained  data  in 

connivance  with  Abid  Hussain,  an  employee  of  NADRA  and 

published  the  photos  in  the  said  newspapers  after  making 

changes.  

Crl. App. No.13-2012 

4 

8. 

The definition for the offence of defamation is provided in 

Section 499 of Pakistan Penal Code, which reads as under: - 

“499. Defamation.  Whoever  by  words  either  spoken  or 
intended  to  be  read  or  by  sign  or  by  visible  representations, 
makes  or  publishes  any  imputation  concerning  any  person 
intending  to  harm,  or  knowing  or  having  reason  to  believe 
that  such  imputation  will  harm,  the  reputation  of  such 
person,  is  said,  except  in  the  cases  hereinafter  excepted,  to 
defame that person” 

The bare reading of the above definition shows that actus reus of 

the offence is that by words either spoken or intended to be read 

or by sign or by visible representations, making or publishing any 

imputation  concerning  any  person  which  harms  the  reputation 

of  such  person.  Likewise,  the  mensrea  for  the  offence  is  that 

referred  words  which  are  spoken  or  the  sign  or  visible 

representations  should  be  with  the  intention  to  harm  or 

knowledge  or  reason  to  believe  that  the  same  will  harm  the 

reputation.  Under  Explanation  4  to  the  said  Section,  no 

imputation  is  said  to  harm  a  person’s  reputation,  unless  that 

imputation  directly  or  indirectly  in  the  estimation  of  others, 

lowers  the  moral  or  intellectual  character  of  that  person,  or 

lowers  the  character  of  that  person  in  respect  of  his  caste  or  of 

his calling, or lowers the credit of that person or causes it to be 

believed that the body of that person is in loathsome state, or in 

a state generally considered as disgraceful.  

 
Crl. App. No.13-2012 

5 

9. 

The reading of the entire evidence tendered by prosecution 

in  support  of  its  case  shows  that  none  of  the  witnesses  uttered 

anything  about  mensrea.  The  prosecution  witnesses,  including 

the  complainant,  did  not  depose  directly  or  indirectly  that  the 

appellant had printed or published the defamatory material with 

the intention/knowledge or reason to believe that the same shall 

harm the reputation of the complainant. Similarly, under section 

501  PPC,  a  person  who  prints  or  engraves  any  matter  which  is 

defamatory  to  any  person  either  should  know  or  had  good 

reasons  to  believe  that  the  same  is  defamatory.  Likewise,  under 

section  502  PPC,  whoever  sells  or  offers  for  sale  any  printed  or 

engraved substance containing defamatory matter, knowing that 

it  contains  such  matter,  shall  be  punished  with  simple 

imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 

fine,  or  with  both.  In  the  instant  case,  the  prosecution  did  not 

prove intention, knowledge or reasons to believe that the matter 

was defamatory as is required under sections 499, 501 & 502 PPC.  

10.  The  basis  of our  criminal  system  is  enshrined  in  the  Latin 

Maxim  Actus  non  facet,  nisi,  mensit  rea  (An  act  is  not  guilty 

unless the mind is guilty). The effect of the referred principle is 

that  the  prosecution,  in  order  to  prove  the  guilt  of  an  accused, 

not only has to prove the guilty act/the actus reus and mensrea 

but also guilty mind/mensrea for each offence is to be discerned 

Crl. App. No.13-2012 

6 

from the definition of the offence. It is only in exceptional cases 

that  the  legislature,  in  its  wisdom,  can  dispense  with  the 

requirement  of  mensrea  and  the  referred  offences  are  called 

crimes  of  strict  liability.  The  offence  in  question  is  not  one  of 

strict  liability  and  the  prosecution  was  required  to  prove  actus 

reus  as  well  as  mensrea,  which  as  mentioned  above,  ithas  failed 

to  do  so.  In  a  case  reported  as  ‘Abdul  Karim  and  5  Others  VS 

Abu  Zafar  Qureshi  and  3  Others’  (PLD  2001  Karachi  115),  the 

Hon’ble Sindh High Court observed as under: - 

“Thus for constituting an offence of defamation the mens rea 
or  intention  is  essential  ingredient.  The  article  so  published 
must be libellous and it lowered down  the reputation  of the 
person” 

Similarly, in case reported  as  ‘Mst. Shash Begum and others VS 

Bashir  Ullah  and  others’  (2013  P  Cr.  LJ  1737),  it  was  observed  as 

follows: - 

“25.  From the above provisions of law, it is abundantly clear 
that the most essential ingredient for constituting an offence 
of  defamation  is  mens  rea  or  intention.  (Reliance  PLD  2001 
following  are  the  other  necessary 
Karachi 
ingredients of defamation as defined under section 499, PPC: 

115).  The 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

imputation 

the  making  or  publishing  of  an 
concerning any person; 
such imputation must have been made:- 
a) by words either spoken or intended to be read; or 
b) by signs; or 
c) by visible representations, and  

    such  imputations  must  have  been  made  with  the 
intention  of  harming  or  knowing,  or  having  reason  to 
believe,  that  it  will  harm  the  reputation  of  the  person 
concerning, whom it is made” 

 
 
 
Crl. App. No.13-2012 

7 

26.  However the accusation preferred in good faith against 
any person to any of those, who have lawful authority 
over  that  person  or  an  imputation  made  in  good  faith 
by  person  for  protection  of  his  right  or  interest,  as 
specifically  mentioned  in  the  above  exceptions,  do  not 
fall  within  the  definition  of  ‘Defamation’  as  envisaged 
under section 499, PPC.” 

11.  Under  Explanation  4  to  Section  499  PPC,  no  imputation 

can be said to harm a person’s reputation, unless said imputation 

directly or indirectly lowers the moral or intellectual character of 

that person or lowers the character of that person with respect to 

his  caste  or  of  his  calling.  The  allegation  against  the  appellant, 

leveled  by  the  complainant,  is  that  he  published  defamatory 

material  alleging  that  the  complainant  and  his  family  sent  the 

people abroad by procuring their visas for monitory benefits. The 

prosecution did not produce any evidence to show that the said 

imputation printed in the newspapers lowered the reputation of 

the appellant in the estimation of other persons, especially with 

respect to his job/profession. The testimonies of the prosecution 

witnesses do not contain anything to the effect which shows that 

the  reputation  of  the  complainant  and  his  family  was  actually 

harmed  and  that  resulted  in  lowering  of  the  same  in  the 

estimation of others hence on this count as well, the prosecution 

failed  to  prove  that  the  material  was  defamatory  and/or  the 

appellant committed the actus reus of the offence. In view of the 

  
 
    
Crl. App. No.13-2012 

8 

above,  the  conviction  of  the  appellant,  vide  the  impugned 

judgment, is not sustainable and the same merits setting aside.  

12. 

For the reasons set out above, the instant appeal is allowed 

and the judgment dated 18.02.2012 to the extent of convicting the 

appellant  for  an  offence  under  section  501  PPC  is  set  aside. 

Consequently, the appellant is acquitted of the referred charge. 

13.  As the appellant is on bail hence the surety tendered shall 

be discharged.  

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
 JUDGE            

Announced in Open Court on 30.06.2017  

Zawar 

 JUDGE            

Uplaoded by : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
