ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 3862 OF 2021 

Muhammad Nawaz 
VS    
Additional District Judge, etc.  

Petitioner by 

:  Malik A. Latif Khokhar, Advocate. 

Respondents by 

:  Mr. Zubair Aslam, Advocate. 

Date of hearing   

: 

10.03.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.    

Through  the  instant  petition,  the  Petitioner 

(Muhammad  Nawaz)  has  assailed  the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  19.05.2021 

passed  by  the  learned  SCJ-II/Judge  Family-Guardian  Court,  Islamabad  (East), 

whereby  Respondents  No.  3  to  5’s  Suit  for  Recovery  of  Present  and  Past 

Maintenance  Allowance  was  allowed  and  the  Judgment  dated  14.09.2021  passed 

by the learned Additional District Judge-III, Islamabad (East), whereby Petitioner’s 

appeal against said Judgment and Decree was dismissed.  

2. 

Facts,  in  brief,  as  per  the  Memo  of  Petition,  are  that  the  Petitioner  and  the 

Respondent  No.3  (Naseem  Akhter)  were  married  in  the  year  1994.  The  parties 

were  blessed  with  two  children  i.e.  Respondents  No.  4  &  5  (Faiza  Bibi  & 

Shahzaib).  The  parties  lived  a  normal  life  for  about  two  decades,  however, 

thereafter  their  relations  got  strained  and  the  Respondent  No.  3  deserted  the 

Petitioner, which resulted in litigation between the parties. The first family Suit for 

Restitution of Conjugal Rights was filed by the Respondent No.3 in the year 2017, 

which  was  decreed  in  favor  of  the  Petitioner  owing  to  his  counter  claim  of 

Restitution of Conjugal Rights. The said decree attained finality and an Execution 

Petition in that regard is pending before the Family Court, Islamabad. According to 

the Petitioner, despite Court notices Respondent No.3 is avoiding service and is not 

appearing in the Court since the filing of the Execution Petition.  

3. 

Thereafter, the Respondents No. 3 to 5 filed a Family Suit for the Recovery 

of  Past  and  Present  Maintenance  Allowance  with  effect  from  April,  2017.  The 

Petitioner controverted the allegations made in the Plaint through filing of written 

statement, however, the learned Trial Court decreed the suit of Respondents No. 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 3862/2021 

to  5  vide  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  19.05.2021  and  granted  past  and  present 

maintenance  allowance  at  the  rate  of  Rs. 5,000/-  to  the  Respondent  No.3  and  Rs. 

3,000/- to each of the Respondents No. 4 & 5 per month.  

4. 

Being aggrieved, the Petitioner challenged the said Judgment and Decree in 

appeal,  however,  the  same  was  dismissed  vide  Judgment  and  Decree  dated 

14.09.2021  and  Judgment  and  Decree  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  was  upheld. 

Hence, present petition.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  contended  that the  Impugned  Judgments 

and Decrees passed by the learned Courts below are not tenable in the eyes of the 

law  as  the  Respondent  No. 3  is not  entitled  to  any  maintenance  when  she herself 

deserted  and left the company of the Petitioner; that Petitioner has been deprived 

of the loving company of his  children; that Respondent No. 3 avoided joining the 

execution  proceedings;  that  the  maintenance  allowance  fixed  by  the  learned  Trial 

Court  is  exorbitant  as  Petitioner’s  income  has  not  been  considered  at  the  time  of 

passing the Judgment and Decree; and that the Petitioner is a laborer who works in 

a local hotel on daily wages and earns Rs. 800/- per day, therefore, cannot afford 

the expenses of Respondent No.3, who otherwise is not living with him since the 

year 2015-2016 for no fault of his. Learned counsel in support of his contentions 

relied  on  the  Judgment  titled  Muhammad  Asad  Khan  VS  Mst.  Sadaf  Niaz,  NLR 

2006  Civil  1,  Saif  Ullah  VS  Maimoona  Almas  and  others,  2013  CLC  897,  Mst. 

Parveen Khan VS Abdul Ghafoor and 2 others, 2016 CLC 932 and Arshad Ali VS 

Additional  District  Judge,  Vehari  and  others,  2002  CLC  1450  in  support  of  his 

contentions. 

6. 

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the Respondents No.3 to 5 argued 

that  it  is  the  Petitioner  who  left  the  house  and  Suit  for  Restitution  of  Conjugal 

Rights  has  been  filed  by  Respondent  No.  3,  therefore,  it  is  crystal  clear  that 

Respondent No. 3 wants to live with the Petitioner who is duty bound to maintain 

his wife, therefore, sought dismissal of the instant petition.   

7. 

Arguments heard and record perused with the able assistance of the learned 

counsel for the parties.  

8. 

Perusal of the Plaint filed by the Respondent No. 3 reveals that according to 

the  cause  of  action  alleged  therein,  the  Petitioner,  inter alia, left  the house  of  the 

Plaintiff/Respondent  in  the  year  2016  without  any  reason  and  stopped  [paying] 

P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 3862/2021 

basic expenses of the Plaintiff/Respondent, and that a Suit for Conjugal Rights was 

instituted  in  the  year  2017.    However,  no  evidence  was  led  and  not  a  word  was 

stated about the Respondent No. 3’s allegation with regard to the Petitioner leaving 

the house in her examination-in-chief.     

9. 

On the other hand, the Petitioner stated in his examination-in-chief that it is 

the Respondent No. 3 who has separated  from the Petitioner and who is adamant 

not  to  reunite  without  any  reason  despite  the  fact  that  Petitioner  has  rented  a 

separate  accommodation  in  Jhanda  Chichi,  Rawalpindi  on  the  express  wish  of 

Respondent  No.  3.  He  further  stated  that  prior  to  that  he  had  arranged 

accommodation  in  Gulistan  Colony,  Rawalpindi  which  also  he left  due  to  wishes 

of  Respondents.  No.3.  Admittedly,  no  cross  examination  was  conducted  in  this 

regard.  

10. 

It  is  also  noteworthy  that  in  response  to  the  Respondent  No.  3’s  Suit  for 

Restitution  of  Conjugal  Rights,  the  Petitioner  filed  a  written  statement  seeking 

Restitution  of  Conjugal  Rights  in  his  favor.  The  learned  Family  Court  allowed 

Restitution of Conjugal Rights in favor of the Petitioner  vide Judgment & Decree 

dated 16.11.2018.   

11.  Despite  the  foregoing  it  is  the  Respondent  No.3  who  in  her  cross 

examination  on  14.01.2020  categorically  admitted  that  she  cannot  live  in  Jhanda 

Chichi,  Rawalpindi  and  voluntarily  submitted  that  she  is  willing  to  live  in 

Islamabad.  The  above  statements  of  the  parties  reflect  that  it  is  the  Respondent 

No.3 who is unwilling to reunite with the Petitioner at his current abode in Jhanda 

Chichi,  Rawalpindi.    This  aspect  has  been  completely  ignored  by  both  the  lower 

Courts.  

12. 

 As  the  plaintiff,  it  was  the  Respondent  No.  3’s  burden  to  establish  her 

allegation that the Petitioner left the house which amounted to desertion that would 

entitle her to maintenance, however, she utterly failed to discharge such burden.  

13.  The evidence shows that it is the Respondent No. 3 who refuses to live with 

the  Petitioner  where  he  is  currently  living.  In  such  circumstances  this  Court is  of 

the  opinion  that  Respondent  No.  3  is  not  entitled  to  get  maintenance.  Both  the 

Courts  below  reached  an  erroneous  conclusion  to  the  extent that  maintenance  for 

Respondent  No.  3 has  been  allowed.  In  fact  the  Impugned  Judgment  of  the  Trial 

Court does not contain any  finding or discussion with regard to the relevant facts 

as  discussed  herein  above.  Whereas,  the  Impugned  Judgment  of  the  learned 

P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 3862/2021 

Additional District Judge-III,  Islamabad (East) has concluded that the Respondent 

No. 3 left the house of the Petitioner, which is contrary to the record.   

14.  The  Petitioner  has  not  challenged  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  as 

far as the maintenance of Respondents No. 4 & 5 are concerned, therefore, instant 

petition is allowed and Impugned Judgments and Decree are set aside to the extent 

that they have allowed maintenance for Respondent No. 3.  

Announced in the open Court on _________________________. 

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
