ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAD

W.P.No.368512019

Khurshid  Alam
VERSUS

Judge  Family  Court (West)  Islamabad, etc

S.No. of order/
Proceeding

Date  of
hearing
24.10.2019. Mr.Javed  Iqbal Banday, Advocate for the Petitioner.

Order  with  signature  of Judge, and that  of parties  or counsel,
where  necessary.

Through this writ petition,  the Petitioner  has  assailed  order

dated  10.10.2019,  passed by the learned Judge Family Court

(West), Islamabad  whereby his application  for impleadment  as

defendant  in the suit titled  "Shumaila  Shoaib VS Yasir

Khurshid" for recovery  of maintenance allowance  was dismissed.

2. 

Learned  counsel for petitioner  contends that a suit titled

Shumaila  Shoaib  VSYasir Khurshid for recovery  of

maintenance  allowance is pending  before  the Guardian Judge-

West, Islamabad  wherein  defendant  Yasir  Khtrshid  is the real son

of petitioner who has some dispute  with his wife and petitioner

being  father  intends  to become  a party in the said suit on the

ground that House No.631,  Street No.3, Sector G-ll/1, Islamabad

was purchased  by the petitioner from his life time saving in the

name of his son Yasir Khurshid as benamidar and now both

husband  and wife in connivance  with  each other are trying to

deprive  the petitioner from  his house.

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner  has been

confronted with the maintainability  of the instant  writ petition

whereby  he could not explain his locus-standi  in the family  dispute

between  his son and  daughter-in-law.  The claim  of the petitioner

qua the property refened  above is an independent  dispute  with his

son which could only be resolved  through  a civil  Court, therefore,

petitioner  has no legal  right to interfere in the legal proceedings  of

W.P.No.3685/2019
-2-

suit titled Shumaila  shoaib VS yasir Khurshid.  Besides,  the

above  referred position it is a trite law that  interlocutory order or
interim  orders  of the Family  court cannot be assailed  in

constitutional  jurisdiction  of the High court. Reliance  is placed on

case  law titled shahida Faril v.".us  M*t.Hira  Tahi.  (2017 yLR

116fl.

4' 

In view of above,  the petitioner  has no locus-standi

nor has any legal right  to interfere  in the family  litigation of his
son Yasir  Khurshid  and daughter-in-law  Shumaila  shoaib,

therefore, instant writ petition is misconceived and same is hereby

dismissed in limine.

(MOH

KAY

JUDGE

