ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.629/2021 
Sajid Mehmood  
VS 
ADJ, Islamabad and others.  

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Shafqat Hussain Yasir, Advocate alongwith 
petitioner.  

Respondent by: 

Mr. Alamzeb Khan, Advocate alongwith 
respondent No.3. 

Date of Decision: 

26.01.2022. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  assailed  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  04.01.2020,  passed  by 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad  and  maintained  by  learned  Additional 

District  Judge  (MAC)  (West),  Islamabad,  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

25.01.2021,  whereby  the  suit  for  Recovery  of  Dower  Amount  and  Maintenance 

has been partially decreed in favour of respondent No.3. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  respondent  No.3/Mst. 

Asmat  Bibi  was  married  to  petitioner  on  28.03.2004  in  accordance  with  Muslim 

rite  and  ceremony,  but  later  on,  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dowry  articles  and 

maintenance  without  any  basis,  rather  refused  to  live  in  the  matrimonial  bond 

with the petitioner; that marriage has not yet been dissolved by respondent No.3 

nor petitioner has divorced the said respondent; that both the Courts below have 

not  appreciated  the  status  of  petitioner  that  he  is  working  in  Textile  Mill  and 

getting monthly salary of Rs. 27,000/- per month, in which he has to maintain the 

daughters from first wife and both the Courts below have passed the conditional 

decree against the petitioner on exorbitant rates of maintenance. 

3. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  alongwith  respondent  No.3  contends  that 

petitioner has not yet complied with the terms and conditions of the decree qua 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.629/2021 

Page | 2 

due  maintenance,  though  she  is  willing  to  live  with  the  petitioner  on  the 

conditions  referred  by  the  Trial  Court  in  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 

04.01.2020; that decree for restitution of conjugal rights has also been granted to 

the  petitioner  with  two  conditions  i.e.  maintenance  allowance  and  separate 

accommodation. 

4. 

5. 

Arguments heard and record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3  were 

married  to  each  other  on  28.03.2004  according  to  Muslim  rites  and  ceremony 

against  the  dower  of  20  Tolas  of  Gold  Ornaments  and  Rs.  400,000/-  cash  and 

therefore, Rukhsti took place, though respondent No.3 claims that Haq Mehr has 

not  yet  been  paid  by  the  petitioner,  however,  initial  relationship  between  the 

parties remained cordial, but later on, dispute emerged between the parties. The 

petitioner  is working  in  Textile  Mill  and  used  to  visit  Harripur  for  a  week  in  a 

month  and  in  August,  2017,  desertion  took  place  on  the  primary  reasons 

submitted by respondent No.3 that she is second wife of the petitioner, who was 

forced  to  live  with  other  family  members  of  the  petitioner,  especially  his 

daughters from earlier marriage and she claims that petitioner has to  provide a 

separate  accommodation.  The  respondent  No.3  has  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of 

dower  and  maintenance  and  on  the  contrary,  the  petitioner  has  filed  a  suit  for 

conjugal rights and as such issues were framed to that effect.  

6. 

The  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3,  when  appeared  before  the  Court  in 

reconciliation proceedings, respondent No.3 has taken a stance that she is ready 

to  join  the  matrimonial  bond  with  the  petitioner,  but  on  the  other  hand, 

petitioner  has  not  paid  any  maintenance  to  her  till  date,  though  the  actual 

amount  granted  to  respondent  No.3  by  the  Courts  below  @Rs.15,000/-  per 

month  become  Rs.  800,000/-  approximately  w.e.f.  August,  2017,  but  only  

Rs. 154,000/- have been paid to respondent No.3 by the petitioner, this aspect has 

further been confirmed by the petitioner before this Court. The marriage is still 

 
 
W.P. No.629/2021 

Page | 3 

intact  and  respondent  No.3  is  willing  to  reconcile  the  matter  and  her  attitude 

apparent in the Court, further discloses inclination to join matrimonial bond with 

two  conditions  referred  in  decree,  but  petitioner  time  and  again  reiterated  his 

stance  of  low  income  but  has  not  submitted  any  proof  or  plea  in  his  written 

statement qua his low income, in such scenario, the question of fact qua the rate 

of  maintenance,  the  date  of  desertion,  the  conduct  of  the  parties  have  properly 

been  appreciated  by  the  Courts  below  in  concurrent  findings,  therefore,  at  this 

stage, no other view could be taken in judicial review in terms of Article 199 of 

the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. The petitioner has failed to 

persuade this Court to disbelieve the contention recorded by the Courts below in 

favour  of  respondent  No.3,  the  wife,  who  is  still  ready  to  join  the  matrimonial 

obligation,  with  the  condition  that 

if  petitioner  provides  the  separate 

accommodation  and  maintenance,  hence  this  Court  has  not  seen  any  positive 

conduct of the petitioner, who is not serious to resolve the issues. 

7. 

For what has been discussed above, instant writ petition is misconceived 

and same is hereby DISMISSED.         

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

RAMZAN 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
