ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAD

W.P No.1748/2019

Muhammad  Ali Akbar  Shabbir
VS

Additional District Judge-X  (West),  Islamabad,  etc

S.No. of order/
Proceedins

Date of
hearins
01.10.2019. Mr.Maztrar  Iqbal Ch, Advocate for petitioner.

Order  with  signature  of Judge, and that of parties  or counsel,
where  necessary

Mrs.Safia  Sarfraz,  Advocate for respondent  No.2.

Through  this writ petition,  the petitioner  has assailed  the

judgment and  decree dated 03.10.2018  passed by the Family

Judge (West),  Islamabad  and judgment and decree  dated

30.3.2019 passed by the Additional District Judge-X (West),

Islamabad  in appeal whereby  both  the Courts below have  upheld

the decree  for maintenance  allowance  as well as dowry articles

against  the petitioner.

2. 

Leamed  counsel  for the petitioner contends  that  petitioner

and respondent  No.2 were milried  to each other in district

Khushab  on 28.12.2014 against dower amount  of Rs.30001-  and

respondent No.2  after rukhsati settled with the petitioner,  however,

respondent  No.2 left the abode  of the petitioner  and filed suit for

recovery  of maintenance allowance and dowry articles  at

Islamabad whereby learned  trial Court  decreed  the suit to the

extent of maintenance  allowance and dowry  articles i.e gold

ornaments and dowry  articles  as per list Ex.P/9 or in alternate

to pay amount  of Rs.349,2701- It is further contended  that

petitioner  does not oppose the maintenance  claim of

respondent  No.2, however,  contends  that the dowry articles

have  not been proved in accordance  with law and petitioner

has not been given  right to rebut the claim of respondent  No.2

in appropriate manner.

-2-
ll.P No,l718/2019

3.  Conversely,  learned counsel for respondent No.2,

contends  that the decree for dowry  articles  was passed  against

the petitioner  on the bases of ex-parte judgment  dated

03.10.2018 as petitioner was  proceeded  against ex-parte on

03.9.2018  as he failed to contest the matter despite  filing of

written statement.

4.  Arguments  heard.  Record perused.

5.  Perusal of record reveals that respondent  No.2 filed

suit for recovery of dowry  articles alongwith maintenance

allowance whereby  petitioner had contested  the same by

frling  written statement only on one ground  that respondent

No.2,  had received dowry articles in presence  of witnesses

referred in preliminary  objection No.2 of the written

statement. Thereafter  petitioner did not appear before  the

Court and was proceeded  against ex-parte  and after  recording

evidence  of respondent  No.2, ex-parte  judgment and decree

was passed. The claim of respondent No.2 is based upon  the

dowry  articles  list Ex-P/9.  Even  respondent  No.2 placed  the

receipts  of anicles referred  in the list by way of Ex.P3 to

Ex.P8 which were not rebutted  in any manner.  The claim of

respondent  No.2 was further  substantiated  through  evidence

of Fateh Khan who appeared as PW-2  which has not been

rebutted in any manner. Even there is no denial that

respondent No.2 was not deserted  from the abode of

petitioner and as such petitioner is only aggrieved with the

decree to the extent of recovery of dowry articles. The

-3-
lV.P No.l718/2019

petitioner was proceeded  ex-parte  and no evidence is

available on record to rebut the claim of respondent  No.2

which  has been proved by way of independent evidence, even

the overwhelming  documentary  evidence substantiated  her

claim.

6. 

I have gone through the concurrent  findings of the

Courts below whereby issue No.1 has rightly  been

appreciated  by the learned  trial Court and was also upheld  by

the appellate Court and no illegality  has been obsenred  in the

proceedings of the Courts below, therefore, instant writ

petition  is misconceived  and same is hereby dismissed.

M.S.ZAKI.

JUDGE

