JUDGMENT SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD,
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.124/2021
Muhammad Hassan Naseem
VS
Mrs. Neelam Shahzadi & 03 others

Petitioner by:

Mr. Mehran Habib, Advocate along with
petitioner.

Respondents by:

Syed Khawar Ameer Bukhari, Advocate for
respondents No.1 & 2.

Date of Decision:

07.12.2021.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J: Through this  writ  petition,

the

petitioner  has  called  in  question judgment  of  the  learned  Additional  District

Judge-V  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  24.11.2020,  whereby  appeal  filed  by  the

petitioner against order dated 09.09.2020, passed by learned Family Judge (West),

Islamabad, has been dismissed.

2.

Succinctly, Muhammad  Hassan  Naseem  (petitioner)  and  Mst.  Neelam

Shahzadi (respondent No.1) tied the knot on 02.12.2016 and were blessed with a

son (respondent  No.2) on  19.09.2017. Later  on,  respondent  No.1 filed  a  suit  for

recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  against  the  petitioner, which  was  ex-parte

decreed vide ex-parte judgment and decree dated 06.02.2019. Feeling aggrieved

thereof,  the  petitioner  moved  an  application  under  Section  9(6)  of  the  West

Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  which  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Judge

Family Court vide order dated 09.09.2020, which compelled the petitioner to file

an appeal before the learned Additional District Judge, which was also dismissed

vide impugned judgment dated 24.11.2020. Hence, instant writ petition.

3.

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner contends  that  despite  respondent  No.1

knowing the address of petitioner deliberately mentioned wrong address of the

petitioner in  order  to  get  ex-parte  judgment,  regarding  which  no  affidavit  of

W.P. No.124/2021

Page | 2

confirmation  of  address  was  submitted  by  respondent  No.1  in  the  learned  trial

Court; that the petitioner has good prima facie case in his favour, but the both the

Courts  have  condemned unheard  the  petitioner  while  passing  the  impugned

judgments, which manifestly causes miscarriage of justice.

4.

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  and  2  opposed  the

filing  of  instant  writ  petition  on  the  grounds  that the  summons  issued  were

received by the petitioner’s brother at his residence in Faisalabad, whereafter the

learned Family Court also opted to get the summons served upon the petitioner

through  substituted mode  of  service  i.e.  publication  of  proclamation  in

newspaper,  as  such,  the  learned  Family  Judge  pursuant  to  exhausting  all  the

modes, rightly proceeded against the petitioner and decreed the suit in favour of

respondents No.1 & 2 on 06.02.2019, whereafter the petitioner remained mum for

almost  14  months  and  thereafter  moved  an  application  for  setting  aside  the

exparte judgment and decree, as such, the petitioner willfully abstained himself

from  contesting  the family  suit,  rather  he  has  been  playing  hide  and  seek  with

the Court, per se, both the Courts below  have rightly appreciated the facts and

circumstances of the case and decreed the suit.

5.

6.

Arguments heard, record perused.

Perusal of record reveals that petitioner is aggrieved with the concurrent

orders by learned Judge, Family Court, whereby application for setting aside ex-

parte judgment  &  decree  was  dismissed  and  the  said  order  was  maintained  by

learned  Additional  District  Judge-X  (West),  Islamabad.  Learned  counsel  for  the

petitioner contends that petitioner has not been served while passing the ex-parte

judgment & decree dated 06.02.2019 in any manner and law requires that every

defendant has to be served in proper manner so as to extend him right of hearing

under the law with fair opportunity which is missing in this case.

W.P. No.124/2021

Page | 3

7.

The minute scanning of record reveals that respondent Neelam Shahzadi

has  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  of  Rs.40,000/- per  month  w.e.f.

05.03.2017  onwards  for  herself  and  Rs.15,000/- per  month  w.e.f.  19.09.2017

onwards  for  minor  son  Muhammad  Ali  against  the  petitioner  on  01.06.2018,

whereby address of petitioner referred in the said plaint has been mentioned as

“Resident  of  115  J-B,  Village  Chak  No.115  J-B  Dialghar,  Tehsil  & District,

Faisalabad” and  learned  Judge  Family  Court  has  issued  notice  on  the  said

address through registered post and same was received on the given address by

the real brother Fahad on 28.06.2018 through TCS and receipt of delivery has also

been appended on record but despite receiving the notice no one has turned up,

where-after,  trial  court  adopted  the  substituted  mode  of  service  through

publication in “Daily Khabrain” and notice was published on similar address. In

result of the substituted mode of service, ex-parte proceedings were initiated and

evidence was recorded by Judge Family Court and there-after ex-parte judgment

& decree has been passed against the petitioner, whereby he was directed to pay

Rs.30,000/- per  month  till subsistence  of  marriage  with  10%  annual  increase  to

respondent No.1 and Rs.8,000/- per month from September, 2017 till age of legal

entitlement  with  15%  annual  increment,  even  delivery  expenses  were  also

awarded.

8.

The  petitioner  filed  application  for  setting  aside ex-parte judgment  &

decree  on  27.04.2020  with  different  address  referred  in  his  application  and

denied the service of notice with the following claim:-

That few days ago the close relative of applicant informed him that a bailiff

of civil court has visited the village having ex parte decree with him which

is  passed  against  the  applicant,  so  applicant  immediately  approached  the

court despite of Lock Down due to COVID-19 and from there it transpired

that  respondent  No.1  obtained  the  decree  from  the  learned  court  of

Islamabad, where her brother is residing and doing the job in district

W.P. No.124/2021

Page | 4

courts  Islamabad, so  the  applicant  rushed  to  get  the  attested  copies  of

same.

9.

While  going  through  the  said  reasons  mentioned  in  the  application,

learned Judge Family Court has given considerable thought and quoted different

instances  where  notice  of  court  at  Faisalabad  was  duly  served  upon  the  real

paternal uncle (ﺎﯾﺎﺗ) of the petitioner and as such no justiciable reasons have been

placed upon record as to why petitioner for 15 months kept silent after passing of

the impugned judgment and decree. Even otherwise, petitioner has admitted this

fact  that  his  permanent  address  is  of District  Faisalabad  as  referred  by

respondent  in  the  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance,  which  has  been  confirmed

from  his  CNIC  appended  with  this  petition.  The  petitioner  has  also  been

confronted  qua  his  permanent  address  whereby  he  candidly  conceded  that  the

address mentioned in the main suit i.e. “Resident of 115 J-B, Village Chak No.115

J-B Dialghar, Tehsil & District, Faisalabad”, is a permanent address, hence, no

justiciable reason has been brought on record by the petitioner for non-service or

any illegality committed by the courts below.

10.

This Court  has also  confronted  the  petitioner  qua  the  payment  of  any

amount to his ex-wife or minor, whereby he candidly conceded that no payment

was ever been paid to the respondent as he was jobless person, has no sources to

pay. In  such  scenario,  the  conduct  demonstrated  by  the  petitioner  is  not  above

board, who is not entitled for any relief.

11.

In view of above, instant petition is misconceived and the same is hereby

dismissed.

Zahid.

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)
JUDGE

