ORDER SHEET

I

HI

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P No.291112019.

Muhammad  Yasin

VS

Mst. Iqra Javaid and another.

S. No. of
order/
nroceedinss

Date of order/
Proceedings

Orderwith signature of Judge  and that of parties or counsel
where necessalT.

01

29.10.20t9

Mr. Mujib-ur-Rehman  Kiani, Advocate for the petitioner.

Through the instant writ petition,  the petitioner has assailed

the judgment  & decree dated 17.12.2018, passed  by leamed

Senior Civil Judge-Ill/Judge  Family  Court-East,  Islamabad  as

well  as judgment  & decree dated 27.06.2019, passed by leamed

Additional  District Judge-I  (East) Islamabad,  whereby  the decree

passed by learned Judge  Family Court-East, Islamabad  in favour

of respondent  No.1 to the extent of maintenance  as well as dowry

articles  was maintained.

2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner inter-alia contends  that

the petitioner  was married to respondent No.l on 11.04.2014

against  prompt dower of Rs.10001-  and in addition to the said

amount  5 Tolas gold  ornaments  have also been  referred  in

column No.17  of the Nikahnama; that respondent  No.1 willfully

left abode of the petitioner and refused to perform  her

matrimonial  obligations, where-after divorce  was pronounced  on

03.01.2017  and as such she is not entitled  for maintenance  from

the date of desertion  i.e. 18.04.2014  till Iddat period  as she was

disobedient wife but the Courts below have  not considered  this

aspect; that the wife who was not performing  matrimonial

obligations  is not entitled for maintenance,  even no evidence has

been brought  on record by respondent  No.l regarding  financial

status  of the petitioner  nor rate of maintenance  has been

2
W.P No.291112019

determined  on the principles  settled  by Superior Courts; that

respondent No.l  has not proved that dowry articles and  personal

belongings  including  5 Tolas gold omaments  have  been  snatched

by the petitioner  but the Courts below have not considered  this

aspect  and passed  the impugned  judgments & decrees in

mechanical  manner  rather the same  are based  on misreading  and

non-reading  of important facts.

3.  I have  heard leamed  counsel  for the petitioner  and  gone

through  the record.

4.  Perusal of the record  reveals that the petitioner  entered  into

Nikah with respondent  No.l on 11.04.2014  against prompt

dower of Rs.10001-  and in column No.l7 of the Nikahnama  5

Tolas gold omaments have  been given to respondent  No.l as

gift. As per record appended with  this case  and  on the basis of

arguments  of leamed counsel for the petitioner it has been

admitted by the petitioner  side that respondent No.l  had left the

abode  of the petitioner on 18.10.2014  within 06 months of the

date of marriage  and Talaq was pronounced  by the petitioner  on

17.11.2016,  whereas respondent  No.l has filed suit for

maintenance  and recovery  of dowry  articles on 23.05.2017,

whereby she claims that she is entitled for past monthly

maintenance  allowance  at the rate of Rs.12,000/- w.e.f.

18.10.2014 till completion of Iddat period alongwith  recovery of

5 Tolas gold ornaments  or in alternate  its amount according to

market  value. Respondent  No.l has also claimed  costs of

Rs.1,50,000/'on medical treatment  alongwith  recovery of dowry

articles as per list. The suit has been contested by the petitioner

by way of filing written statement,  whereby  he has denied the

purchase of any dowry articles  and contends that he has

maintained respondent No.l when she was living  with  him,

however,  it has been acknowledged by the petitioner  side that

3
w.P  No.291112Ot9.

dower  and 5 Tolas  gold omaments  has already been paid to

respondent No.l. Surprisingly  the claim of maintenance  referred

in Para l0 of the plaint  has been denied  by the petitioner by

saying  that  "incorrect hence denied".

5.  I have gone through  the evidence,  whereby  respondent

No.l has recorded her evidence  to prove her contention  in the

light of issues  framed  by Family Court.  Iqra Javed/respondent

No.1 herself  appeared  as P.W.1 and reiterated  her stance  taken in

the affrdavit/Exh.P.1  and her supportive  witnesses  Mutrammad

Bashir submitted his affidavit/Exh.P.2, Mazhar  Hussain

submitted  his affidavit/Exh.P.3  and Abdul  Majeed  submitted  his

affidavit/Exh.P.4,  who were  cross-examined  by the present

petitioner, however,  no fruitful claim  could be achieved in

contrast to above  evidence. The petitioner  put his  appearance

before the Court  as D.W.1  and submitted his affidavit/Exh.D.l,

in which  he has taken the stance  that respondent  No.l is

disobedient wife and the dowry articles  were returned through

commrsslon.

6.  During  the course  of cross-examination, he acknowledges

that:-

fi! i: LJ, t 7 eU,.t  tib  oV.  r tt $ f ryr r {t L ef -( 7 v, :."
tuz-S !d:i:r7(L7  4u.-y' t 7ctLr4-7r/:/:6/
4 i vti 7 o, /ul  * -7 L x o i 
tti tp,/ L L eb
rr' : {  { | fi  *, J,.,t 
A L 6 7, $ I' L rl -u xltVt

=t 

"- 

7.  Similarly,  the petitioner  has also acknowledged  that he has

returned the dowry  articles  in the following  manner:-

'r-1

,F /, -,1, * o xv*v /t/,  t t ;i ow lti t { : i L vr! &,!  t v"
J- I  !+ *., t 1 -t/Jr t ia CtW +6,a V t 1Tt L y'- a{ t/
?u/-p{,.,!d !d'i:t-?6u{ /,t, 21a20, li,l\f
-Grra{dw!t*d{d  --;}
" -,! J"ji/,! :i/16,il15,  14, tl/ Jr lf\v)u

4
W.P No.2911120t9.

8.  Besides  the above  referred  acknowledgement,  the petitioner

has also  acknowledged  that he entered  into second  marriage.

9.  Keeping in view above background  of the case  and

evidence recorded by the petitioner  side, I have gone  through  the

findings  recorded by learned Trial Court on issue No.l,  who has

rightly appreciated  the factum of non-payment  of maintenance

on part of the petitioner, even Jirga was constituted  in which

P.W.4/Ch.  Abdul Majeed has given detailed  version  through

Exh.P.4 and it has also been  noted  that Jirga was constituted  on

the request  of mother of respondent No.l for assumption  of

matrimonial  bond but the petitioner  has not paid a single penny

to respondent  No.l from the date of desertion till Iddat  period,

however, the petitioner has not taken any specific stance in his

written  statement  regarding his financial status and learned Trial

Court has discussed all these  issues in detail while referring

column  No.17 of Nikahnama  in its findings on issue No.2  and

decided  the issue against  the petitioner.  The findings of learned

Trial Court regarding  dowry  articles  have  not been  refuted  in any

manner,  especially  in the light of admission  made by the

petitioner  in cross-examination, in which  he himself admiued

that  certain dowry articles have  not been retumed to respondent

No.1.

10. I have  also gone  through  the judgment  of learned Appellate

Court,  whereby  learned Appellate Court  has appreciated  the

acknowledgement  of the petitioner, who while appearing  as

D.W.l as well as during cross examination made admission

regarding  non return of dowry articles. Even  otherwise  the

petitioner during  cross-examination  on P.W.l  suggested  that

"whether  it is correct that  jewellery,  which was given to her was

taken  back from her" as such the admission  which has been

made by the petitioner  on record is so blatant  and  clear that no

5
W.P  No.2911120t9.

other meanings  can be extended qua the claim submitted  by

respondent  No.l in her evidence. It is trite law that concurrent

findings cannot be interfered  in constitutional jurisdiction

especially when judicial review  has been claimed  by the

petitioner. Both the Courts  below  have rightly appreciated  the

evidence. Learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to point

out any illegality  and jurisdictional  defect in the impugned

judgments. The instant writ petition  is misconceived  and the

same stands disruissed  @.

R.Atrjrm

(MOHSTN

AR

JUDGE

