ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.124  of 2O2O

Khawaja  Abdul Ghani Majid
VS
National  Accountability Bureau  and others

S. No. oforder
/ proceedings

Date of order/
Proceedinqs
',3.02.2020 Mr. Muhammad Jamshaid  Malik, Advocate for the

Order  with signature  of Judge  and that  of parties or counse
where  necessary.

petitioner.
Barrister  Rizwan Ahmed, Special  Prosecutor,
N.A.B.
Mr. Ahmad Bin Zahid, Deputy  Director, N.A.B.
Mr.  Muhammad  Qasim,  Assistant
Di rector/l  nvestigation  Officer, N.A. B.

Through the instant writ petition under
Article 199 of the Constitution,  the petitioner,
Khawaja Abdul Ghani Majid, seeks the grant of
post arrest bail on medical grounds.
2.  Learned  counsel for  the  petitioner
submitted that the petitioner  was arrested  by the
Federal lnvestigation Agency ("F.1.A.") on
15.08.2018 in F.l.R. No.4/2018,  registered at the
F.l.A., State Bank  Circle, Karachi;  that after being
on physical remand for thirteen days,  the
petitioner  was shifted to Jinnah Post Medical
Centre ("J.P.M.C."),  Karachi on 28.08.2018  as he
was experiencing  extreme pain and excessive
bleeding; that the F.l.A. denied the petitioner  for
follow up by competent doctors;  that pursuant to
the orders passed by the Hon'ble  Supreme Court
in H.R.C. No.39216-G/2018,  the petitioner  was
examined by the Surgeon General of Pakistan;
tlrat in the medical report dated 22.09.2O18,  it was
recommended  that the petitioner required
surgical management  for hemorrhoids;  that it was
also observed that the petitioner had a family
history of colonic carcinoma;  that subsequently,
the petitioner was shifted to Rawalpindi Central

2

W.P. No.124l2O2O

Prison, Adyala for the purposes of interrogation;
that no medical follow ups or attendance was
afforded to the petitioner;  that the petitioner  was
kept in solitary confinement in poor dietary
conditions; that in poor health,  the petitioner  was
shifted to Karachi  to appear before the learned
Special  Court at Karachi; that the petitioner's
medical examination under anesthesia  was
conducted by J.P.M.C.  and a nodule  was found
and removed  from histopathology; that despite
the fact that the petitioner needed long overdue
surgeries, the  officials of  the  National
Accountability  Bureau ("N.A.B.")  shifted him to
lslamabad;  that the results  of the histopathology
showed  that the petitioner  was diagnosed  stage-
one colon cancer; that the medical board
constituted  pursuant to the orders passed by the
learned Accountability Court recommended
urgent  hospitalization  of the petitioner;  that the
Superintendent  of Rawalpindi Central Prison,
Adyala did not provide the requisite medical
attendance to the petitioner; that the medical
board had also recommended for an MRI to be
conducted in order to clearly identiff the stage of
the petitioner's cancer;  that a PET CT Scan  and
colonoscopy  was also recommended to  be
carried out by the medica! board; that the
petitioner's cancer seems  to have spread to his
lungs; that the medical board, in its letter dated
06.11 .2019, recommended  that the petitioner be
shifted to Agha Khan University Hospital under
the supervision of the medical board; that the
medical  board, in its report dated 20.11.2019,
observed that the petitioner's  medical condition
was "extremely worrisome and possibly shows
that the cancer has materialized from the anal
canal to the lungs'l that the petitioner  had filed

3

W.P. No.12412020

writ petition No.2O64l2O19 for his release  on bai!
in  reference No.2/2019,  which petition was
dismissed  by this Court vide judgment  dated
10.10.2019;  and that thereafter,  N.A.B. had filed a
supplementary reference before  the
Accountability Court.
3.  Learned  counsel for the petitioner  further
submitted that due to the deteriorating  life
threatening medical  condition  from which  the
petitioner was suffering, he ought to be granted
post-arrest  bail. Learned counsel for  the
petitioner prayed for the writ petition to be
allowed in terms of the relief sought therein.
4.  On the other hand, learned Special
Prosecutor, N.A.B., assisted by Mr. Muhammad
Qasim, lnvestigation Officer, submitted that the
petitioner was being tried for having laundered
billions  of rupees; that the petitioner is not of an
advanced  age and his ailment is such that he can
be treated in jail; that if the petitioner is released
on bail, there  is a likelihood  of his absconsion; and
that other  references  are also in the process  of
being filed against the petitioner.  Learned Special
Prosecutor, N.A.B. prayed  for the writ petition to

be dismissed.
5.  We have heard the contentions of the
learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the
learned Special Prosecutor,  N.A.B. and have
perused the record with their able assistance.
6.  The petitioner has been incarcerated ever
since 15.08.2018. He is one of the accused  in
Accountability  Reference No.2/2019, which is
pending before the learned Accountability Court

at lslamabad.
7.  This petition  was first taken up for hearing
on 20.01 .2O2O, whereon  this Court directed  the
Executive Director,  Pakistan lnstitute  of Medical

4

W.P. No.12412020

Sciences to constitute a medical  board  in order to
examine  the petitioner  and submit a report  within
a period of ten days. ln compliance with the said

order,  a three-member  medical board comprising
Dr. Qasim M. Buttar (Head of  Oncology
Department),  Dr. Mashood Ali (Head of Gastro
Department) and Dr.  Muhammad  Faheem
(Assistant Professor  of General Surgery) was
constituted.
8.  The medical report was submitted  on
07.02.2020.  The recommendations  and findings  of
the medical board are as follows:-

"The board recommended  the following in view
of  current examination/reviev in  line of
pre vious recomm  en da tions
-  FDG-PECT/CT  Scan.
-  High resolution MRI pelvis  with
-  Colonoscopy  to  evaluate  extent of
-  Baseline  investigations  ( Blood test)
-  Endoluninal U/S
-  CEA level.

contrast.

disease.

The board is of the view that patient  should
undergo above mentioned investigations at
the earliest so that definitive treatment  plan
can be formulated.
cancer & CT
Consldedno bioosv
Scan frndings any further delay will be
definitely detrimental for chances  of cure of
cancer.
Furthermore the board deliberated that due
to  unavailability of  FDG-PET/CT,  high
resolution MRI in the region,  patient  may be
sent to AKUH  or primary  treating  medical
board for all the investigation/work up /
treatment."
(Emphasis  added)

9.  Having gone through  the medical report
submitted on 07.O2.2O20, we are of the view that
the petitioner's ailment is such that cannot  be
properly  treated while in custody in jail. The
petitioner requires  specialized treatment  and his
continuous  detention  in jai! is  likely to  be
hazardous  to his life. Therefore,  bearing in mind
the law laid down in the cases of Muhammad

5

W.P.  No.124l2O2O

Yousafullah Khan VS State (PLD 1995 S.C. 58)

and Muhammad  Saeed  Mehdi  VS The State (2002
SCMR 282) and the contents  of the medical  report
submitted on 07.O2.2O20,  the instant writ petition
is allowed and the petitioner  is granted  bail on
medical  grounds subject to furnishing surety
bonds  in the sum of Rs.1,00,000,000  (Rupees one
hundred  million) with one surety in the like
amount to  the satisfaction  of  the learned
Accountability  Court No.ll, lslamabad.  The
petitioner  shall appear before the learned
Accountability Courts on every date of hearing
unless  exempted  by the Courts. Additionally,  the
petitioner shall cooperate  with and appear  before
the lnvestigation Officer as and when he is
required  for questioning.  The lnvestigation  Officer
shall continue to retain the petitioner's  passport
and his name shall  continue  to remain on the Exit

Control  List.

(FIAZAHMAD  ANJUM JANDRAN)

JUDGE

4hteplea:

(MIANGUL HASSAN  AURANGZEB)

JUDGE

