JUDGMENT  SHEET. 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Civil Revision  No. 77 /2013. 

Ch.  Mazhar Khalil 

VS 

Muhammad  Ashraf Bhatti  etc. 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Ehsan Ullah Sial, Advocate. 

Respondent No. I 

in person and also on behalf of 
respondent No.2 being attorney. 

Date  of Decision: 

30.06.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAY ANI. J :- Through this civil revision petition, the 

petitioner  has assailed the judgment  & decree dated 20.11.2009, passed by learned 

Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad and the judgment  & decree dated  I 9 .0I.2013,  passed 

by  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  suit  as  well  as  appeal 

filed by the petitioner were dismissed concurrently. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  the  petitioner  filed  a  civil 

suit  for  recovery  of Rs.I4,50,000/-  against  the  respondents,  which  was  dismissed 

without appreciating  the  evidence  available on record; that  respondent  No. I  is ex- 

father in law of the petitioner,  whereas respondent No.2  is his brother  in law, who 

received  Rs.I4,50,000/-  as consideration to  arrange plot  in Islamabad  through  oral 

agreement  in presence  of Baber Hussain/P.W.2  and lbrar  Ahmed  P.W.3;  that both 

the  Courts  below  have  not  considered  the  evidence  of P.Ws,  who  confirmed  the 

handing  over  of the  payment  as  sale  consideration  alongwith  execution  of  oral 

agreement qua the plot. 

3. 

Conversely, respondent No. I  in person contends that he is also representing 

respondent No.2,  who  is his  real  son; that  the petitioner  is his  ex-son  in law, who 

filed  false  and  frivolous  suit  to  exert  pressure  upon  them;  that  daughter  of the 

petitioner  filed  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  against  the  petitioner  and  the 

petitioner  in  order  to  counter  that  suit  filed  civil  suit  for  recovery  to  settle  family 

score but  failed to  substantiate  legal grounds; that the petitioner  never  entered into 

agreement to sell nor received any amount; that both the Courts below have rightly 

dismissed claim of the petitioner. 

C.R  No. 77/2013. 

2 

4. 

5. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner,  who  is  ex-son  in law  of 

respondent  No.I  filed  suit  for  recovery  of  Rs.14,50,000/-  being  investment  in 

March,  2008  with  respondent  No. I  and  alleged  that  it  was  agreed  between  the 

parties that profit  will be  shared on 30% and  70% but despite the  commitment the 

plot  was  neither  arranged  nor  the  amount  was  returned.  The  respondents  have 

denied the  oral  agreement  to  sell and  even  receiving  of the  amount  in the  written 

statement. Learned  Trial  Court framed the  issues. The petitioner  himself  appeared 

as P.W.I  and reiterated  his  stance but  surprisingly he could not justify  his transfer 

of payment, even nothing was written amongst the parties nor any such document is 

available on record.  The petitioner produced Baber Hussain as P.W.2, who has not 

justified  contents  of the  oral agreement between  the parties,  even he  is unaware of 

the total  payment,  hence,  his  evidence  cannot be  considered  in terms  of  Qanun-e- 

Shahadat Order,  I984.  Similarly, lbrar Ahmed/P.W.3 has also given vague evidence 

qua  the  oral  agreement  as  well  as  the  payment.  The  initial  onus  was  upon  the 

petitioner  in  terms  of  Article  I I 7  of  Qanun-Shahadat  Order,  I 984,  which  has  not 

been discharged in proper  manner. The entire case of the petitioner  discloses that it 

is counter blast to the  suit for dissolution of marriage filed by  Sadia ex-wife of the 

petitioner and real daughter of respondent No. I. 

6. 

I  have  gone  through  the  impugned judgments  of  Courts  below,  in which 

each  and  every  aspect  has  been  discussed  and  appreciated  in  proper  manner.  No 

illegality has been pointed  out by the petitioner and there is no jurisdictional  defect 

in the impugned judgments. 

7. 

In  view  of  above  discussion,  the  instant  civil  revision  petition  bears  no 

merits, therefore, the same is hereby dismissed. 

RAnjam 

(MOHSIN  AKHTARl<AYftNI) 
JUDGE 

