ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.744/2019 
Sana Aizad and others 
VS

Additional District Judge VII/Guardian Appellate Court, 
Islamabad-West and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioners by: 
Respondents by: 

01.07.2019  
Mr. Mujtaba Haider Sherazi, Advocate. 
Ms.  Jamila  J.  Aslam,  Advocate 
respondent No.3.  

for 

______________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB, J:- Through the instant writ 

petition, the petitioners impugn the order dated 20.02.2019, passed 

by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad, 

whereby  their  appeal  against  the  consolidated  judgment  and 

decree  dated  24.09.2018,  passed  by  the  learned  Family  Court, 

Islamabad,  was  dismissed.  Vide  the  said  consolidated  judgment 

and decree, the learned Family Court dismissed the petition filed by 

petitioner  No.1  for  her  appointment  as  the  guardian  of  the  minor 

Waliyaan  Ahmad,  and  allowed  respondent  No.3’s  petition  for  the 

custody  of  the  said  minor  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 

compromise set out in the said judgment and decree. 

2. 

The facts essential for the disposal of the instant petition are 

that  respondent  No.3  (Imtinan  Ahmed)  and  petitioner  No.1  (Sana 

Aizad) got married on 18.02.2010. The couple were blessed with a 

son, Waliyaan Ahmad, who is presently almost 08 years of age. The 

strained relations between the couple lead to their separation.  

3. 

Petitioner  No.1  has  been  awarded  a  degree  of  Master  of 

Science  in  the  Faculty  of  Life  Sciences  Computational  Modicular 

Biology  by  the  University  of  Manchester,  United  Kingdom.  In  the 

year  2015,  petitioner  No.1  was  awarded  a  scholarship  for  a  Ph.D 

program  at  the  University  of  Derby,  United  Kingdom.  Petitioner 

No.1  was  unable  to  take  Waliyaan  along  with  her  to  the  United 

Kingdom due to the rejection of his visa.  

4. 

On  23.01.2016,  petitioner  No.1  filed  a  petition  before  the 

learned  Guardian  Judge  for  her  appointment  as  Waliyaan’s 

guardian.  This  petition  was  resisted  by  respondent  No.3,  who  had 

                
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
2 

W.P.No.744/2019 

filed  a  petition,  seeking  Waliyaan’s  custody.  On  10.09.2016, 

respondent  No.3  recorded  his  statement  to  the  effect  that  in  the 

interests  of  Waliyaan’s  welfare,  he  would  have  no  objection  if 

petitioner No.1 were to take Waliyaan along with her  to the United 

Kingdom  provided  she  would  care  for  Waliyaan  in  a  befitting 

manner and would bring him to Pakistan on an annual basis to meet 

respondent  No.3,  and  return  to  Pakistan  upon  completion  of  her 

course  work.  It  was  also recorded  that  petitioner No.1  would  take 

Waliyaan as her dependant and in the event, Waliyaan was unable 

to get a visa for the United Kingdom, his custody would be handed 

over to respondent No.3. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  No.1  before  the  learned 

Guardian  Judge  also  recorded  his  statement  that  petitioner  No.1 

would  bring  Waliyaan  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  meet  with 

respondent  No.3  on  an  annual  basis;  that  respondent  No.3  could 

meet  Waliyaan  in  United  Kingdom  whenever  he  wanted;  that 

petitioner  No.1  would  return  to  Pakistan  on  the  completion  of  her 

course work; and that respondent No.3 would render assistance in 

obtaining Waliyaan’s visa to United Kingdom. 

6. 

After  the  recording  of  the  above-mentioned  statements,  the 

learned  Guardian  Court,  vide  order  dated  10.09.2016,  disposed  of 

petitioner  No.1’s  guardianship  petition  and  respondent  No.3’s 

custody petition in terms of the said statements.  

7. 

Unfortunately,  on  09.11.2016,  Waliyaan’s  visa  application 

was rejected and so was his review application. Petitioner No.1 had 

proceeded to United Kingdom without Waliyaan.  

8. 

On  10.01.2017,  respondent  No.3  issued  a  divorce  notice  to 

petitioner  No.1.  The  marriage  between  petitioner  No.1  and 

respondent No.3 has ended. 

9. 

On  09.03.2017,  petitioner  No.1  filed  another  guardianship 

petition  before  the  learned  Guardian  Court,  Islamabad  seeking  to 

be  appointed  as  Waliyaan’s  guardian.  Perusal  of  the  said  petition 

shows  that  it  had  been  sent  by  petitioner  No.1  from  the  United 

Kingdom. 

It  was  attested  by 

the  Consular  Attache,  High 

Commission  for  Pakistan,  London.  Since  Waliyaan  was  left  by 

petitioner No.1 with her parents, i.e., petitioners No.2 and 3 herein, 

 
 
3 

W.P.No.744/2019 

a petition seeking Waliyaan’s custody was filed by respondent No.3 

on 25.04.2017 before the learned Guardian Court, Islamabad.  This 

petition  was  contested  by  petitioner  No.1’s  parents  by  filing  a 

written  reply.  These  two  petitions  were  consolidated,  vide  order 

dated 04.07.2017.  

10.  After the recording of evidence, the learned Guardian Court, 

vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  24.09.2018,  dismissed  petitioner 

No.1’s  guardianship  petition  and  allowed  respondent  No.3’s 

petition for Waliyaan’s custody. The said judgment and decree was 

assailed by petitioner No.1 and her parents before the Court of the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad.  Vide  judgment  and 

decree  dated  20.02.2019,  the  learned  Appellate  Court  dismissed 

the  said  appeal.  The  said  concurrent  judgments  and  decrees 

passed  by  the  learned  Courts  below  have  been  assailed  by  the 

petitioners in the instant writ petition. 

11.  Learned  counsel for the petitioners, after narrating the  facts 

leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition,  submitted  that  the 

concurrent judgments and decrees of the learned Courts below are 

based  on  misreading  and  non-reading  of  the  evidence  on  the 

record;  that  the  learned  Courts  below  erred  by  not  appreciating 

that respondent No.3 had willfully abandoned Waliyaan; that during 

the  subsistence  of  the  marriage  between  petitioner  No.1  and 

respondent No.3, the latter did not show any interest in Waliyaan’s 

welfare; that until petitioner No.1 completes her Ph.D in the United 

Kingdom,  Waliyaan  can  be  taken  care  of  by  his  maternal 

grandparents; that during the pendency of the proceedings before 

the  learned  Guardian  Court  and  the  learned  Appellate  Court, 

Waliyaan’s custody had remained with his maternal grandparents, 

who  were  able  enough  to  care  for  their  grandchild’s  welfare;  and 

that  respondent  No.3  has  defaulted 

in  paying  Waliyaan’s 

maintenance. 

12.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  further  submitted  that 

petitioner  No.1  had  filed  the  earlier  guardian  petition  in  order  to 

enable Waliyaan to obtain a visa so as to enable him to travel to the 

United Kingdom along with petitioner No.1; that earlier respondent 

No.3 had agreed to leave the minor with petitioner No.1; that in the 

 
 
4 

W.P.No.744/2019 

earlier  round  of  litigation  before  the  learned  Guardian  Court, 

respondent  No.3  had  agreed  for  Waliyaan  to  be  with  his  maternal 

grandparents  while  petitioner  No.1  was  abroad;  that  Waliyaan’s 

visa  was  rejected  due  to  respondent  No.3  not  showing  any 

cooperation in the matter; and that respondent No.3 had refused to 

give an affidavit which was an essential requirement for Waliyaan’s 

visa.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  prayed  for  the  writ 

petition  to  be  allowed  and  for  the  concurrent  judgments  and 

decrees passed by the learned Courts below to be set-aside. 

13.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3 

submitted  that  in  the  earlier  proceedings  before  the  learned 

Guardian  Court,  respondent  No.3  had  agreed  for  Waliyaan  to 

remain  in  petitioner  No.1’s  custody  provided  the  latter  took 

Waliyaan  along  with  her  to  the  United  Kingdom;  that  respondent 

No.3 did not create any obstacle in the grant of a visa to Waliyaan; 

that petitioner No.1’s counsel had delayed the provision of the draft 

of  the  affidavit  required  to  be  sworn  by  respondent  No.3;  that 

respondent  No.3  had  never  agreed  to  a  situation  where  petitioner 

No.1  would  be  abroad  and  Waliyaan  would  be  in  his  maternal 

grandparents’  custody  in  Pakistan;  that  respondent  No.3  had  a 

priority  over petitioners No.2 and  3 regarding Waliyaan’s custody; 

that  Waliyaan’s  welfare  would  be  best  served  if  his  custody  was 

handed  over to  respondent No.3,  who  works  as  a Consultant  from 

home;  that  petitioners  No.2  and  3  had  resisted  respondent  No.3’s 

attempts to meet with Waliyaan; and that the learned Courts below 

did  not  commit  any  jurisdictional  irregularity  so  as  to  warrant 

interference  in  their  concurrent  judgments.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondent  No.3  prayed  for  the  writ  petition  to  be  dismissed.  In 

making  her  submissions,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3 

placed reliance on the judgments of Mst. Zahida Kiani and another 

VS  Capt.  (Rtd.)  Shahid  Ali  Khan  (1993  SCMR  2303),  Shabana  Naz 

VS  Muhammad  Saleem  (2014  SCMR  343),  Ghulam  Mustafa  VS 

Shamim Akhtar and 2 others (2017 YLR Note 45) and Ganj Bibi VS 

Muhammad Younas and another (2011 CLC 1062). 

 
 
5 

W.P.No.744/2019 

14. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  

15.  The facts leading to the filing of the instant petition have been 

set  out  in  sufficient  detail  in  paragraphs  2  to  10  above,  and  need 

not be recapitulated.  

16. 

It may be mentioned that during the course of the arguments, 

learned  counsel 

for  respondent  No.3  handed  over  cheque 

No.57434393,  dated  14.05.2019  for  an  amount  of  Rs.2,80,000/- 

drawn  on  Standard  Chartered  Bank,  Islamabad  in  favour  of 

petitioner  No.1  to  her  learned  counsel.  According  to  the  learned 

counsel  for  respondent  No.3,  this  amount  was  being  paid  in 

discharge  of  respondent  No.3’s  obligation  to  pay  for  Waliyaan’s 

maintenance. 

17.  Presently, petitioner No.1 is in the United Kingdom, whereas 

Waliyaan  is  in  the  custody  of  his  maternal  grandparents  i.e., 

petitioners  No.2  and  3.  It  is  an  admitted  position  that  Waliyaan’s 

application for a visa to the United Kingdom was turned down.  

18.  During the pendency of the earlier guardianship petition filed 

by  petitioner  No.1  and  the  custody  petition  filed  by  respondent 

No.3,  it  was  agreed  that  petitioner  No.1  could  retain  Waliyaan’s 

custody  provided  she  took  him  along  with  her  to  the  United 

Kingdom.  The  fact  that  Waliyaan’s  visa  application  was  rejected 

and  he  is  now  in  his  maternal  grandparents’  custody  has  totally 

changed the  circumstances in which respondent No.3 had agreed 

for Waliyaan’s custody to remain with petitioner No.1. The changed 

circumstances in which petitioner No.1 was abroad while Waliyaan 

was 

in  the  custody  of  his  maternal  grandparents, 

justified 

respondent  No.3 

in  seeking  Waliyaan’s  custody.  Rebus  sic 

stantibus  (Latin  for  “thing  thus  standing”),  is  the  legal  doctrine 

allowing for a contract or a treaty to become inapplicable because 

of  a  fundamental  change  of  circumstances.  It  is  my  view  that  the 

said doctrine is attracted in the case at hand. No advantage could 

be  taken  by  the  petitioners  from  respondent  No.3  pursuant  to  his 

statement  agreeing  before  the 

learned  Guardian  Court  on 

10.09.2016  that  Waliyaan’s  custody  should  remain  with  petitioner 

 
 
6 

W.P.No.744/2019 

No.1. Since Waliyaan was unable to proceed to the United Kingdom 

to  join  his  mother/petitioner  No.1,  the  judgments  of  the  learned 

Courts  below  did  not  suffer  from  any  irregularity  in  granting 

Waliyaan’s custody to his father/respondent No.3. 

19.  The material on the record has not caused me to form a view 

that respondent No.3 is in any manner unable to care for his minor 

son. The learned Guardian Court has been mindful as to Waliyaan’s 

grandparents’ right to meet their grandchild. For this purpose, the 

learned Guardian Court has fixed an adequate visitation schedule. 

The  learned  Guardian  Court,  in  an  appreciable  manner,  has  also 

held  that  petitioner  No.1  would  be  entitled  to  Waliyaan’s  custody 

when  visits  Pakistan.  As  regards  the  learned  Guardian  Court’s 

declaration that petitioner No.1 “shall not be entitled for permanent 

custody in case of her return permanently to Pakistan”,  I  cannot 

bring  myself  to  agree  with  the  same.  The  learned  Guardian  Court 

could  not  impose  such  an  embargo  on  petitioner  No.1  while 

determining  a  visitation  schedule.  In  the  event  petitioner  No.1 

petitions a Guardian Court whenever she returns to Pakistan, it will 

be  for  such  a  Court  to  determine  in  the  existing  circumstances  as 

to in whose custody Waliyaan’s welfare would be best served. 

20. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  partly  allowed  in 

that  the  declaration  of  the  learned  Guardian  Court  while  fixing  a 

visitation  schedule  that  petitioner  No.1  “shall not be entitled for 

permanent custody in case of her return permanently to Pakistan” 

is  set-aside.  The  judgment  of  the  learned  Appellate  Court,  to  the 

said  extent  is  also  set-aside.  Other  than  this,  the  concurrent 

judgments  of  the  learned  Courts  below  are  upheld.  There  shall  be 

no order as to costs. 

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2019 

Qamar Khan* 

Approved for Reporting 

                                                      (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
