ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       I.C.A.No.320 of 2019 
Federation of Pakistan  

VS          

Abdul Qadar Ahsan and another  

Dates of Hearing: 

Appellant by: 

Respondents by: 

learned 

22.07.2019,  23.07.2019,  12.02.2020  & 
22.07.2020. 
Mr.  Tariq  Mahmood  Khokhar, 
Additional Attorney General. 
Khawaja  Imtiaz  Ahmad,  learned  Deputy 
Attorney General.  
Mr.  Muhammad  Nadeem  Khan  Khakwani, 
learned Assistant Attorney General. 
Ch.  Muhammad  Tahir  Mehmood,  learned 
Assistant Attorney General. 
Mr. Muhammad Atif Khokhar, learned State 
Counsel. 
Mr.  Qaiser  Masood,  Additional  Director 
Law, F.I.A. Headquarter.  
Mr. Adeel Ahmed Sheikh, S.I. FIA/AHTC. 
Barrister  Usman  G.  Rashid  Cheema,  for 
respondent No.1. 
Barrister  Ummar  Ziauddin  and  Barrister 
Zainab Janjua, learned amici curiae. 

______________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

intra Court appeal, the appellant, Federation of Pakistan, impugns 

the  judgment  dated  15.05.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Judge-in-

Chambers  allowing  writ  petition  No.4606  of  2018  filed  by  Abdul 

Qadir Ahsan (“respondent No.1”) against the Enquiry Magistrate’s 

report  dated  25.10.2018  wherein  it  was  concluded  that,  on  the 

basis  of  sufficient  incriminating  evidence  on  the  record,  a  prima 

facie case of respondent No.1’s extradition to the United Kingdom 

(“U.K.”)  had  been  made  out.  The  matter  was  remanded  by  the 

learned Judge-in-Chambers to the Enquiry Magistrate with certain 

directions.  

2. 

The  record  shows  that  on  23.09.2016,  the  British  High 

Commission,  Islamabad  made  a  request  to  the  Government  of 

Pakistan for the extradition of respondent No.1 from Pakistan. The 

allegation against respondent No.1 was that he had murdered Mr. 

Andre  Antonio  Marshall  (“Mr.  Marshall”)  in  Manchester,  U.K. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

Respondent  No.1  was  interviewed  by  the  police  in  Manchester. 

After  respondent  No.1  was  taken 

in  police  custody  and 

interviewed, he was released on police bail. Respondent No.1 was 

due to surrender himself to the police on 23.07.2015 but he failed 

to  do  so.  His  whereabouts  were  not  known  to  the  police  in 

Manchester  and  there  was  no  record  of  him  having  left  U.K.  On 

27.01.2016,  the  Magistrates  Court  in  the  City  of  Manchester 

issued warrants for respondent No.1’s arrest. 

3. 

It is an admitted position that, till date, an extradition treaty 

has  not  been  executed  between  Pakistan  and  U.K.  If  there  is  no 

extradition  treaty  between  Pakistan  and  a  foreign  State,  the 

provisions  of  the  Extradition  Act,  1972  (“the  1972  Act”)can  be 

made  applicable  for  the  return  of  persons  to  such  a  non-treaty 

State provided the requirements of  Section  4 of the 1972 Act are 

fulfilled. Unless and until a notification in terms of Section 4 of the 

1972 Act is issued by the Federal Government, a person accused 

of an offence at places within, or within the jurisdiction of, a non-

treaty  State  cannot  be  extradited  to  such  a  State  under  the 

provisions of the said Act. 

4. 

On  02.06.2017,  a  notification  was  issued  by  the  Federal 

Government in exercise of the powers under Section 4 of the 1972 

Act  directing  that  the  provisions  of  the  said  Act,  shall,  with 

respect to the extradition of respondent No.1, who was wanted in 

U.K.  for  the  charges  of  murder,  have  effect  in  relation  to  that 

State.  

5. 

On  23.11.2017,  the  Ministry  of  Interior  forwarded  the  said 

notification  dated  02.06.2017  to  the  Enquiry  Magistrate.  On 

01.07.2018,  respondent  No.1  was  arrested  in  execution  of  the 

warrants  of  arrest 

issued  by 

the  Enquiry  Magistrate  on 

12.12.2017.  On  02.07.2018,  respondent  No.1  was  sent  to  judicial 

custody. The extradition request and its annexes were supplied to 

respondent No.1 on 31.07.2018.  

6. 

In  the  proceedings  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate,  the 

affidavits  of  nine  witnesses  along  with supporting  documentation 

were  produced  as  Exh.P/1  to  Exh.P/47.  Respondent  No.1’s 

statement under Section 342 Cr.P.C. was recorded. He denied all 

3 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

the allegations against him. He chose not to record his statement 

under  Section  340(2)  Cr.P.C.  After  hearing  the  final  arguments, 

the  Enquiry  Magistrate,  in  his  report  dated  25.10.2018,  recorded 

that  there  was  sufficient  documentary  evidence  on  the  record  to 

hold  that  a prima facie  case  for  respondent  No.1’s  extradition  to 

U.K.  had  been  made  out.  Respondent  No.1  assailed  the  said 

report dated 25.10.2018 before this Court in writ petition No. 4606 

of  2018,  which  was  allowed  vide  impugned  judgment  dated 

15.05.2019. The said judgment has been assailed by the appellant 

in the instant intra Court appeal.  

7. 

In  the  impugned  judgment,  it  was  held  inter alia  that  the 

witnesses who submit their affidavits in support of the extradition 

request  have  to  be  cross-examined  and  that  investigation  officer 

of  the  country  making  the  extradition  request  has  to  appear 

before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  and  record  his  evidence.  This  is 

what the appellant is most aggrieved by. 

8. 

The  learned  Additional  Attorney  General  on  behalf  of  the 

appellant (Federation of Pakistan) submitted that the report of the 

Enquiry Magistrate holding that a prima facie case for respondent 

No.1’s  extradition  had  been  made  out  does  not  suffer  from  any 

legal 

infirmity;  that  respondent  No.1  was  alleged  to  have 

committed  a  gruesome  murder  in  U.K.;  that  ample  evidence  had 

been  brought  on  record,  in  the  form  of  affidavits,  to  show  that 

respondent No.1 was involved in the commission of an extradition 

offence  i.e.  Mr.  Marshal’s  murder;  that  the  documents  on  which 

reliance  was  placed  by  the  prosecution  were  authenticated  in 

accordance  with 

  Section  9(2)  of  the  1972  Act;  and  that 

respondent No.1 was not required in U.K. for any act of a political 

character. 

9. 

He  further  submitted  that  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers 

erred by not appreciating that there was no provision in the 1972 

Act  which  required  an  officer  investigating  an  offence  in  the 

requesting  State  to  appear  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  in 

Pakistan  in  order  to  give  evidence  in  support  of  the  extradition 

request;  that  there  are  several  precedents  where  fugitive 

offenders,  required  by  a  requesting  State  to  undergo  a  trial  in 

4 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

such  a  State,  have  been  extradited  without  the  investigating 

officer  being  required  to  appear  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate; 

that there is also no requirement in the 1972 Act for the deponent 

of  a  duly  authenticated  affidavit  filed  in  support  of  an  extradition 

request  to  appear  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  for  the  purpose 

of  cross-examination;  that  as  long  as  the  documents  produced 

before the Enquiry Magistrate in support of an extradition request 

are  executed  in  accordance  with  Section  9(2)  of  the  1972  Act, 

they  are  admissible  in  evidence;  that  it  is  well  settled  that  the 

proceedings  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  are  not  a  trial  but 

simply  an  enquiry;  and  that  in  such  an  enquiry,  the  guilt  of  the 

fugitive  offender  need  not  be  established  but  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate is to determine whether on the basis of the documents 

on the record, a prima facie case had been made out in support of 

the fugitive offender’s extradition. The learned Additional Attorney 

General  prayed  for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed  and  for  the  writ 

petition filed by respondent No.1 to be dismissed.  

10.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

submitted  that  there  is  no  legal  infirmity  in  the  ratio  in  the 

impugned  judgment  that  an  affidavit  is  inadmissible  unless  the 

deponent  appears  and 

is  cross-examined  before 

the 

Court/Authority before which the affidavits are submitted; that as 

a result of the said ratio, the prosecution’s case is rendered as a 

case  of  no  evidence;  that  the  evidence  produced  before  the 

Enquiry  Magistrate  in  support  of  the  request  for  respondent 

No.1’s extradition not worthy of any consideration; and that since 

respondent No.1 is the citizen of Pakistan by descent, he has the 

protection  of  all  the  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the 

Constitution. 

11.  Learned counsel for respondent No.1 further submitted that 

a  false  and  fabricated  case  had  been  prepared  in  U.K.  against 

respondent  No.1;  that  Mr.  Marshall’s  murder  was  a  blind 

occurrence  with  which  respondent  No.1  had  nothing  to  do;  that 

the  request  for  respondent  No.1’s  extradition  was  without  any 

legal  basis;  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  connect  respondent 

No.1  with  Mr.  Marshall’s  murder;  that  after  respondent  No.1  was 

5 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

interviewed  and  released  by  the  police,  he  could  not  attend  the 

police  station  subsequently  since  he  had  decided  to  move  to 

Pakistan;  that  the  leader  of  the  Gooch  Gang  had  extended  life 

threats to respondent No.1; that this matter had been reported to 

the police; that the police had given a “panic alarm” to respondent 

No.1  and  his  family;  that  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  had  taken 

extraneous consideration into account while holding that a prima 

facie  case  for  respondent  No.1’s  extradition  had  been  made  out; 

that  such  considerations  included  respondent  No.1’s  failure  to 

appear  before  the  Police  in  U.K.  on  23.07.2015  and  his  escape 

from  U.K.  to  Pakistan;  that  respondent  No.1  had  adequately 

explained that he was forced to leave U.K. in order to save his life; 

that  the  mere  fact  that  respondent  No.1  changed  his  name  and 

identity  card  should  have  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  extradition 

proceedings; 

that 

the  Enquiry  Magistrate  erred  by  not 

appreciating that the evidence adduced against respondent No.1 

had  not  been  presented  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of 

Section  9  of  the  1972  Act;  that  no  one  who  conducted  the 

investigation  against  respondent  No.1  appeared  before  the 

Enquiry  Magistrate;  that  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  was  under  an 

obligation 

to  apply 

the 

local 

laws  while  conducting 

the 

proceedings; that the evidence adduced against respondent No.1 

does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat 

Order, 1984; and  that in Pakistan,  a  charge  would  not have been 

framed on the basis of the evidence produced before the  Enquiry 

Magistrate.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  prayed  for  the 

appeal to be dismissed. 

12.  We  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  Additional 

Attorney  General  and  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

and have perused the record with their able assistance. We have 

also  gone  through  the  well  prepared  briefs  on  the  subject 

prepared by the learned amici curiae. 

13.  The facts leading to the filing of the instant appeal have been 

set  out  in sufficient details  in paragraphs  2 to  7  above,  and  need 

not be recapitulated. 

6 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

14.  Respondent  No.1’s  extradition  to  U.K.  was  being  sought  so 

that  he  could  undergo  a  trial  for  the  offences  he  was  alleged  to 

have  committed.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  1972  Act,  a  fugitive 

offender,  suspected  to  be  in  any  part  of  Pakistan,  can  be 

extradited. “Fugitive offender” has been defined in Section 2(1)(d) 

of  the  1972  Act  to  mean  a  person  who  is  (i)  being  accused  of  an 

extradition offence, or (ii) convicted of an extradition offence. It is 

an  admitted  position  that  respondent  No.1  was  alleged  to  have 

committed an extradition offence.  

15.  The  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  has  drawn  a  distinction 

between  a  request  for  extradition  of  a  fugitive  offender  who  is 

alleged to have committed an extradition offence and the matter is 

at the investigation stage in the requesting State and a request for 

extradition  of  a  fugitive  offender  against  whom  a  judgment, 

specifying  his  role,  has  already  been  passed  in  the  requesting 

State.  After  drawing  the  said  distinction,  it  has  been  held  that  in 

cases where a judgment has not been passed against the fugitive 

offender and the matter is at an investigation/enquiry stage in the 

requesting  State,“the Inquiry Magistrate with a view to reach at 

just conclusion should also call the Investigation Officer of the 

requesting state, who inquired and investigated the crime in his 

own jurisdiction due to the reason that such Investigation Officer 

has  collected  the  evidence  and  other  incriminating  articles, 

recorded the statements of witnesses through which he believes 

that  fugitive  offender  is  linked  with  the  alleged  crime.” 

Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  “such  Investigation  Officer  of 

foreign jurisdiction has to appear before Inquiry Magistrate in 

Pakistan to record his statement and such witness has to undergo 

test of cross-examination so as to reach at just decision of the 

case  in  which  the  Inquiry  Magistrate  comes  [to]  a  definite 

conclusion that as to whether a prima facie case has been made 

out against the fugitive offender or otherwise, failing which the 

admissibility of statement placed before the Inquiry Magistrate in 

shape of affidavit is of no legal worth.” The above-referred ratio in 

the  judgment  passed  by  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  is  what 

the Federal Government is most aggrieved by.  

7 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

16.  As  mentioned  above,  the  1972  Act  provides  a  mechanism 

and  procedure  for  the  extradition  of  fugitive  offenders  who  are 

alleged to have committed an extradition offence in the requesting 

State or have been convicted of such an offence by a Court in the 

requesting State. But the said Act does not differentiate between 

the  manner  in  which  evidence  is  to  be  produced  before  the 

Enquiry  Magistrate  during  the  enquiry  proceedings  for  either 

category of the fugitive offenders.  

17.  The mandate of Section 9(1) of the 1972 Act is that exhibits 

and depositions (whether or not they are received or taken in the 

presence  of  the  person  against  whom  they  are  used)  and  official 

certificates  of  facts  and  judicial  documents  stating  facts,  may  be 

received  as  evidence  in  the  proceedings  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate if such documents are duly authenticated. Section 9(2) 

of the 1972 Act provides that warrants, depositions or statements 

on oath (which purport to have been issued, received or taken by 

any  Court  of  justice  outside  Pakistan)  and  certificates  of,  or 

judicial documents stating the facts of, conviction before any such 

Court,  shall  be  deemed  to  be  duly  authenticated 

if  the 

requirements of Section 9(2)(a) to (d) of the 1972 Act are fulfilled. 

These requirements are as follows:-  

“(a)  if the warrant purports to be signed by a Judge, Magistrate, 
or officer of the State where the same was issued or acting in or 
for such State;  

(b)  if the depositions or statements or copies thereof purport to 
be certified, under the hand of a Judge, Magistrate or officer of 
the State where the same were taken or acting in or for such 
State, to be the original depositions or statements or to be true 
copies thereof, as the case may require;  
(c)  if the certificate of, or judicial document stating the fact of, 
a conviction purports to be certified by a Judge, Magistrate or 
officer of the State where the conviction took place or acting in 
or for such State; and  

(d)  if the warrant, depositions, statements, copies, certificates 
and judicial documents, as the case may be, are authenticated 
by the oath of some witness or by the official seal of a minister 
of the State where the same were respectively issued, taken or 
given.”  

18.  Section  9(1)  of  the  1972  Act  does  not  provide  a  different 

mode  for  the  production  of  evidence  in  the  enquiry  proceedings 

for the extradition of a fugitive offender alleged to have committed 

 
 
 
 
 
8 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

an extradition offence but not convicted of such an offence in the 

requesting State than the mode for the production of evidence  in 

the case of a fugitive offender who has already been convicted of 

an extradition offence in the requesting State. 

19.  The record further shows that the extradition request dated 

23.09.2016 moved by the British High Commission, Islamabad was 

accompanied by following documents:- 

Serial 
No. 
1 

2 

3 

4 

5. 

6. 

Nature of document 

Authentication 

Exhibit 

Murphy 

Statement 
dated 
05.08.2016  made  by 
constable 
detective 
Simon 
of 
Greater 
Manchester 
Police. 
Statement  of  detective 
Simon  Murphy  dated 
05.08.2016 whereby he 
produced  warrant  for 
arrest  of  Mr.  Abdul 
Qadar  Ahsan  dated 
27.01.2016  under  seal 
of  Greater  Manchester 
Magistrates  Court  and 
signed  by  Justice  of 
Peace.  
Statement  of  detective 
Simon  Murphy  dated 
05.08.2016 whereby he 
custody- 
produced 
photograph  and  finger 
prints  of  Mr.  Abdul 
Qadar Ahsan 
dated 
Statement 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Mr.  Arron  Cooper  a 
civilian  witness  who 
heard  gun  shots  on 
20.05.2015  at  around 
12:30AM 
dated 
Statement 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Ms.  Rachel  Xuu  a 
civilian  witness  who 
discovered 
the  dead 
body of Andre Marshall 
on 20.05.2015. 
dated 
Statement 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Ms.  Seanie  Lynch  a 
civilian  witness  who 
heard 
arguments 
outside  the  front  of  her 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
singed 
district 
by 
judge/justice of peace 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
district 
by 
singed 
judge/justice of peace 

Exhibit- 
P/2 to P/6 

Exhibit- P/7 
to P/9 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
district 
by 
singed 
judge/justice of peace 

Exhibit- 
P/10 to 
P/16 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
district 
by 
singed 
judge/justice of peace 

Exhibit- 
P/17 to 
P/18 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
district 
by 
singed 
judge/justice of peace 

Exhibit- 
P/19 to 
P/22 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
district 
by 
singed 
judge/justice of peace 

Exhibit- 
P/23 to 
P/24 

9 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Magistrate’s 
Court, 
district 
by 
singed 
judge/justice of peace 

Exhibit- 
P/25 to 
P/26 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
singed 
district 
by 
judge/justice of peace 
Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
singed 
district 
by 
judge/justice of peace 

Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
singed 
district 
by 
judge/justice of peace 
Sworn  at  Manchester 
Salford 
and 
Court, 
Magistrate’s 
singed 
district 
by 
judge/justice of peace 
- 

Exhibit- 
P/27 to 
P/28 

Exhibit- 
P/29 to 
P/31 

Exhibit- 
P/32 to 
P/33 

Exhibit- 
P/34 to 
P/46 

Exhibit-
P/47 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

house  on  20.5.2015  at 
just after 12:30AM. 
Statement 
dated 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Mr.  Philip  Lumb  a 
who 
pathologist 
post 
carried 
the 
mortem 
Andre 
murdered 
Marshall. 
Statement 
dated 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Mr.  Andre  Horne  a 
ballistic expert.  

out 
of 

dated 
Statement 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Ms.  Fiona  Barrett  a 
scene 
crime 
at 
investigator 
Manchester Police. 
Statement 
dated 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Ms.  Jacqueline  French 
a forensic scientist. 

to 

to  P/46, 
seal 

dated 
Statement 
05.08.2016  made  by 
Mr.  Kate  Leonard,  a 
Barrister  of  England 
and Wales. 
Certificate 
authenticate 
statements  at  Exhibit 
issued 
P/2 
under 
and 
signature of Mr. Patrich 
the 
Joseph  one  of 
District 
Judges/Justices  of  the 
(Magistrate’s 
Peace 
at 
Court) 
sitting 
Manchester 
and 
Salford  Magistrate’s 
Court.  

20. 

In  respondent  No.1’s  writ  petition,  it  was  pleaded inter alia 

that  the  documents  tendered  in  evidence  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate  were  not  authenticated 

in  accordance  with 

requirement  of  Section  9  of  the  1972  Act.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.1, in his arguments, did not elaborate or explain as 

to  what  exactly  was  deficiency  in  the  authentication  of  the  said 

documents.  These  documents  were  authenticated  by 

the 

 
10 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

Magistrates  Court  at  the  Greater  Manchester  and,  therefore  the 

requirement of Section 9(2) had been fulfilled. Consequently, it is 

our  view  that  since  the  documents  produced  in  evidence  in 

support of the request for respondent No.1’s extradition satisfied 

the requirements of Section 9(2) of the 1972 Act, they could have 

been  taken  into  consideration  and  relied  upon  by  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  whether  a  prima facie  case 

had been made out in support of the requisition for the surrender 

of respondent No.1.  Respondent  No.1 did  not  take issue with  the 

genuineness in the request for his extradition to U.K.   

21. 

In  terms  of  Entry  No.18(5)(c)  in  Schedule-II  read  with  Rule 

3(3)  of  the  Rules  of  Business,  1973,  the  subject  of  admission  of 

persons  into  and  departure  of  persons  from  Pakistan,  including 

extradition  and  expulsion  from  Pakistan,  is  a  subject  to  be  dealt 

with  by  the  Interior  Division.  We  would  tend  to  agree  with  the 

learned Judge-in-Chambers that henceforth, in order to eliminate 

any doubt as to the genuineness of the request for extradition and 

the  affidavits,  depositions  and  other  documents  accompanying 

such  a  request  ought  to  be  produced  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate appointed pursuant to Section 7 of the 1972 Act by an 

officer  duly  authorized  by  the  Section  of  the  Ministry  of  Interior 

designated  to  deal  with  extradition  requests.  Furthermore,  we 

also  agree  with  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  that  the  Federal 

Government  ought  not  to  act  like  a  post  office  by  simply 

forwarding  an  extradition  request  to  an  Enquiry  Magistrate 

appointed pursuant to Section 7 of the 1972 Act.  

22.  When a requisition for the surrender of a fugitive offender is 

made to the Federal Government in accordance with Section 6 of 

the 1972 Act, the Federal Government, before issuing an order to 

an Enquiry Magistrate to inquire into the case in terms of Section 

7  of  the  1972  Act  is  expected  in  the  very  least  to  satisfy  itself  on 

the following matters:- 

i) 

Whether the requesting State is included in the list of foreign 

States  published  by  the  Federal  Government  in  the  official 

gazette  under  Section  3(1)  of  the  1972  Act,  with  which  an 

11 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

extradition  treaty  is  in  operation,  and  is  therefore,  a  treaty 

State for the purposes of the 1972 Act.  

ii)  Whether  the  offence,  which  the  fugitive  offender  is  alleged 

to have committed or for which he has been convicted in the 

requesting State, is specified in the declaration made by the 

Federal Government pursuant  to  Section 3(2) and (3) of the 

1972 Act. 

iii)  Whether  the  offence,  which  the  fugitive  offender  is  alleged 

to have committed or for which he has been convicted in the 

requesting  State,  is  an  “extradition offence”  as  defined  in 

Section  2(1)(a)  of  the  1972  Act  and  finds  mention  in  the 

Schedule to the said Act. 

iv)  Whether the request for the extradition of a fugitive offender 

has  been  made  to  the  Federal  Government  in  accordance 

with the manner prescribed in Section 6 of the 1972 Act. 

v)  Whether  the  Federal  Government  is  satisfied  in  terms  of 

Section 5(2)(a) of the 1972 Act that the offence in respect of 

which the surrender of a fugitive offender is sought is not of 

a political character. 

23.  Now,  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  has  taken  the  view 

that a fact deposed in an affidavit produced in evidence would be 

considered  admissible  if  the  deponent  appears  before  the  Court 

or  authority  before  whom  the  affidavit  has  been  submitted.  In 

holding  so,  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  placed  reliance  on 

Article  10A  of  the  Constitution  and  the  law  laid  down  by  the 

Superior  Courts  in  the  cases  of  Bank  of  Punjab  VS  M/s  Anmol 

Textiles Mills Ltd. etc. (2017 CLD 631), Muhammad Tabbasum VS 

Mehmood  (2017  CLC  1221  High  Court  AJK),  Abdul  Majeed  VS 

Abdur Rashid (PLD 2016 Lahore 383), Mst. Iqbal Bibi VS Learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  etc.  (2014  MLD  1206),  and  Bashir 

Ahmad  VS  Abdul  Wahid  (PLD  1995  Lahore).  Indeed  in  the  said 

judgments,  it  has been held inter alia  that where the deponent  of 

an affidavit produced before the Court does not appear before the 

Court to undergo the test of cross-examination, the facts deposed 

in the affidavit would be of no evidentiary value.  

 
12 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

24.  We have noted that none of the judgments referred to by the 

learned  Judge-in-Chambers  relate  to  extradition  proceedings 

under  the  provisions  of  the  1972  Act.  Additionally,  the  said 

judgments relate to the evidentiary value of an affidavit where the 

deponent does not appear before a Court to make a statement in 

support  of  the  facts  deposed  in  the  affidavit  or  to  be  cross-

examined during a trial as opposed to enquiry proceedings. 

25.  We find the observations of the learned Judge-in-Chambers 

to  the  effect  that  the  affidavit  produced 

in  support  of  an 

extradition request to be no evidentiary value unless the deponent 

is  produced  for  cross-examination  not  to  be  in  consonance  with 

the  law  laid  down  by  the  Superior  Courts.  In  the  case  of  Abdul 

Ghaffar  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLJ  1999  Lahore  348),  the 

Enquiry  Magistrate,  in  his  enquiry  report,  had  recommended  the 

petitioner to be extradited to United States of America (“USA”). In 

the  said  case,  the  prosecution  had  produced  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate depositions of special agents of the Drug Enforcement 

Agency  of  the  USA.  These  depositions  were  in  the  nature  of 

affidavits  sworn  by  special  agents  before  the  Magistrate,  District 

Court,  Eastern  District  of  Virginia  duly  verified  by  the  Attorney 

General.  The  prosecution,  without  formally  tendering  these 

depositions  in  evidence,  brought  them  on  record  to  be  read  as 

evidence  in  the  enquiry  proceedings  for  the  extradition  of  the 

petitioner  in  the  said  case.  The  petitioner  had  objected  to  the 

production  of  the  depositions  on  the  ground  that  without  the 

production of their deponents in the witness box and providing an 

opportunity  to  him  to  cross-examine  them,  the  depositions  could 

not  be  considered  as  evidence  in  the  enquiry  under  Section  8  of 

the  1972  Act.  The  said  objection  did  not  find  favour  with  the 

Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  which  dealt  with  the  same  in  the 

following terms:- 

“13.   The real controversy involved in the present case is as to 
whether for the purpose of an inquiry under Extradition Act, 1972, 
the examination of the witnesses proposed to be produced in 
proof of the charge at the trial to be held in a Foreign Country is 
necessary at the inquiry or their deposition in the nature of 
affidavits sworn before the concerned forum in such country was 
sufficient to measure the nature of allegations and the evidence 
in support thereof to ascertain the responsibility of an accused 

13 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

and justification of his extradition. The inquiry and trial are 
independently defined in the Criminal Procedure Code. Inquiry is 
different to the trial, which is conducted to find out the existence 
or otherwise of a prima facie case and is not equated with a 
regular trial by the concerned Court to give finding of guilt. 
14.   Taking the correct view of the matter, the law does not 
require the production of a witness from the country in which the 
trial is to be held. The only requirement is that the evidence 
proposed to be brought against a fugitive offender should be 
made available to the country from where the fugitive offender is 
required to be sent. The deposition of Faheem Ashraf in the 
nature of affidavit duly recorded before the Magistrate in Virginia 
and  certified  by  the  Attorney  General  produced  before  the 
Inquiry Magistrate sufficiently fulfilled the requirement of Section 
8(2) of the Extradition Act, 1972, and the personal appearance of 
the witnesses before the Inquiry Magistrate was not necessary. 
There being clear distinction between the trial and the inquiry, 
the requirement of law is that the inquiry proceedings should be 
as nearly as possible to the procedure for the trial before the 
Sessions Court, but it does not mean that the inquiry should be 
converted into trial.” 
(Emphasis added) 

26.  The  said  judgment  of  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  was 

upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgment reported as 

Abdul Ghaffar VS  Federation  of Pakistan (2000 SCMR  1536). The 

question as to whether the deponent of an affidavit filed in support 

of  an  extradition  request 

is  to  appear  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate was also considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 

the said judgment wherein it was inter alia held as follows:- 

“We find that the learned Judge in Chambers was quite right in 
opining that the personal appearance of witnesses before the 
Inquiry  Magistrate  was  not  necessary  in  that  the 
material/evidence brought against the petitioner, including the 
deposition of Faheem Ashraf in the form of an affidavit duly 
recorded before the Magistrate in Virginia, USA and certified by 
the  Attorney-General,  was  produced  before  the  Inquiry 
Magistrate and the same was in line with the requirements of 
section 8(2) of the Extradition Act, 1972.” 

27.  Through  the  judgment  reported  as  “Nasrullah  Khan  Henjra 

VS  Government  of  Pakistan”  (PLD  1994  S.C.  23),  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  decided  appeals  filed  by  three  different  fugitive 

offenders  who  had  challenged  judgments  passed  by  the  Hon'ble 

Lahore High Court dismissing writ petitions challenging reports of 

Enquiry  Magistrates  recommending  the  extradition  of  such 

fugitive  offenders.  Perusal  of  the  said  judgment  shows  that  a 

specific  objection  was  taken  to  the  report  of  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate on the ground that the Enquiry Magistrate should have 

 
 
14 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

examined  the  witnesses,  and  afforded  an  opportunity  to  the 

petitioner  to  cross-examine  them.  This  objection  did  not  find 

favour with the Hon'ble Supreme Court which spurned the same in 

the following terms:- 

"8. As already indicated, together with the requisitions for the 
surrender of the petitioners the diplomatic representative of the 
United States Government sent to the Federal Government a 
number of documents. These included affidavits of persons who, 
except in the case of Nasrullah Khan Henjra, had direct dealings 
and association with the petitioners in regard to the smuggling of 
heroin in the United States. These affidavits were placed on the 
record of the proceedings conducted by the learned Magistrate 
and by operation of section 9(1), ibid, were treated as evidence 
by  him.  Copies  of  these  affidavits  were  delivered  to  the 
petitioners and sufficient time was given to them before their 
statements under section 342, Criminal Procedure Code, were 
recorded.  The  petitioners  also  filed  written  statements  in 
refutation of the charges being levelled against them; however, 
they did not lead any evidence in defence. We are unable to find 
any  legal  defect  in  the  procedure  adopted  by  the  learned 
Magistrate." 

28. 

In the said case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court did not feel the 

need  to  require  the  officers  investigating  the  case  against  the 

fugitive offender or the witnesses whose affidavits/statements had 

been  produced 

in  evidence  to  appear  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate  for  the  purpose  of  cross-examination.  Moreover,  in 

paragraph  7  of  the  said  judgment  it  has  been  observed  that  the 

1972  Act  takes  notice  of  the  difficulty  which  the  requisitioning 

State  may  face 

in  producing  evidence  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate,  and  in  order  to  get  over  this  difficulty  a  special 

provision  has  been  made  in  Section  9(1)  of  the  1972  Act  for  the 

manner  in  which  evidence  is  to  be  produced  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate. 

29. 

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Akhtar  Malik  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan 

(1994  P.Cr.L.J.  229),  the  Division  Bench  of  the  Hon'ble  Lahore 

High  Court  addressed  the  question  as  to  whether  during  the 

enquiry proceedings before the  Enquiry Magistrate, the evidence 

produced against the fugitive offender was in accordance with the 

law, in the following terms:- 

“The definition of “evidence” as given in Qanun-e-Shahadat, 
1984, shows that the word “evidence” as used means statement 
of the witnesses and the documents. Therefore, it cannot be said 
that in the case in hand the evidence is not there, merely for the 
reasons that oral statement of witnesses have not been recorded. 

 
15 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

The documents are on the record and although were not formally 
tendered in evidence by the prosecution; the fact remains that 
the said material was on file within the knowledge of the accused 
who had been confronted therewith and who knew as to what 
material is to be used against them and had full opportunity to 
prove, that the allegations levelled in the material were false. The 
affidavits/documents  having  been  duly  authenticated  and 
attested by competent authorities/Courts of a foreign country 
were per se evidence in the case as per provisions of section 9 of 
the Act. Hence, the same can be used against the accused for 
prosecuting them and the said material is quite sufficient for 
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the accused persons 
are guilty of the offences alleged to have been committed by 
them.” 

The  said  judgment  of  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  was 

upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgment reported as 

“Nasrullah Khan Henjra VS Government of Pakistan” (supra).  

30.  Section 9 of the 1972 Act is in pari materia to Section  10 of 

the Indian Extradition Act, 1962. In the case of Sarabjit Rick Singh 

VS Union of India (2008 (2) SCC 417), it was held as follows:- 

“36.   In a proceeding for extradition no witness is examined for 
establishing an allegation made in the requisition of the foreign 
State. The meaning of the word “evidence” has to be considered 
keeping in view the tenor of the Act. No formal trial is to be held. 
Only  a  report  is  required  to  be  made.  The  Act  for  the 
aforementioned purposes only confers jurisdiction and powers of 
the Magistrate which he could have exercised for the purpose of 
making an order of commitment. Although not very relevant, we 
may observe that in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the 
powers of the committing Magistrate have greatly been reduced. 
He is now required to look into the entire case through a very 
narrow hole. Even the power of discharge in the Magistrate at 
that stage has been taken away.  
37…. 
38.     Section  10  of  the  Act  provides  that  the  exhibits  and 
depositions (whether received or taken in the presence of the 
person, against whom they are used or not) as also the copies 
thereof and official certificates of facts and judicial documents 
stating facts may, if duly authenticated, be received as evidence. 
Distinction must be borne in mind between the evidence which 
would be looked into for its appreciation or otherwise for a 
person guilty at the trial and the one which is required to make a 
report upon holding an inquiry in terms of the provisions of the 
Act. Whereas in the trial, the court may look into both oral and 
documentary evidence which would enable it to ask any question 
in respect of which the accused may offer explanation, such a 
detailed procedure is not required to be adopted in an inquiry 
envisaged  under  the  said  Act.  If  evidence  stricto  sensu  is 
required to be taken in an inquiry forming the basis of a prima 
facie opinion of the court, the same would lead to a patent 
absurdity. Whereas  in  a  trial  the  court  for  the  purpose  of 
appreciation of evidence may have to shift the burden from stage 
to stage, such a procedure is not required to be adopted in an 
inquiry. Even under the Code of Criminal Procedure existence of 

 
 
16 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

strong suspicion against the accused may be enough to take 
cognizance of an offence which would not meet the standard to 
hold him guilty at the trial.”  

31.  The  above-referred  dicta  of  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan  causes  us  to  hold  that  it  is  not  obligatory  for  the 

deponents  of  affidavits  filed  in  support  of  extradition  requests  to 

appear  as  witnesses  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  for  the 

purpose  of  cross-examination  on  the  facts  deposed  in  their 

affidavits. There is however no bar in the 1972 Act for the Enquiry 

Magistrate to require the presence of the deponent of the affidavit 

produced  in  support  of  an  extradition  request  in  the  event  the 

Enquiry  Magistrate  considers  such  presence  essential  so  as  to 

enable  him  to  form  an  opinion  that  a  prima facie  case  has  been 

made out for the extradition of a fugitive offender. 

32.  For the learned Judge-in-Chambers to hold that the Enquiry 

Magistrate  “should  also  call  the  Investigation  Officer  of  the 

requesting State, who inquired and investigated the crime in his 

own jurisdiction”  does  not,  in our view,  find  support in  any  of the 

provisions  of  the  1972  Act,  rather  goes  contrary  to  the  above 

referred  ratio  in  the  cases  of  Abdul  Ghaffar  VS  Federation  of 

Pakistan  (supra) and Nasrullah  Khan  Henjra  VS  Government  of 

Pakistan (supra). In  the  impugned  judgment,  reference  has  been 

made  to  a  few  judgments  of  the  Superior  Courts  showing  that 

witnesses  had  appeared  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  during 

extradition  proceedings.  We  have  had  the  opportunity  of  going 

through the said judgments but in none of them was it held that a 

witness on behalf of the requesting State or the Ministry of Interior 

appearing  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate,  had  to  be  cross-

examined  in  order  for  his  affidavit/testimony  to  be  admitted  in 

evidence. 

33. 

It  is  on  the  basis  of  the  insertion  of  Article  10A  in  the 

Constitution  that  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  held  that  “any 

fact deposed through affidavit has to be considered admissible if 

the deponent appears before the Court or Authority before whom 

the affidavit of facts has been submitted.” Indeed Article 10A of the 

Constitution  provides  that  for  the  determination  of  his  civil  rights 

 
17 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

and  obligations  or  in  any  criminal  charge  against  him,  a  person 

shall be entitled to a fair trial and due process. The writ petitioners 

before  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  had  not  challenged  any  of 

the provisions of the 1972 Act on the touchstone of Article 10A of 

the  Constitution.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  case  of  Nargis 

Shaheen  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  1993  Lahore  732),  the 

Full Bench of the Hon'ble Lahore High Court held inter alia that the 

provisions  of  the  1972  Act  were  not  illegal  or  ultra vires  the 

Constitution  and  that  they  were  in  accord  with  the  injunctions  of 

Islam  as  set  out  in  the  Holy  Quran  and  Sunnah  as  well  as  the 

intrinsic  object  of  International  Treaties  entered  into  by  a  Muslim 

State.  The  said  judgment  was  upheld  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  vide  judgment  reported  as  Nargis  Shaheen  VS 

Federation of Pakistan (1994 SCMR 1706).  

34. 

In the judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in suo 

moto  case  No.4/2010  (PLD  2012  SC  553),  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court  rejected  the  argument  that  the  issuance  of  a  show  cause 

notice  and  the  framing  of  a  charge  for  Contempt  of  Court  against 

the  respondent  would  violate  his  rights  under  Article  10A  of  the 

Constitution on the ground that the Court had formed a prima facie 

opinion  in  the  matter  by  initiating  suo moto  action  against  the 

respondent. Reference was made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to 

the judgment in the case of President VS Shaukat Ali (PLD 1971 SC 

585),  wherein  it  was  held  inter alia  that  a  preliminary  enquiry 

intended to determine whether a prima facie case had been made 

out  or  not  is  a  safeguard  against  the  commencement  of  wholly 

unwarranted final proceedings against a person. 

35. 

It  has  consistently  been  held  that  the  Magisterial  enquiry 

which is conducted pursuant to the request for extradition is not a 

trial. The said enquiry decides nothing about the innocence or guilt 

of  the  fugitive  offender.  The  main  purpose  of  the  enquiry  is  to 

determine  whether  there  is  a  prima facie  case  or  reasonable 

grounds,  which  warrant  the  fugitive  offender  to  be  sent  to  the 

requesting  State.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  is 

limited  and  is  not  concerned  with  the  merits  of  the  trial.  The 

provisions  of  the  1972  Act  do  not  contemplate  production  of  any 

18 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

oral  evidence  by  the  Federal  Government.  No  fact  needs  to  be 

proved by evidence. What is necessary is to arrive at a finding that 

a  prima facie  case  has  been  made  out  for  extradition  from  the 

depositions, statements, copies and other information which are to 

be  gathered  from  the  official  certification  of  facts  and  judicial 

documents  produced  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of 

Section 9 of the 1972 Act. 

36.  Now,  there  is  a catena of  case-law  specifically  dealing  with 

extradition  cases  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  the  proceedings 

before the Enquiry Magistrate under Section 8 (2) of the 1972 Act 

are  not  a  trial  but  an  enquiry.  Section  4(k)  of  the  Criminal 

Procedure  Code,  1898  provides  that  “enquiry”  includes  every 

enquiry  other  than  a  trial  conducted  under  the  Code  by  a 

Magistrate or a Court. The word “enquiry” as  used in the context 

of  Sections  6  and  7  of  the  1972  Act  has  been  explained  by  the 

Hon'ble Supreme  Court  in  the case  of  Muhammad  Azim  Malik VS 

Government of Pakistan (PLD 1989 SC 519) to be coextensive with 

the  power  of  the  Magistrate  1St  Class  to  hold  an  enquiry  into  an 

offence  whether  triable  by  himself  or  not.  It  was  also  explained 

that under the provisions of the  1972 Act, the  Enquiry  Magistrate 

conducts  an  enquiry  and  not  a  trial.  Additionally,  in  the  case  of 

Muhammad  Asim  Malik  VS  Anwar  Jalil  (PLD  1989  Lahore  279),  it 

was  held  that  the  enquiry  conducted  by  a  Magistrate  to  find  out 

the  existence  or  otherwise  of  a  prima facie  case  could  not  be 

equated with a regular trial by a Court of law.  

37.  Section 8(2) of the 1972 Act provides inter alia that when the 

fugitive  offender  appears  or 

is  brought  before  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate,  the  latter  “shall enquire into the case in the same 

manner, and have the same jurisdiction and powers, as nearly as 

may be, as if the case were one triable by a Court of Session and 

shall take such evidence as may be produced in support of the 

requisition and on behalf of the fugitive offender, including any 

evidence to show that the offence of which the fugitive offender is 

accused or alleged to have been convicted is an offence of a 

political character or is not an extradition offence.”  

19 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

38. 

In  paragraph  26  of  the  impugned  judgment,  the  learned 

Judge-in-Chambers,  after  referring  to  Section  8(2)  of  the  1972 

Act, held as follows:- 

“Hence, it can safely be concluded that enquiry proceedings 
before  the  enquiry  Magistrate  shall  not  be  a  summary 
proceedings,  rather  it  would  be  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
Sessions trial is conducted. In such eventuality, the enquiry 
Magistrate  shall  proceed  with  the  matter  like  a  trial  court, 
especially in the manner as a sessions Court conducts the trial of 
an accused. Hence, the Extradition Act, 1972 itself provides 
complete mechanism to the fugitive offender to defend himself 
against the requisition made by requesting State to the Federal 
Government for surrender of such fugitive offender. As such, the 
enquiry  Magistrate  shall  conduct  the  trial  after  giving  full 
opportunity of producing evidence to the parties i.e. requesting 
State (who is seeking requisition of fugitive offender) as well as to 
the fugitive offender and shall also adopt every mode to dig out 
the truth.” 

39.  With  utmost  respect  to  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers,  we 

cannot  bring  ourselves  to  subscribe  to  his  interpretation  of 

Section  8(2)  of  the  1972  Act.  In  our  view,  what  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate has to ascertain during the proceedings under Section 

8  of  the  1972  Act  is  whether  the  material  placed  before  him  is 

sufficient  to  establish  a  prima facie  case  to  justify  the  trial  of  a 

person  whose  extradition  is  sought.  This  is  of  course  in  cases 

where  the  fugitive  offender  has  not  been  convicted  by  a  Court  in 

the Treaty State seeking his requisition.  

40.  The mere fact that Section 8(2) of the 1972 Act requires the 

Enquiry  Magistrate  to  conduct  the  enquiry  in  a  manner  as  if  the 

case  was  one  triable  by  a  Sessions  Court  does  not  ipso facto 

make  the  proceedings  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  into  a  trial. 

The  scope  of  the  enquiry  to  be  conducted  by  the  Enquiry 

Magistrate in terms of Section  8(2) of the 1972 Act has  been well 

explained by the Division Bench of the Hon'ble Lahore High Court 

in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Asim  Malik  VS  Anwar  Jalil  (PLD  1989 

Lahore  279).  In  the  said  case,  the  Division  Bench  of  the  Hon'ble 

Lahore High Court held inter alia that the only pre-requisite for the 

Enquiry  Magistrate  was  to  ascertain  whether  on  the  basis  of 

material  placed  before  him  in  accordance  with  the  requirements 

of  the  1972  Act,  a  prima facie  case  as  understood  in  legal 

parlance was made out. Furthermore, it was held that the Enquiry 

 
20 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

Magistrate was  not  expected  to return a verdict  of guilt  upon the 

offender  and  that  what  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  was  obligated  to 

find  was  whether  a  triable  case  was  made  out.  Law  to  the  same 

effect  was  recently  laid  down  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of  Tahir 

Attique  Zarif  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2019  Islamabad 

483). 

41.  We find the interpretation of the learned Judge-in-Chambers 

placed  on  Section  8(2)  of  the  1972  Act  also  to  be  contrary  to  the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court’s interpretation of the said Section. In the 

case  of  Nasrullah  Khan  Henjra  VS  Government  of  Pakistan 

(supra),  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  paragraph  6  of  the  said 

report, after reproducing Section 8(2) of the 1972 Act, interpreted 

the same in the following terms:- 

“If after considering the material before him the Magistrate forms 
the opinion that a prima facie case has not been made in support 
of the requisition for the surrender of the fugitive offender he 
must discharge him and make a report to that effect to the 
Federal Government. But if on the other hand he comes to the 
conclusion that a prima facie case has been made out in support 
of the requisition he is required to send inter alia a report to the 
Federal Government and commit the fugitive offender to prison to 
await the orders of the Federal Government. (See section 10 of 
the Act). Under section 11, on receipt of the report from the 
Magistrate the Federal Government may, if it thinks fit, issue a 
warrant  for  the  surrender  of  the  fugitive  offender  to  the 
requisitioning country.” 

42.  The said interpretation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court would 

indicate  that  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  is  not  required  by  the 

provisions of the 1972 Act to conduct the enquiry proceedings like 

a criminal trial before a Sessions Court. It is not mandatory for the 

Enquiry  Magistrate  to  summon  witnesses  whose  depositions  or 

affidavits  accompany  the  request  for  extradition  or  the  Officer 

investigating  the  offence  against  the  fugitive  offender  in  the 

country  making  such  a  request.  Such  depositions  or  affidavits 

produced  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  are  to  be  treated  as 

evidence  by  operation  of  Section  9(1)  of  the  1972  Act.  What  is 

however  required  is  for  such  depositions  or  affidavits  and  other 

documents accompanying the request for extradition be delivered 

to  the  fugitive  offender  and  sufficient  time  be  given  for  the 

recording  of  his  statement  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  This  is 

 
21 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

implicit  in  the  observations  of  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in 

paragraph 8 of the judgment in the case of Nasrullah Khan Henjra 

VS  Government  of  Pakistan  (supra)  which  is  reproduced  herein 

below:- 

“As already indicated, together with the requisitions for the 
surrender of the petitioners the diplomatic representative of the 
United States Government sent to the Federal Government a 
number of documents. These included affidavits of persons who, 
except in the case of Nasrullah Khan Henjra, had direct dealings 
and association with the petitioners in regard to the smuggling of 
heroin in the United States. These affidavits were placed on the 
record of the proceedings conducted by the learned Magistrate 
and by operation of section 9(1), ibid, were treated as evidence 
by  him.  Copies  of  these  affidavits  were  delivered  to  the 
petitioners and sufficient time was given to them before their 
statements under section 342, Criminal Procedure Code, were 
recorded.  The  petitioners  also  filed  written  statements  in 
refutation of the charges being levelled against them; however, 
they did not lead any evidence in defence. We are unable to find 
any  legal  defect  in  the  procedure  adopted  by  the  learned 
Magistrate.” 

43. 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Azim  Malik  VS  Government  of 

Pakistan (PLD 1989 SC 519), an objection was raised on behalf of 

the  fugitive  offender  that  since  the  offence  which  was  alleged  to 

have  been  committed  by  the  fugitive  offender  was  triable  under 

the laws of Pakistan by a Court of Sessions, therefore, the Enquiry 

Magistrate had no jurisdiction under  Section 8  of the 1972 Act  to 

conduct  the  enquiry.  While  spurning  the  said  objection,  the 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  held 

that 

the  Enquiry  Magistrate 

“conducts an inquiry and not a trial and an inquiry, under the 

Criminal  Procedure  Code,  also  is  different  from  the 

trial.”Furthermore, in the case of Mst. Akhtar Malik VS Federation 

of Pakistan (1994 P.Cr.L.J. 229), an objection was taken on behalf 

of  the  fugitive  offender  that  the  enquiry  proceedings  were  not 

conducted  by  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  in accordance with Section 

8 of the 1972 Act inasmuch as neither was any charge framed nor 

was  any  evidence  recorded  nor  was  any  incriminatory  evidence 

on  the  basis  of  which  the  fugitive  offender  was  sought  to  be 

extradited,  put  to  him  portion-wise.  The  said  objection  was 

rejected by the Hon'ble Lahore High Court in the following terms:- 

“16. Arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners with 
regard to the holding of mode of inquiry as envisaged by the Act 
and as held by the learned Enquiry Officer are also misconceived. 

 
 
22 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

The provisions of section 8 of the Extradition Act read with Article 
9 of the Treaty clearly show that a Magisterial inquiry is to be held 
only to come to a prima facie conclusion as to whether a case 
against  the  petitioner  for  facing  trial  in  the  indictment  in 
pursuance whereof a request for extradition has been received, 
is  made  out  or  not.  An  inquiry  admittedly  has  a  different 
connotation than the “trial” as is clear from the definition of the 
“inquiry” as given in Criminal Procedure Code, I section 4(k), 
whereof defines the word “inquiry” as under:-- 

“Inquiry:  includes  every  inquiry  other  than  a  trial 
conducted under this Code by Magistrate or Court.” 

Arguments  addressed  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner to the effect that inquiry has to be held in accord with 
commitment proceedings, is not supported by the provisions of 
section 8 of the Extradition Act, 1972 read with Article 9 of the 
Treaty which provides that the inquiry has to be held in accord 
with  the  law  of  the  country  which  is  to  pass  an  order  of 
extradition. By virtue of section 9 of the Act, authenticated 
documents which have been relied upon by the learned Enquiry 
Officer as well as the respondents for recording of the report and 
passing of the impugned order have been made per se admissible 
and, therefore, on the basis of that material learned Enquiry 
Officer has rightly held that there is a prima facie case against 
the  accused  for  directing  them  to  face  trial.  Similarly,  the 
respondents have also rightly held that it is a fit case for passing 
of an order of extradition.” 

As  mentioned  above,  the  said  judgment  was  upheld  by  the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Nasrullah Khan 

Henjra VS Government of Pakistan (supra). 

44.  We have also observed that in the case of Muhammad Asim 

Malik  VS  Anwar  Jalil  (PLD  1989  Lahore  279),  quoted  in  the 

impugned judgment, it was held inter alia as follows:- 

“As said above, objections of the petitioner related to absence of 
a prima facie case for surrender of the fugitive offender; defects 
in the inquiry and its results and personal non-hearing by the 
Federal Government.  Extradition is a  special branch  of law 
dealing with a special subject. Therefore, provisions of section 9 
in so far as they allow the evidence of exhibits, depositions, 
statements on oath, duly authenticated in the manner provided 
therein to be received in the inquiry are an exception to the 
general procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure 
and the Evidence Act, 1872 Qanun-e Shahadat, 1984. Having 
regard to the object underlying the law of extradition and its kind 
and nature, the inquiry conducted by a Magistrate to find out the 
existence or otherwise of a prima facie case could not be 
equated with a regular trial by a Court of law. Therefore, the 
argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the 
provisions in Qanun-e-Shahadat prohibiting the reception of a 
particular kind of evidence, at inquiry, must prevail over the 
special provisions in the Extradition Act, with respects to him, is 
not correct and we see no force in it. At this stage, it may be 

 
  
 
 
 
23 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

observed that as to authentication of documentary evidence, 
learned counsel for the petitioner raised no dispute.” 
(Emphasis added) 

45. 

In the case of Kamlesh Babulal Aggarwal VS Union of India 

(2008 (104) DRJ 178), it was observed as follows:-  

“In our opinion, the power of the Magistrate in conducting an 
inquiry under Section 7 of the Act is akin to framing of the charge 
under Section  228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.  The 
requirement of Section 228 also is of a prima facie case. If the 
court  is  satisfied  that  a  prima  facie  case  is  made  out  for 
proceeding further (trial), then a charge has to be framed. The 
sifting of evidence at this stage is permissible only for a limited 
purpose to find out a prima facie case but the court cannot 
decide at this stage that the witness is reliable or not.” 

46. 

It  now  needs  to  be  determined  whether  the  evidence 

brought before the Enquiry Magistrate was sufficient to arrive at a 

finding  that  a prima facie  case  for  respondent  No.1’s  extradition 

to  U.K.  had  been  made  out.  The  allegations  against  respondent 

No.1  are  detailed  in  the  affidavit  of  Detective  Constable  Simon 

Murphy  (“Mr.  Murphy”)  employed  by  the  Greater  Manchester 

Police. Respondent No.1 is alleged to have murdered Mr. Marshall 

in  a gang  relating  shooting  in Manchester,  U.K.  Mr. Marshall was 

said  to  have  been  an  active  member  of  an  organized  criminal 

group  called  the “Gooch Gang”  which  operated  in  the  Moss  Site 

Area  of  Manchester.  His  body  was  found  by  a  member  of  the 

public on 20.05.2015 at  approximately 7:25 a.m. next to a parked 

car  on  Manor  Park  Road,  Manchester.  The  post-mortem 

examination had established that Mr. Marshall’s death was caused 

by at-least seven gunshot wounds. On 22.05.2015, Mr.  Marshall’s 

vehicle  was  discovered 

in  Manchester.  The  vehicle  was 

forensically  examined  on  23.05.2015.  Respondent  No.1’s  blood 

was discovered in the driver seat area on the back of the seat, the 

handbrake and the reverse of the sun visor.  

47. 

In  Mr.  Murphy’s  affidavit  (Exh.P.2  to  P.6),  it is  also  deposed 

that  on  26.05.2015,  respondent  No.1  was  interviewed  by  the 

police  as  a  suspect  under  caution.  He  denied  any  involvement  in 

Mr. Marshall’s  murder.  He,  however,  confirmed  that  he  had  been 

with  Mr.  Marshall  on  the  evening  of  19.05.2015.  He  asserted  that 

he had been dropped by Mr. Marshall at a parade of shops known 

 
 
 
24 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

as  the  Quadrant.  Respondent  No.1  was  noticed  by  the  police 

officers  to  have  an  injury  to  his  left  hand.  Respondent  No.1 

explained that the cause of injury was him playing with a flick knife 

while  he  was  in  Mr.  Marshall’s  car  and  had  accidentally  cut 

himself.  After  the  interview,  respondent  No.1  was  released  on 

police  bail.  A  ballistics  expert  is  said  to  have  examined  the 

photographs of the injury to respondent No.1’s left hand  and had 

provided a statement confirming that the injury is consistent with 

injuries  that  can  be  caused  by  the  recoiling  slide  of  a  pistol.  The 

cell site analysis of respondent No.1’s phone shows that at 11:10 

p.m.,  the  cell  was  cited  in  Urmston  from  the  same  mast  that 

services the location where Mr. Marshall’s body was found.  

48.  As  per  the  contents  of  the  said  affidavit,  respondent  No.1 

was  due  to  surrender  himself  on  23.07.2015  to  the  police  in 

Manchester  but  he  failed  to  do  so.  Respondent  No.1  is  said  to 

have been in a relationship with a woman named Debbie Sanyalou 

(“Ms. Sanyalou”). On 18.11.2015, the police is said to have visited 

Ms.  Sanyalou’s  address.  At  the  time  of  the  visit,  she  was  said  to 

have  been  engaged  in  a  face  time  conversation  with  respondent 

No.1.  The  IP  address  of  this  call  was  traced  to  Lahore,  Pakistan. 

On 17.02.2016, Ms. Sanyalou is said to have traveled to Lahore via 

Amsterdam.  Since  she  had  never  traveled  to  Lahore  prior  to  this 

and had no known contacts in Lahore, the police believed that the 

purpose of this visit was to visit respondent No.1.  

49.  Jacqueline  French  (“Ms.  French”)  had  carried  out  an 

examination  of  the  blood  swab  left  on  the  driver’s  seat  back, 

which was sampled and sent for DNA profiling. The purpose of the 

examination was to determine from whom the blood in the vehicle 

could  have  originated.  The  profile  obtained  is  said  to  have 

matched the DNA profile of respondent No.1 such that he could be 

the source of the blood in the vehicle. Ms. French, in her affidavit 

(Exh.P.32  to  P.33),  deposed  that  it  had  been  estimated  that  the 

chance of obtaining the matching of the DNA profiles if the blood 

had  originated  from  someone  other  than  and  unrelated  to 

respondent No.1 to be in the order of 1 in 1 billion. Her conclusion 

25 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

was that the blood found on the left shoulder of the driver’s back 

seat of the vehicle could have originated from respondent No.1.  

50.  Andre Horne (“Mr. Horne”), in his affidavit (Exh.P.27 to P.28) 

deposed inter alia  that on  04.09.2015,  he  had  received  a request 

from  Greater  Manchester  Police  to  examine  a  photograph  of  the 

left hand of a person with an injury  to the inside of the left thumb 

and that he was asked whether he was familiar with such injuries 

and whether he would  comment on how such an injury may have 

been  caused.  Mr.  Horne’s  comments  were  that  the  injury  may 

have  been  caused  by  the  recoiling  slide  of  a  pistol.  He  also 

explained  that  the  slides  of  some  pistols  have  sharp  edges 

capable  of  causing  cutting  injuries  and  that  this  type  of  injury 

occurs  most  often  when  the  weak  hand  is  used  to  support  the 

shooting hand by gripping the wrist of the shooting hand from the 

rear.  He  also  deposed  that  the  injury  may  also  be  caused  to  a 

strong  hand  if  the  pistol  is  gripped  in  an  unnatural  way  or  if  it  is 

forced  into  an  unnatural  position  during  a  defensive  act  by  the 

victim. Mr. Horne’s conclusion was that the injury observed to the 

left  thumb  of  respondent  No.1  was  consistent  with  being  caused 

by  the  slide  of  a  semi-automatic  pistol  if  the  pistol  was  gripped 

with  the  thumb  in  the  way  of  the  recoiling  slide.  He,  however, 

qualified  this  by  deposing  that  the  possibility  that  the  injury  had 

been  caused  in  another  way  could  not  be  excluded.  It  may  be 

mentioned that as per the contents of Mr. Horne’s affidavit, he has 

a  certificate  in  forensic  fire  arm  and  tool  mark  examinations  for 

specialists.  He  has  also  completed  an  Advance  Programme  in 

Forensic Criminalistics majoring in Forensic Ballistics.  

51.  The  documents 

filed  along  with  respondent  No.1’s 

extradition  request  before  the  Enquiry  Magistrate  include  the 

affidavit  sworn  by  Ms.  Fiona  Barrett,  who  is  a  Crime  Scene 

Investigator  for  the  Greater  Manchester  Police.  She  holds  a 

Diploma  in  Crime  Scene  Examination  from  the  University  of 

Durham. In her affidavit (Exh.P.29 to P.31), she has deposed inter 

alia  that  on  23.05.2015,  she  had  examined  a  vehicle  connected 

with  the scene of  a reported  murder  and  that  in conjunction  with 

two  other  forensic  scientists,  she  made  an  examination  of  the 

26 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

vehicle  and  took  photographs  and  recovered  tape  lifts,  swabs, 

blood swabs, a footwear mark, floor mats, a bullet head, etc. from 

the vehicle. It may be mentioned that one of the blood swabs (i.e. 

FMB/17) recovered by Ms. Fiona Barrett from the vehicle was the 

one with which Mr. Ahsan’s DNA profile had matched.  

52.  Along  with  the  extradition  request,  the  affidavits  of  Phillip 

Lumb (who had carried out a post mortem examination of the body 

of  Andre  Marshall-Smith),  Arron  Cooper  (who  had  heard  the 

gunshots when he was at his house, which was in close proximity 

to Manor Avenue), Rachel Xu (who was the first person to discover 

Andre  Marshall-Smith’s  body,  and  informed  the  Police),  and 

Seanie Lynch (who lived in the neighborhood where the gunshots 

were fired) were also filed. 

53.  Having gone through the documents filed in the proceedings 

before the Enquiry Magistrate, it is our considered view that prima 

facie  the  abovementioned  duly  authenticated  documents  are 

sufficiently  clinching  enough  to  rope  in  respondent  No.1  in  the 

commission of the alleged offence for the purposes of the present 

request. 

54. 

In  the  impugned  judgment  dated  15.05.2019,  the  learned 

Judge-in-Chambers had directed the F.I.A. to submit the complete 

documentary  record  after  obtaining  a  report  from  NADRA  as  to 

whether  respondent  No.1  had  changed  his  personal  details  and 

identity in order to conceal his presence in Pakistan. It is pertinent 

to bear in mind that neither in the proceedings before the Enquiry 

Magistrate  nor  in  the  grounds  of  his  writ  petition  did  respondent 

No.1  take  the  position  that  his  name  was  not  Mr.  Abdul  Qadir 

Ahsan or that he was not in fact the person whose extradition has 

been sought. Therefore, we are of the view that a direction to the 

F.I.A.  to  inquire  into  whether  respondent  No.1  had  changed  his 

identity was not warranted. 

55.  When  the  appeal  was  fixed  for  rehearing,  learned  counsel 

for respondent No.1 submitted that respondent No.1 was fed up of 

being  in  jail  and  that  he  was  ready  to  be  extradited  to  U.K.  This 

confirms that it was indeed respondent No.1, who was the person 

whose extradition had been sought.  

27 

I.C.A.No.320/2019 

56. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  appeal  is  allowed  and 

judgment  dated  15.05.2019  is  set-aside,  and  consequently  writ 

petition  No.4606/2018  filed  by  respondent  No.1  is  dismissed. 

There shall be no order as to costs.  

(AAMER FAROOQ)  

      JUDGE   

   (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
         JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2020 

             (JUDGE) 

 (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan 

Uploaded By  : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
