ORDER SHEET 
IN THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.4316of2019 

Asif Hayat 
VS
Family Judge,  Islamabad (West) and others 

Date of  order/  Order  with  signature  of  Judge and that  of  parties  or  counsel where 
Proceedln  s 
11.12.2019  Mr. Saad M. Hashmi, Advocate for the petitioner 

necessa  . 

Through the instant writ  petition,  the petitioner, 

Asif  Hayat,  impugns  the  interlocutory  order  dated 

28.09.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family 

Court, whereby  respondents  No.2 and 3's application 

for the amendment of the plaint was allowed. 

2. 

The 

record 

shows 

that  on  26.02.2018, 

respondents  No.2 and 3 filed  a suit for  dissolution  of 

marriage  on 

the  basis  of  Khu/a,  recovery  of 

maintenance  and  dowry  articles.  The  petitioner 

contested  the  said  suit  by filing  a  written  statement. 

Subsequently,  respondents  No.2  and  3 

filed  an 

application  for an amendment in the plaint  in order to 

incorporate  therein  a claim regarding  the recovery of 

articles  allegedly  taken  by  the  petitioner  from  the 

locker  in the bank. The learned  Family Court allowed 

the  said application  by holding  that  the  provisions  of 

the  Code of  Civil  Procedure,  1908 ("C.P .C. ")  are  not 

strictly  applicable  to  the  proceedings  before  the 

learned  Family Court,  and that  since  the  locker  had 

been operated  by the petitioner  in respondent  No.2's 

absence, the latter  was entitled  to claim the recovery 

of  her  property  in  the  locker.  The  said  order  dated 

28.09.2019 has been assailed by the  petitioner  in the 

instant writ  petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted 

that  respondents  No.2 and 3  were  seeking to change 

the  nature  and  complexion  of  the  suit  by  filing  the 

application  for  amendment in the  plaint; that  in effect 

2 

W.P.No.4316  /2019 

respondents  No.2 and 3 were  seeking  a  declaration 

from the learned Family Court that the contents of the 

locker were respondent No.2's property;  and that the 

learned  Family Court  did  not  have the jurisdiction  to 

pass a declaratory  decree.  Learned  counsel for  the 

petitioner  prayed for the writ  petition  to be allowed in 

terms  of  the  relief  sought  therein.  In  making  his 

submissions, 

learned  counsel  for 

the  petitioner 

placed  reliance  on  the  judgment  reported  as  PLO 

2011SC260. 

4. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioner  and  have  perused  the 

record  with  his able assistance. The facts  leading to 

the  filing  of the  instant  petition  have been set  out  in 

sufficient  detail  in  paragraph  2  above  and  need not 

be recapitulated. 

5. 

Since the  impugned order  dated  28.09.2019 is 

an interlocutory  order,  I  am not inclined to go into the 

merits  of 

the  case 

lest 

it  may  prejudice 

the 

petitioner's  case before the learned Family Court. 

6. 

As  Section  14(3)  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family 

Courts  Act,  1964 ("the  1964 Act")  expressly  bars  a 

right  of  appeal  or  revision  against  an  interim  order 

passed  by  a  Family  Court,  the  same  cannot  be 

circumvented  by challenging such an interim order  in 

the  Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court.  A 

party  aggrieved  by such an interim  order  has to wait 

until  a Family Court  passes a final  order  and then to 

challenge  it  in an appeal. This  is because an interim 

order  merges  into  the  final  verdict.  The  purpose 

behind  barring  an  appeal  or  a  revision  against  an 

interim  order  of the  learned  Family Court  is to  avoid 

delays in disposal of the cases by the  learned Family 

Court.  Since the  suit  instituted  by  respondents  No.2 

and  3  is  for  dissolution  of  marriage  on the  basis  of 

Khu/a,  recovery  of  maintenance  and  dowry  articles, 

3 

W.P.No.4316  /2019 

the  final  decree  that  may be  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge,  Family  Court  would  be  appealable  under 

Section  14 of the  1964 Act.  Reference  in this  regard 

may be made to the following  case law:- 

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Syed  Saghir  Ahmad  Naqvi  VS 

Province  of  Sindh  (1996  SCMR  1165),  it  has 

been held as follows:- 

"The statute  excluding a right  of appeal from 
the  interim  order  cannot  be  passed  by 
bringing  under attack  such interim  orders  in 
Constitutional jurisdiction.  The party  affected 
has to wait till it matures into a final order and 
then to attack  it in the proper  exclusive forum 
created  for  the  purpose  of  examining such 
orders. 11 

(ii) 

In  the  case  Mumtaz  Hussain  alias  Butta  VS 

Chief  Administrator  of  Auqaf.  Punjab  (1976 

SCMR 450), it has been held as follows:- 

~~s the said  Ordinance  has  taken  away  the 
right  of  petitioner  to  interim  relief,  learned 
counsel  submitted  that  this  was  a  ground 
which  entitled  the petitioner  to prosecute  a 
writ  petition  despite  the  pendency  of  the 
proceedings  on 
the  District  Court.  The 
argument  is  misconceived  because  the  writ 
jurisdiction  of  the superior  Courts cannot be 
invoked  in  aid  of  injustice  and  in  order  to 
defeat the express provisions  of the statutory 
law. 11 

(iii) 

In the  case of  Mst. Maham Shabbir  VS Salman 

Haider  (2014 CLC 330), the  Hon'ble  Islamabad 

High Court held as follows:- 

Its  jurisdiction 

"9.  . . .  High  Court  in  exercise  of  its  writ 
jurisdiction  is not sitting  as a Court of appeal, 
to 
or  court  of  revision. 
interfere  on  the  point  of  fact  is  limited. 
Interlocutory  order  if  does  not  suffer  from 
any illegality,  malafide  or  is  not  in  excess of 
jurisdiction  or lack  of exercise of jurisdiction 
or not based on misreading, misconstruing  or 
discarding  of  the  evidence  and  material  on 
record  cannot be challenged in constitutional 
jurisdiction.  Nevertheless,  the  facts  of  each 
case are  to be considered  separately and no 
uniform  principle  can  be  determined  for 
exercising the writ jurisdiction.  11 

4 

W.P.No.4316 /2019 

7. 

It  is  my  view  that  exceptional  circumstances 

which  could  justify  invoking  the  jurisdiction  of  the 

High  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution 

would  be  when  the  order  or  action  assailed  was 

palpably without jurisdiction,  malafide,  void or  coram 

non Judice.  The  order  impugned  in  this  petition  is 

clearly  interlocutory  in nature  and does not dispose 

of  the  entire  case  before  the  learned  Family Court. 

The  impugned order  is  neither  without  jurisdiction, 

nor  malafide,  void  or  coram  non  Judice  so  as  to 

warrant  interference in the Constitutional jurisdiction 

of this Court under Article  199 of the Constitution. 

8. 

The  order  dated  28.09.2019,  being  purely 

interlocutory  in  nature,  could  not  be  subjected  to 

challenge  by  filing  a  Constitutional  petition  before 

this  Court  as  it  would  amount  to  defeating  the 

legislative  intent  behind  Section  14(3)  of  the  1964 

Act.  Therefore,  I  am not  inclined  to  interfere  in the 

said  interlocutory  order  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge, Family Court. 

9. 

Since  I  do  not  find  the  pre-requisites  for 

interference  in the  Constitutional jurisdiction  of  this 

Court  with  the  impugned order  dated  28.09.2019 to 

be  satisfied  in  the  case  at  hand,  the  instant  writ 

petition 

is  dismissed  as  not  maintainable.  The 

petitioner will be at liberty to challenge the said order 

dated 28.09.2019 in an appeal against the final order 

passed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family Court,  if  the 

occasion arises for  doing so. There shall be no order 

as to costs. 

QamarKhan* 

(MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

