1 

Form  No:  HCJD/C 
ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 

JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Case  No: Writ Petition  No.456 of 2022 

Saif ur Rehman  Khan 
VS 

Special  Judge Accountability  Court-I etc. 

Petitioner by:  Mr. 

Muhammad 

Ahsan 

Bhoon, 

Advocate. 

Respondents  by: Sardar  Muzaffar Ahmed  Khan,  Deputy 
Prosecutor  General  NAB. 
Syed 
Director/1.0.  NAB. 

Jamil  ur  Rehman,  Assistant 

Date  of Decision: 

05.04.2022 

AAMER  F AROOQ,  J.- 

The  petitioner  (Saif  ur  Rehman 

Khan)  seeks  bail  after  arrest  in  Reference  filed  against  him  by 

National  Accountability  Bureau 

(NAB)  which  has  not  been 

numbered  yet  or taken  up  for proceedings. 

2. 

The  case  of NAB  against  the  petitioner  is that  he  floated  a 

Ponzi  scheme  by  way  of  inviting  investors  from  general  public 

on  social  media  in  promise  of  hefty  return  and  did  not  pay  any 

profit  or  the  principal  investment  amount.  It  is also  the  allegation 

that  the  scheme  was  floated  and  being  run  in violation  of various 

laws  of the  country. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner, 

inter  alia,  contended 

that  the  investigation  against  the  petitioner  stands  concluded  and 

2 

W.P. No.456/2022 

he  is  no  more required  for the same; that  filing of the Reference 

in itself reflects the fact that the investigation stands concluded. It 

was contended that even otherwise the case against the petitioner 

is  one  of  further  inquiry  inasmuch  as  the  allegation  is  one  of 

cheating public  at large and the concept of cheating  is defined in 

Section  415  PPC  and  in  order  to  establish  the  same  actus  reus 

and  mens  rea  is  to  be  proved  which  is  a  matter  for  trial.  He 

placed reliance on the judgment  of the Hon'ble  Supreme Court of 

Pakistan  to  show  that  in  such  facts  and  circumstances  the 

petitioner  is  entitled  to  remedy  of bail.  Reliance  was  placed  on 

the  case  titled  Dr.  Waqar Hameed  v.  The  State  (2020  SCMR 

321)  &  Rafiq  Haii  Usman  v.  Chairman  NAB  (2015  SCMR 

1575). 

4. 

Learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  NAB,  inter  alia, 

contended  that  the  scam  involved  sum  of  Rs.16.9  billion  and 

there  are  more  than  5800  claimants.  It  was  contended  that  the 

Reference  was  sent  by  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of 

Pakistan  (SECP)  under  Section  41 B  of  The  Securities  and 

Exchange  Commission of Pakistan Act,  1997 (the Act) as well as 

the Reference  from State Bank of Pakistan. It was contended that 

the  petitioner  ran  Ponzi  scheme  B4U  group  and  the  companies 

are not registered.  It was contended that even otherwise  law does 

not  permit  running  such  a  scheme  by  inducing  public  to  invest 

money for high returns. 

3 

5. 

Arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 

W.P.  No.456/2022 

have  been  heard  and  the  documents  placed  on  record  examined 

with  their  able  assistance. 

6. 

The  gist  of  prosecution's  case  against  the  petitioner  has 

been  mentioned  hereinabove,  therefore,  need  not  be  reproduced. 

The  case  against  the  petitioner  is  of  Section  9(ix)  and  (x)  of the 

National  Accountability  Ordinance,  1999.  In case  of Section  9(a) 

(ix)  the  offence  is  constituted  if a  person  committed  cheating  as 

defined 

in  Section  415  PPC  and  thereby  dishonestly 

inducing 

members  of  the  public  to  deliver  any  property  including  money 

or  valuable  security  to  any  person  and  under  Section  9(a)(x)  ibid 

if  commits  the  offence  of criminal  breach  of trust  as  defined  in 

Section  405  PPC  with  regard  to  any  property  including  money  or 

valuable  security  entrusted  to  him  by  members  of  the  public  at 

large. 

It  is  an  admitted  position 

that 

the  petitioner 

invited 

investors  but  was  also  paying  the  money  to  his  investors  albeit  it 

was  all  illegal.  In  such  eventuality  whether  he  acted  dishonestly 

or  had  intention  of  depriving  the  investors  from  their  principal 

amount 

is  something 

to  be  determined  at  the  stage  of  trial. 

Likewise,  whether 

the  offence 

in  question  constitutes  one  of 

breach  of  trust  inasmuch  as  there  was  an  entrustment  by  the 

public  at  large  also  needs  to  be  examined  during  the  course  of 

trial.  In  light  of the  definition  of criminal  breach  of trust  as  well 

as  cheating  as  provided 

in  Sections  405  and  415  PPC 

the 

question  of  dishonesty 

is  to  be  established 

through  evidence. 

Learned 

counsel 

for 

the  petitioner,  during 

the  course  of 

4 

W.P. No.456/2022 

arguments  highlighted, 

in  particular, 

illustration  provided  m 

paragraph  (g) to  Section  415  ibid which  reads  as follows: 

"A  intentionally  deceives  Z  into  a  belief that  A 

means  to  deliver  to  Z  a  certain  quantity  of indigo 

plant  which  he  does  not  intend  to  deliver,  and 

thereby  dishonestly  induces  Z  to  advance  money 

upon the faith  of such delivery. A  cheats;  but  if A, 

at  the  time  of  obtaining  the  money,  intends  to 

deliver the indigo plant,  and afterwards breaks his 

contract  and does not deliver it,  he does not cheat, 

but  is  liable  only  to  a  civil  action for  breach  of 

contract. " 

7. 

Again  the  perusal  of  illustration  shows  that  the  question 

whether 

there  was  an  intention 

to  deprive 

the  person  of  his 

property  needs  to  be  established 

through  evidence.  It was  also 

agitated  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 

that  all  the 

properties  of  the  petitioner  have  been  frozen  which  fact  was 

acknowledged  by  the  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  NAB 

and  in  this  behalf  it  was  contended 

that  30  properties  of  the 

petitioner  are  available  and  have  been  secured  including  the  bank 

accounts.  It  was  also  brought  to  the  knowledge  of the  Court  that 

the  names  of  the  petitioner  and  his  family  are  on  Exit  Control 

List.  This  Court  was  apprised  that  the  value  of the  properties 

in 

the  name  of  petitioner 

including  money  in  bank  accounts  are 

sufficient  to  meet  the  claims.  In  this  behalf  the  present  claims  are 

5 

W.P. No.456/2022 

m  sum  of  Rs.4  billion  and  the  conservative  value  of  assets  is 

approximately  the  same. 

8. 

In  view  of  the  above  facts  and  circumstances, 

it  is  almost 

evident 

that 

the  scheme  was  being 

run  unlawfully  by  the 

petitioner  and  the  alleged  scam  runs  in  billions;  however, 

the 

question  of  illegality  of  the  scheme  is  subject  matter  before  the 

SECP  in  which  the  petitioner  has  already  been  penalized.  As 

noted  above, 

the 

investigation 

stands  concluded 

and 

the 

prosecution 

still  has  to  prove 

its  case  against 

the  petitioner 

establishing  the  assertion  made  in the  Reference  which  makes  the 

case  against  him  one  of further  inquiry.  Moreover,  the  continuous 

incarceration  of  the  petitioner  shall  not  serve  any  purpose.  It  is 

trite  law  that  the  bail  should  not  be  refused  as  a  matter  of 

punishment  and  where  a  person  is  entitled  to  the  relief  ought  to 

be  granted.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  case  titled  Manzoor  v.  The 

State  (PLD  1972 SC 81). 

9. 

For  the  above  reasons,  the  instant  petition  is  allowed  and 

the  petitioner  is admitted  to  bail  after  arrest  subject  to  furnishing 

bail  bonds  in the  sum  of Rs.1,000,000/-  (rupees  one  million  only) 

with  one  surety  in  the  like  amount  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 

learned  Trial  Court.  The  petitioner 

shall  also  surrender  his 

passport  as  a condition  of bail.  In case  the  NAB  further  wishes  to 

confront  any  document  to  the  petitioner  in any  new  complaint  or 

further  has  to  investigate  the  matter  they  may  summon  him  for 

6 

W.P.  No.456/2022 

the  said  purpose  and  if he  fails  to  do  the  needful  an  appropriate 

application  for  cancellation  of bail  may  be  agitated. 

(SARDAR EJAZ ISHAQ KHAN) 
JUDGE 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

•M.NAVEED• 

