a

ORDIR SHEET.
I
GH
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

Crl. Misc. No. 67glBCl2OI9

Muhammad  Abbas

S. No. of
order/
proceedlngs

and that of partles  or

Date of
order/
Proceedlnsr

VS
Mst. Raheela Chaudhry etc.
Order wtth stgnature  of Judge
counsel where necessary.
(Og)  13.11 .2OL9  Barrister Muhammad  Hassan Alam and Mr.
Mohammad  Shoaib Butt, Advocates for  the
petitioner.
Mr.  Gulbaz Mushtaq, Advocate  alongrrith
respondents.
Ms. Saima  Naqvi,  State Counsel.
Shahzad ASI,
Sohaib Pasha,  ASI.
Parveen  Akhtar, HC,  P.S Margalla,  Islamabad.

MOHSIN  AKIITAR  KAYANI J.  Through this

criminal  miscellaneous,  petitioner  has prayed for

cancellation  of pre-arrest bail granted  to respondents

No. 1 to 3 by learned Additional Sessions  Judge

(West),  Islamabad  vide order dated LT.O9.2OL} in
case FIR No.l46/2OL9,  dated 10.08.2019, U/s
420,468,47  l, PPC,  P.S Margalla, Islamabad.
3.  Brief facts referred in the instant case are that

the above  referred  FIR has been registered on the

complaint  of present petitioner  with the allegation

that he has dispute with respondents  No. 1 to 3 and

FIR No. 363 dated O3.IO.2O1S U/s 406lg4,  p.S

Ramna, Islamabad  has been got registered by him

against  respondents  No. 1 to 3. The complainant has

further  alleged that Marl.rkh  Ali/respondent  No.3 in

connivance with Mst. Raheela Chaudhry/respondent

2

Crl. Misc.  No. 673-BC.2019

No.l and Kashaan Ali/respondent  No.2 as well as
Nikah Khawan eari Muhammad Gur of Jamia masjid

Al-Quresh, Main Service Road,  Mehra Abadi G_ll/2,
Islamabad  and witnesses namely as Muhammad
Hussain, Muhammad  Ishfaq, Liaquat Ali  have
prepared a forged and fictitious  Nikahnama,  which

was not registered in any union council and on the

basis of' said Nikahnama,  Marukh Ali craims to be
the wife of present  petitioner and filed a false and
frivolous suit  for  recovery  of  Haq Mehr and
maintenance  before the learned Family court,

Islamabad, whereby  obtained ex-parte decree in her

favour.  The complainant  when  came  to know about

the said fraud, has filed application  for setting-aside

the ex-parte  proceedings,  which  was accepted  by the

learned Family  court, Islamabad, hence instant FIR

has been  lodged.
3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner  contends  that
respondents  No. 1 to 3 have prepared  forged and
fictitious document/Nikahnama,  which has been

used by them in the Family  court in the said suit for

recovery of maintenance  and Haq Mehr and as such

respondents  in connivance with other  witnesses  have

prepared  the forged document/Nikahnama  and they
have failed to produce the original document  of
Nikahnama  as  welr as  witnesses before  the
Investigation  officer,  whereas  learned  court of
Additional  Sessions Judge have granted the pre_
arrest bail to the respondents  No. 1 to 3 through  the
impugned order without adhering to  the legal

.J

Crl. Misc.  No. 673-BC.2019

3

propositions of law and the impugned order is

perverse and illegal.
4.  Conversely, learned counsel for respondents
No. I  to 3 contends  that as per the allegation  of
complainant/petitioner, he came to know about the
factum of Nikah in  the Family  Court and the
document in  question is  subjudice  before the

competent Court having  jurisdiction,  which could not

be considered  as an incriminating  evidence against

present respondents and the subject matter could

only be decided by the Family Court and very act of

registration of FIR is illegal.  He further contends that

the learned Additional  Sessions Judge has granted

the pre-arrest bail while considering  the mala-fide  on

the part of complainant,  who has yet to record his
evidence  before the Family  Court in  order to
substantiate  his  plea,  therefore, in  such
circumstances,  pre-€urest  bail has rightly been

granted to the respondents.

5.  Arguments  heard, record perused.
6.  From the perusal of record, it reveals  that the
entire  case revolves around the Nikahnama dated
06.06.2014  executed between Muhammad

Abbas/petitioner  and Marukh Ali/respondent  No.3,

the said document was used by Marukh Ali in the
Family Suit titled as "Marukh Ati VS Muhammad.
Abbas" for recovery  of maintenance  and dower
articles  and obtained judgment and decree  in her
favour, which was set-aside  and matter is pending

before  Family court.  The respondent  No.3 has taken

a specific plea and stance that she has entered into

4

Crl. Misc.  No. 623-BC.2019

Nikah with  Muhammad Abbas and even the
document brought on record  by the respondent  No.3
is  forged and fictitious, whereby the  originat
Nikahnama was not produced before  Investigation

officer, despite  the fact that the same  was referred in
the Family suit as Exh.p4, which was returned  by

the Family  Court  vide order dated 13.03.201g.
7.  In addition  to above, the petitioner  has also fired
a suit for jactitation of marriage titled "Muhammad

Abbas VS Marukh  Ali etc., which is also pending
before Family Court and as such question of
execution  of Nikah  is yet to be determined  by the

Family  court and the requirement  of pre-arrest bail
is  visible from the record, which was rightly

appreciated by the learned Additional  sessions  Judge
in the impugned  order.  The petitioner has failed to
point out any perversity,  illegality  in the impugned

order and even respondents  No. I  to 3 have not

abused the process  of law nor violated  the terms  and

conditions of the bail, even not tempered with the

evidence  of this case,  therefore,  all the requirements
of cancellation of bail in terms of Section 4gT(Sl

Cr.P.C are lacking in this case.
8.  As for as submissions of fake document  i.e.

Nikahnama  before  the Family court in the judicial
proceedings is concerned,  it is settled law that any
forged document  if  submitted  before the judicial

proceedings, the matter should  have been settled

through  the proceedings  U /s 476 Cr.p.C  read with
195 Cr.P.C and the findings  of learned  Family Court
would be considered in the criminal case and in

5

Crl. Misc.  No. 673-8C.2019

these circumstances respondents No. I  to 3 are
entitled for grant of pre-arrest  bail. It is well settled
law that parameters for canceflation  of bail are
different  from parameters for grant of bail. Bail
granting order can be recalled if the same  is perverse,
illegal or there is misuse  of bail by the accused
person, but  in  the  instant matter all  these
ingredients  are missing.
8.  In view of above, the pre-arrest  granted  to the
respondents  No. I  to 3  could not be recalled,

therefore, instant criminal miscellaneous  petition  is

misconceived  and sarne is hereby dlsmlssed.

(MOHS

JUDGE

,), **

