ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISIAMAllAQ  HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Crlmlnal Appeal No. 102/ 2018 

Syeda Tahireen Fatima 
VS
The State and another 

Appellant by: 

Respondent No.2 by: 

State by: 

Mr. Khurram Mehmood Qureshi, 
Advocate. 

Mr. Muhammad Fakhar Hayat Awan, 
Advocate. 

Mr. Hammad Saeed Dar, State 
Counsel with Mr. Shahid Warraich, 
Sub-Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

15.09.2020 

Ghulam Azam Qambranl.  J.:  This  appeal  has  been  filed 

against  the  impugned judgment  dated  27.09.2016  passed  by the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-V,  Islamabad-East,  whereby 

the  respondent/  accused was  acquitted  from  the  charge,  in  case 

F.l.R  No.50 dated 26.05.2015, under Sections 324,  109, 34 P.P.C 

and  25-D  of  Telegraph  Act,  1885,  registered  at  Police  Station 

Khanna, Islamabad. 

2. 

Briefly  stated  facts  of the  prosecution  case  are  that the  on 

the  application  of  petitioner/  complainant  above-mentioned  F.l.R 

was  registered,  wherein,  she  alleged 

that 

the  respondent/ 

accused  followed  her  vehicle  and  the  respondent  Sohail  Altaf 

opened  two  fires  shots  with  pistol  at  her which  landed  on  mirror 

and  door  of  the  car, wherein,  she was travelling  but  miraculously 

saved. However, she identified Sarfaraz and Sohail who had pistol 

in  their  hand.  Motive  behind  the  said  incident  was  that  she  had 

filed  family  suits  against  her  husband  and  she  was  continuously 

receiving threat calls from his husband and others, and has further 

alleged  that  the  respondent/  accused  Sohail  and  others,  at  the 

behest of her husband, tried to kill her. 

2 

"Crl. Appeal No. 102 of  2018" 

3. 

After  registration of the  F.l.R.  investigation was  carried out; 

during 

the  course  of 

investigation,  respondent  surrendered 

himself, joined  the  investigation  with  the  plea  that  at  the  time  of 

alleged  occurrence,  he was  out  of  country  and  in  support  of  his 

contention  produced  his  original  passport.  Thereafter, 

the 

petitioner/  complainant  filed  an application,  which  was  made  part 

of  the  challan  wherein  she  had  mentioned  that  the  person  who 

made fires  at  her was  looking like the  respondent  namely  Sohail 

and  had further  mentioned that  it was  a  service  road where there 

was  dim light. The  investigation officer  has also verified the travel 

history of the respondent/ accused through the record of F.l.A. 

4. 

After  completion  of  the  investigation,  report  under  Section 

173 of Cr.P.C., was submitted before the learned Court of Judicial 

Magistrate, Section-30, Islamabad-East. The respondent/ accused 

and  co-accused  Sarfaraz Ahmed  filed  applications  under  Section 

249-A  Cr.P.C  before 

the 

learned 

trial  Court,  which  were 

dismissed,  vide  order  dated  21.05.2016.  Feeling  aggrieved  from 

the  dismissal  order,  both  filed  separate  revision  petitions  before 

the 

learned  Court  of  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-V, 

Islamabad-East. The  learned Court of Additional  Sessions Judge, 

after  hearing the  parties accepted the  revision  petition  of  present 

respondent, whereby,  he was acquitted from the charge whereas, 

the  revision  petition  filed  by  the  accused,  Sarfaraz  Ahmed,  was 

dismissed.  The  petitioner/  complainant  through  her  attorney  has 

filed the instant acquittal appeal. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  contended  that  the 

impugned order is against the law, facts and circumstances of the 

case; that two crime empties were  recovered during the course of 

investigation  and 

there 

is  statement  of  a  witness  namely 

Muhammad  Niaz.  The  learned  counsel  further  argued  that  the 

respondent  is  nominated with  a  specific  role; that  still the  learned 

trial  Court  has  not  examined  the  prosecution  witnesses  at  a 

premature stage, the application under Section 249-A Cr.P.C was 

3 

"Cr/. Appeal No. 102 of  2018" 

allowed 

in 

favor  of  the  respondenU  accused  resulting  into 

miscarriage  of  justice.  Lastly,  prayed  for  the  acceptance  of  the 

instant appeal with the direction to the learned trial Court to record 

the statement of witnesses. 

6. 

Per  Contra,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  opposed 

the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant stating that 

the appeal itself is not competent on the ground that the same has 

not been filed  by the complainant herself; that the appeal  in  hand 

was 

filed  on  04.11.2016  and 

thereafter  on  11.12.2018, 

Miscellaneous  Application  No.513/2018  was 

filed  seeking 

permission  to  sign  the  memo  of  appeal  by  the  complainanU 

appellant, which was not pressed and the same was dismissed as 

withdrawn vide Court order dated  18.12.2018; that the appeal has 

been  filed  through  Muhammad  Niaz  who  is  stated  to  be  the 

attorney  for  complainant  Syed  Tahireen  Fatima;  that  in  criminal 

cases,  filing  of  appeal  through  attorney  would  not  be  competent; 

that without signatures of the appellant, it  has been filed; that prior 

to alleged incident respondent was at United Kingdom, admittedly, 

he was  not at the  spot at the time of alleged occurrence; that the 

respondent  has  been  malafidly involved  in  the  case;  that  when  it 

came  into the  knowledge of complainant that  the  respondent  has 

produced documentary  evidence that  he was  out of country, then 

she  made  a  statement  on  08.06.2015,  to  the  police  that  the 

person  who  fired  at  her  was  likely  to  be  the  respondent;  that 

number  of  opportunity  were  provided  to  the  complainant  for 

recording  of  her  statement  and  for  production  of  any  evidence 

before  the  Court  but  she  failed;  that  there  is  no  evidence  on 

record  against  the  respondent;  that  there  was  no  probability  of 

conviction of the  respondent; that the acquittal of respondent is  in 

accordance  with  law,  warrants  no  interference  and  lastly,  urged 

for dismissal of the instant appeal. 

7. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

4 

"Crl. Appe•I  No. 102 of  2018" 

8. 

Minute  perusal of the  record  reveals that  F.l.R  No.50/2015 

was  registered under Section 324, 109, 34 P.P.C, 25-D Telegraph 

Act  at  Police Station  Khanna, Islamabad, by the appellant against 

the  respondent  and  some  other  accused  person.  During  the 

course of investigation, only two empties had been recovered and 

in  proof  of  the  allegation,  there  is  only  the  statement  of  one 

Muhammad Niaz who was stated to be the driver of the appellant. 

The  investigation  was  carried  out  and  initially  the  police  reached 

to a  conclusion that  a  fake and concocted  report had been made, 

on the  basis whereof,  a  final  report was  prepared  on  25.02.2017 

as  no  case  was  made  out.  During  the 

investigation, 

the 

respondent  surrendered  himself  before  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad-East, for  the  grant  of  pre-arrest  bail, 

which  was  confirmed.  The  respondent  also  appeared  before  the 

police  by  submitting  documentary  evidence  in  the  shape  of  his 

passport with  the  plea that  at the  relevant time  he was  in  United 

Kingdom  and  was  not  in  the  Pakistan.  The  contention  of  the 

respondent  was  confirmed  through  the  record  of  F.l.A  and  his 

travel  history also  confirmed that  he was  not inside the  country.  I 

have  also  gone  through  the  supplementary  statement  dated 

08.06.2015 made by the appellant wherein, she has clearly stated 

that  the  person  who  fired  at  her  was  looking  like  respondent/ 

Sohail  Altaf.  The 

record 

further 

reveals 

that 

the  alleged 

occurrence  was  stated  to  have  been  occurred  at  a  service  road 

and admittedly, as stated there was dim light. The appellant in  the 

contents  of  F. I. R  has  mentioned that  it was  the  respondent  who 

made fires  at  her  but in  the subsequent  statement she  has taken 

another  stance  that  the  person  who  fired  was  looking  like  the 

respondent.  The  reason  behind  the  change  of  stance  by  the 

appellant  was  that  the  respondent appeared  before  the  Court  as 

well  as cooperated  with the  investigation officer  by submitting  his 

original passport and other travelling document, wherefrom  it was 

confirmed that at the date and time of alleged occurrence,  he was 

at United Kingdom. 

5 

-cn. Appeal No. 102 of  2018" 

9. 

It  is  also transpired  that the  respondent  is one  of the close 

relative  of the  husband of appellant/ complainant,  whereas family 

cases  are  pending  in  between  spouses,  as  such,  the  malicious 

involvement of the  respondent in  the  instant case cannot  be ruled 

out. 

10. 

The arguments of learned counsel for the respondent is that 

the  instant  appeal  has  not  been  filed  by  the  appellant  herself 

rather  it  has  been  filed  through  Muhammad  Niaz  being  her 

attorney therefore,  same is  not maintainable.  It  is  evident from the 

record  that  without  obtaining  signatures  of  the  appellant  it  was 

filed on 04.11.2016,  and thereafter C.M.No.315/2018 was filed by 

the learned counsel for appellant seeking permission for obtaining 

signatures thereon  but  later on, vide  order  dated  18.12.2018, the 

learned counsel  for  the  appellant  himself  did  not  press the  same 

and sought withdrawal  of the same, which was allowed.  It  depicts 

that the appeal has not been filed by the appellant herself rather it 

has  been  filed  by  the  signature  of  one  Muhammad  Niaz, who  is 

not an aggrieved person and placing on record a copy of power of 

attorney, which  has no concern with the  instant appeal, therefore, 

the appeal in  hand itself is  not competent and not maintainable. 

11 . 

It  has  also  been  observed that  from  the  date  of framing  of 

charge  i.e.  12.10.2015  till  the  order  sheet  dated  17.07.2019 

passed  by  Learned  Senior  Civil  Judge-I,  Judicial  Magistrate, 

Islamabad-East,  the  complainant/  appellant  and  her  witness,  if 

any,  failed  to  appear  till  such  date  for  a  considerable  period  of 

more  than  four  year.  Perusal  of  record  further  reveals  that  the 

complainant 

in 

the  contents  of  F. I. R  had  nominated 

the 

respondent  with  a  specific  role,  but,  in  subsequent  statement, 

when  it was  surfaced  that  at the  time  of  alleged  occurrence,  the 

respondent was in  United Kingdom, then she changed her version 

that  the  person  who  made  fires,  was  having  resemblance  with 

Sohail Altaf/  respondent and further  in  her subsequent  statement 

dated 08.06.2015 she had also mentioned that there was dim light 

at  the  place  of  alleged  occurrence,  which  made  the  case  highly 

6 

"Crl. Appeal No. 102 of  2018" 

doubtful  and  in  such  circumstances,  there  was  no  probability  of 

the conviction of the  respondent. The learned Additional  Sessions 

Judge,  East-Islamabad,  through  impugned  order,  has  rightly 

accepted  the  application  under  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C  whereby, 

acquitted the respondent. 

12. 

I  have  found  no  illegality  or  irregularity  in  the  impugned 

judgment  passed by the  learned revisional Court, nor the same is 

suffering from any misreading, non-reading, or misappropriation of 

material available on record, warranting interference by this Court. 

13. 

In  the  circumstances,  there  is  no  merit  in  the  instant 

acquittal appeal; therefore, the same is hereby, dismissed. 

Announced  in open Court on this 28th day of September, 2020. 

~LAM 

AZAM QAM$ANI) 
JUDGE  J 

