ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD BIGB  COURT.  ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal Appeal No.152/2019 

Zarina  Kausar 
VS 
Deedar  Ali etc. 

Sr.No. of 
order/ 
proceeding 

Date of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties  or counsel 
where necessary. 

07.02.2020  Mian Nadeem Aziz [atala, Advocate for the appellant. 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANI. 

J.  Appellant 

(Zarina  Kausar)  seeks  setting  aside  of  impugned 

order  dated  13.11.2018,  passed  by  the  learned 

Judicial  Magistrate,  Section-30,  Islamabad-West, 

whereby respondents  No.1 was acquitted. 

2. 

Briefly stated,  prosecution  case  is  that  the 

complainant/  appellant  got registered  F.I.R No.121 

dated  13.04.2017  with  Police  Station  Industrial 

Area,  Islamabad,  under  Section  380 /34  PPC, 

Islamabad,  with  the  averments 

that  one  Zaib 

Deedar  S/o  Deedar  Ali  was  well  acquainted  with 

her  family therefore,  he  used  to  visit her  house. It 

has  been  further  stated  that,  on  01.07.2016,  she 

sold  out  her  plot  bearing  No.87-A,  Block-B, 

Membership  No.725,  situated  at  Judicial  Town, 

2 

C'rLdPReallVo.  158/2019 

Cooperative  Housing  Society, 

Islamabad, 

in 

consideration  of Rs.17,00,000/-  (seventeen  lac), in 

favor of the  accused/  respondent,  out  of which an 

amount  of  Rs.7,00,000/-  (seven  lac)  were  paid 

while the  remaining amount  of Rs.10,00,000/- (ten 

lac) were  to  be  paid  after  a  period  of one  month 

and she transferred  the above said plot in the name 

of Zaib Deedar. It has been  further  alleged that  on 

06.03.2017, the  above said Zaib Deedar along with 

his father namely Deedar Ali came to her house and 

his  father  requested  for  a  last  chance  to  pay  the 

remaining  amount.  In  the  meantime,  they  were 

sitting in the  drawing room of her  house, she went 

to  the  kitchen  for making tea  for them  and  in her 

absence,  both  accused  persons 

stolen 

the 

documents of the plot as well as Rs.2,00,000/- from 

the  Almirah  of  her  house  as  the  accused  Zaib 

Deedar  had  the  knowledge  as  to  where  the 

documents  were  kept  hence,  the  above  said  F.l.R 

was lodged. 

3. 

After  registration  of  F.l.R  investigation  was 

carried  out.  During  the  course  of  investigation, 

Deedar Ali, the  father  of Zaib Deedar was arrested. 

3 

C:rL.lf.RReallVo.  15212019 

After  usual  investigation,  challan  was  submitted 

before  the  learned  Court  of  Judicial  Magistrate, 

Islamabad-West.  After 

fulfilling 

the 

codal 

formalities, charge was framed against the accused 

to  which  he  denied  and  claimed  Trial.  The 

prosecution  was  directed  to  produce  evidence  in 

support  of the charge for proving the charge 

4. 

In  order  to  prove  its  case,  the  prosecution 

examined PW-1 Zarina Kousar. That on 06.11.2018, 

accused/  respondent  moved  an  application  under 

Section  249-A  Cr.P.C.  The 

learned 

Judicial 

Magistrate  acquitted  the  accused  namely  Deedar 

Ali  vide  order  dated  13.11.2018,  under  Section 

249-A  Cr.P.C,  on  the  ground  that  there  is  no 

probability  of  the  accused  being  convicted  and 

further  trial in the case, will be wastage of the time 

of the Court. Being aggrieved from order  impugned 

appellant filed instant appeal. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  contends 

that  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  passed  the 

impugned  order  in  hasty  manner  and  without 

recording  the  statements  of  the  remaining  three 

witnesses,  namely  Abdul  Khalil,  Muhammad  Ali 

4 

Crl. JW.pealNo. JSZ/Z019 

Ayub and  Afzal s/o  Fazal Din;  that  the  impugned 

order  passed  by  learned  judicial  magistrate  is 

suffering from legal infirmities, therefore,  is liable 

to be set-aside. 

6. 

I  have  minutely  perused  the  entire  record 

which  depicts  that  one  of  the  accused  namely 

Deedar  Ali  was  arrested  on  15.04.2017.  He  was 

thoroughly  investigated  and  after  that,  he  was 

shifted  to  judicial  custody.  The  record  further 

reveals that  the  above said Deedar Ali had filed an 

application under Section 22-A/B Cr.P.C against the 

complainant,  Zarina  Kousar,  before  the  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge-II/Ex-Officio Justice  of 

the  Peace, Islamabad, which  was  disposed  of vide 

order  dated  21.02.2017. So far as, the contention of 

learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  that  there  are 

three  other  witnesses,  who were  not  examined by 

the learned Judicial Magistrate, is concerned, I  have 

minutely  perused  the  statement  of  above  said 

witness  namely  Abdul  Khalil  recorded  under 

Section  161  Cr.P.C  wherein  he  has  stated  that  on 

30.04.2016  the  complainant  namely  Mst.  Zarina 

Kousar herself came to  her  office and purchased  a 

s 

Crl. AopealNo.  15ZIZOJ9 

stamp  paper  with  regard  to  plot  in  favour of Zaib 

Deedar. However, he  has  no  knowledge  about  the 

contents  of  the  said  stamp  paper.  The  witness, 

Muhammad  Ali  Ayub  has  also  stated  that  the 

complainant  namely Mst.  Zarina Kousar, widow  of 

Hafeez  ud  Din,  herself  came  to  her  office  for 

purchasing  a stamp paper  for a sale agreement. He 

registered  the  particulars  however;  he  has  no 

concern,  whatsoever,  with  the  contents  of  the 

stamp  paper  mentioned 

therein.  The  witness 

namely Muhammad Afzal has  stated  that  he  is the 

resident  of judicial colony and  narrated  that  there 

is  no  dispute  of  Zaib Deedar  with  regard  to  plot 

No.87-A,  Block-8,  Judicial  Colony,  nobody  has 

restrained  him for construction  of the house on the 

said  plot, however, now  a  days,  value  of the  said 

plot  has  been  increased  from  Rs.17,00,000/-  to 

Rs.18,00,000/-  and  the  same  is  free  from  all 

encumbrances. 

7. 

The  allegation  against  the  arrested  accused 

Deedar  Ali  and  his  son  Zaib  Deedar  was  about 

commission  of  theft  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  as  well  as 

documents  of the  above  mentioned  plot  bearing 

6 

C:rLAp9eal!Vo.  15812019 

No.87-A, Block-B,  Judicial Colony, Islamabad. It  is 

pertinent  to  mention  here  that  the  complainant 

herself  mentioned  in the  contents  of the  F.l.R that 

she  had  already  transferred  the  said  plot  in  the 

name of absconding accused Zaib Deedar. So far as 

the  involvement of acquitted  accused Deedar Ali  is 

concerned, 

in 

this  regard, 

it 

is  stated 

that 

admittedly 

he  was 

arrested, 

thoroughly 

investigated  but  nothing  was  recovered  from  his 

possession  and  no  direct  evidence  has  come  on 

record  to  connect him with  the  commission of the 

alleged  offence. As  far  as  the  contentions  of  the 

learned  counsel for appellant  is concerned that  the 

remaining three  witnesses  have not been recorded 

by  the  learned  Trial  Court, the  statements  of the 

above  said  witnesses,  as  mentioned  above  are 

altogether  different, and  have no concern with the 

commission of the  alleged offence, therefore,  they 

are  unnecessary.  The  learned  Judicial  Magistrate 

has rightly not recorded their statements,  being un  

necessary. 

8. 

In  view  of  the  facts  discussed  above,  it 

transpires  from the  record  that  no direct  evidence 

7 

C:rLIUJReal1'{o.  15813019 

is available on record against the acquitted accused 

Deedar Ali. The allegation about the theft of alleged 

agreement  is  baseless  as  the  complainant  herself 

transferred  the  above  said  plot  in  favour  of  Zaib 

Deedar, therefore,  the  sale  of above  said  plot  and 

execution of agreement makes the prosecution case 

highly doubtful and  as there  was  no probability  of 

the  conviction of the  accused  even  if the  evidence 

of the  remaining PWs was recorded,  therefore,  the 

learned  Trial  Court  has  rightly  acquitted  the 

accused/respondent. 

9. 

I  have found no illegality or irregularity in the 

impugned  order  warranting  interference  by  this 

Court,  nor 

the  same 

is  suffering  from  any 

misreading or non-reading of evidence. 

10.  Resultantly,  the  instant  appeal  having  no 

force, is dismissed in limjne. 

Raul.lJI.* 

lGHULAM  AZAM  ~RANI) 

JUDGE 

