ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD

CIAL DEPAR

W.P. No. 715/2020

Flamid Ilyas

VS

National  Accountability tsureau,  etc.

Petitioner by:

Mr. Muhammad  Masood Khan and Mr
Muhamm ad Zeeshan  Khary Advocates.

Respondents  by:

Rana Zain'l'ahir,  Special  Prosecutor  NAB.
Muhammad  Ghufran,  AD/ I.O.

Date of Decision: 

01..1.0.2020.

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, I:  'I'hrough this Writ Petition, the

petitioner  has prayed  for issuance  of direction to respondents  to remove his

namc  from IICL and any bar imposed by the respondents on his traveling may

kindly  be declared  illegal.

2. 

Learned  counsel  for the petitioner contends  that petitioner was remained

posted as Coordinator,  Bafuia'fown Karachi project from 2009 to 20'1.4  and there-

after  he has performed his duties  as Deputy  Chief Executive  (Operating)  since

March  20'14 and all of his duties were assigned by Ilahria'l'own (Pvt.) Ltd.; that

pctitioner was traveling  to Saudi-Arabia in connection with performance of

Umrah when he was offloaded  on the ground that his name  has been referred in

no fly list on the recommendations of NAII, who are investigating  the matter

relating  to fake bank accounts;  that petitioner  received  three  call up notices from

NAI} regarding fake bank account  scam whereby an amount  of I{s.1.22 billion

was rcceived  as kick backs  in JV Opal by Zardari  Group,  whereby  petitioner has

submitted  the cntire information  required  by NAB  through  his reply  to the call

up notices  but despitc that his name has not been removed  from IICL; that

rcspondcnts  have not complied with any justiciable reasons  to retain the name of

pctitioncr on IiCI. and as such fundamental rights of the petitioner  has been

a

w.P. No.71512020

2

violated,  whereby  right to free movement in terms of Article 15 of the

Constitution of Islamic  I{epublic  of Pakistan,1973 could not be curtailed in any

manner

3.  Convcrsely, learned  Special  Prosecutor  NAB contends  that inquiry of fake

bank  account  is still under process  and as such petitioner is required  in the

investigation  in connection with huge sum of money which  was transacted

through his signatures,  whereby  petitioner  has failed to satisfy  the NAB

regarding  such a huge  transaction  from his personal  bank account,  whereby

I{s.200/-  Million was encashed  and Rs.50/-  Million was transferred to Asad

Abbas 7,aidi; that other co-accused  under  this inquiry have already  entered  into

plea-bargain  namely Zain Malik and petitioner's  name could not be removed

from IICL unless  investigation  and probe stand concluded.

4. 

Arguments heard,  record  perused.

5.  Perusal  of record reveals that petitioner  in order to perform  Umrah

alongwith his family members went to Islamabad  Airport on 09.03.2019,

whereby boarding  card was issued but immigration staff refused to give

clearance  for deparfure  and petitioner  was off loaded as his name was placed  in

no fly list, subsequently petitioner's  name  was placed on ECL on 31.05.2019  on

thc rccommcndations of NAB.

6. 

'I'hc history of this case reveals that petitioner  was working  as Deputy

Chief Ilxecutive  of Bahria  T'own, Karachi and there-after at Islamabad  w.e.f  2009

to 201,4, however,  he finally  resigned  on 05.03.2020.  During his service with

Ilahria'l'own,  he was signatory of certain  accounts  of Bahria'l'own  (Pvt.) Ltd. and

during the inquiry and probe of fake bank  accounts  scam it was  revealed that

Its.l.22  billion kick back was received  in GV Opal-225  by Zardari Group and as

such pctitioner was booked  in the inquiry  being signatory  to those  bank  accounts

on behalf of Bahria'fown (I')vt.) Ltd., wherefrom  Rs.800/-  million was transferred

in thc allcged fake bank account namely  Dream'frading  and Ocean Enterprises

in rcsult whereof NAB issued  call up notices  dated 1,0.04.2019,07.05.2019  &

/\

W.P. No.71512020

3

13.05.2019 to the petitioner to explain his position.  All three notices were replied

by the pctitioner, however,  Investigation  officer present  before this Court states

that explanation so rendered  by the petitioner has not yet been verified  and

conside  with the requisite  information  even  petitioner  has failed  to explain  the

status  of Rs.200/-  million which  was encashed  by the petitioner

7. 

In this backdrop  learned  Special  Prosecutor, NAB has heavily  emphasized

that petitioner  may not be allowed to proceed abroad  although  I.O as well as

Special  Prosecutor NAII having  been confronted regarding  status of petitioner

who is I'akistani  citizen  has no other nationality and his family is also residing in

Pakistan.

8.  We have also  gone through  the reported judgment I'LD 2OO7 SC 642 @ML

(Nt through Khawaia  Muhammail Asi! VS Federation  of Pakistant. whereby

Article L5 of the Constitution  of Islamic Republic  of Pakistan,  1973 regarding

frcedom of movement has been given wider  meaning.  The petitioner  has also

relicd upon I'LD 20L9 lslamabad  376 (Syed Zulfikar Abbas Bukhai VS

Federation of Pakistan),  whereby it was held that Federal Government  while

placing the name of petitioner on ECL did not apply its mind and acted

mechanically  on the recommendations  of NAII and it was also held that any

rccommcndation  by investigation  agency to place  the name of an individual  on

IiCL  was not to be followed by the Federal Government  in a mechanical  fashion,

especially  when the only charge  is mere pendency of inquiry  but in the instant

matter  investigation  is still pending  and under way whereby I.O has pima-fncie

cxpressed his grave concern  regarding  transaction of huge sum of money from

thc bank account  of petitioner  which has not yet been justified  by the petitioner,

who is signatory to that account, wherefrom  the amount has been encashed.

9.  Wc have also attended  the proposition  with reference  to the impugned

ordcr  and as such detailed reasons have been rendered  by the NAII in their para-

wisc  comments  for placing the name of petitioner on ECI-  especially  when

Its.250/-  million has transferred in petitioner's  personal  bank account  No.1-2-15-

e

W.P. No.71512020

4

20371-71.4-1.61.053, maintained  at Summit Bank Dolmen  City Branch,  Karachi,

whereby an amount  of Rs.200/- million was drawn  as cash by the petitioner

himself  and as such the details of that amount  have not yet been provided,

although claim raised  by the petitioner is regarding a joint venture project  for

construction  of multipurpose  high-rise  building  at plot No.225,  Itaja Ghazanfar

Ali Khan  Road, Saddar, Karachi.

10.  We have confronted  the learned counsel for the petitioner  regarding

maintainability  of instant writ petition,  whereby he contends that alternate

rcmcdy  though referred in the Exit from Pakistan (Control) Ordinance,  1981 is

availablc  but the same will not serve the purpose and constitutional  petition  is

maintainable.  Ileliance is placed upon PLD 2075 Lahore

(Inam Akbar VS

Feileration  of Pakistan). But this Court is of the view that it is not appropriate  to

adjudicate  the matter  when the alternate remedy is in field, as things  are

rcquired  to be done strictly according  to law, or it should not be done  at all.

Ileliance  is placed upon PLD 2010 SC 759 (Human  Rights  Cases Nos.4668 of

2006.  1'111 of 2007

15283-G  of 207D. I'LD 2073  SC 255

Anutar

and others  VS Mst,

Ilequm  and others)

11.  ln view  of above backdrop, instant petition is not maintainable,  espccially

when altcrnate remedy of review is still in field; hence, the same is hereby

dismissed.  'l'he petitioner  may approach the competent  authority for review  of

thc impugned  order, who shall decide the review while considering the

background  of the case  after hearing the petitioner in accordance with law. The

competent  authority  shall also record  reasons while taking into consideration the

invcstigation  conductcd by the NAII in fake bank  account  scam.

(FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM  IANDRAN)

IUDGE

r)

IUDGE

Trhid

