ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.2114/2016 
Ghulam Sarwar and others 
VS
Federation of Pakistan through its Secretary, Ministry of Information and 
Technology and others 

Date of Hearing: 
Petitioners by:   

Respondents by: 

13.02.2020  
M/s  Muhammad  Asif  Mehmood,  Nawazish  Ali  Gondal 
and Jameel Hussain Qureshi, Advocates in  
W.P.Nos.2114, 2345, 3108 & 3625 of 2016 
Mr. Mubashar M. Jaffar Qasuri, Advocate in  
W.P.Nos.483, 494, 495 & 496 of 2018 
Mr.  Arshid  Mehmood  Kiani,  learned  Deputy  Attorney-
General,  

  Mr.  Nadeem  Khan  Khakwani, 

learned  Assistant 

Attorney-General 

  M/s  Shahid  Anwar  Bajwa,  Tassadaq  Hanif,  Shaifque-
ur-Rehman  Dab,  Habib  Ahmed  Bhatti,  and  Akhlaq 
Ahmad Bhatti, Advocates for P.T.C.L. 

  Mr. Raheel Zafar, Manager (Legal) P.T.C.L.  
  Barrister  Ahsan  Jamal  Pirzada 

for  P.T.E.T. 

in 

W.P.No.494/2018 

  Mr. Muhammad Latif Saeedi, Advocate for P.T.E.T. 
  Sheikh  Matee-ur-Rehman,  Manager  (Legal)  P.T.E.T. 

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  this  judgment,  I 

propose  to  decide  the  writ  petitions  listed  in  "Schedule-A"  hereto 

since they entail common questions of law and fact. All the petitioners 

who  are  retired  employees  of  the  Pakistan  Telecommunication 

Company  Limited  ("P.T.C.L.")  after  having  opted  for  the  Voluntary 

Separation  Scheme  (“V.S.S.”)  introduced  by  P.T.C.L.  and  having 

received  all  the  benefits  under  the  said  scheme,  seek  a  direction  to 

the respondents to pay their pension along with increases in pension 

at  the  same  rate  as  announced  by  the  Government  for  retired  civil 

servants.  

2. 

Some  of  the  petitioners  were  employed  in  the  Telephone  and 

Telegraph Department (“the T&T Department”) and transferred to the 

Pakistan  Telecommunication  Corporation  (“P.T.C.”)  by  operation  of 

Section  9  of  the  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Corporation  Act,  1991 

(“the  1991  Act”)  and  retired  while  in  service  of  P.T.C.  or  further 

transferred  to  P.T.C.L.  by  operation  of  Sections  35  and  36  of  the 

 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

Pakistan  Telecommunication  (Re-organization)  Act,  1996  (“the  1996 

Act”) whereas the others were employed in P.T.C. after the enactment 

of the 1991 Act. The petitioners in the first category would hereinafter 

be referred to as “the departmental employees”.  

3. 

The  1991  Act  was  enacted  on  25.11.1991.  Section  9(1)  of  the 

said Act provided inter alia that all departmental employees shall, on 

the  establishment  of  P.T.C.,  stand  transferred  to  and  become 

employees  of P.T.C.  on  the same  terms  and  conditions  to  which they 

were  entitled  immediately  before  such  transfer.  Section  9(2)  of  the 

said  Act  provided  that  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  the 

departmental  employees  transferred  to  P.T.C.  shall  not  be  varied  by 

P.T.C. to their disadvantage.  

4. 

The  1996  Act  was  enacted  on  13.10.1996.  Under  Section  35  of 

the  said  Act  departmental  employees  or  employees  appointed  by 

P.T.C.  could  be  transferred  to  become  employees  of  P.T.C.L.  The 

proviso  to  Section  35(2)  provided  that  the  terms  and  conditions  of 

service  of  such  transferred  employees  shall  not  be  varied  to  their 

disadvantage. Additionally, the proviso to Section 36(1) of the said Act 

provided  that  the  Federal  Government  shall  guarantee  the  existing 

terms  and  conditions  of  service  and  rights  including  pensionary 

benefits  of  the  transferred  employees,  whereas  Section  36(2) 

provided  that  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  any  transferred 

employee  shall  not  be  altered  adversely  by  P.T.C.L.  except  in 

accordance  with  the  laws  of  Pakistan  or  with  the  consent  of  the 

transferred employees and award of appropriate compensation.  

5. 

It  is  not  disputed  that  on  15.11.2007,  P.T.C.L.  introduced  a 

V.S.S.  which  could  be  opted  for  by  regular  employees  of  P.T.C.L. 

under the age of 58. The employees interested in opting for V.S.S. had 

sixty  days  from  15.11.2007  to  complete  and  submit  the  option/waiver 

form  to  the  V.S.S.  Support  Centre.  P.T.C.L.  reserved  to  itself  the 

power to review the applications for the V.S.S. and decide whether or 

not to accept such applications. It was clearly mentioned in  the terms 

of  the  V.S.S.  that  an  employee  who  chooses  not  to  opt  for  the  V.S.S. 

would  remain  employed  at  P.T.C.L.  under  the  existing  terms  of 

employment.  The 

letters  addressed  by  P.T.C.L.  to  the  eligible 

employees  clearly  provided  that  the  employees'  decision  either  to 

3 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

participate  or  not  to  participate  in  the  V.S.S.  programme  would  be 

voluntary and at their own will. 

6. 

Employees opting for the V.S.S. were to be paid severance pay, 

separation  bonus,  medical  benefits, 

leave  encashment,  housing 

allowance, and provident fund. Employees with less than ten years of 

service  were  to  be  paid  a  lump  sum  bonus  of  Rs.3,00,000/-  whereas 

employees with service between 10 to 20 years were to be paid a lump 

sum bonus of Rs.4,50,000/-. The terms of the V.S.S. also made it clear 

that  the  regular  status  of  employees  with  a  minimum  of  twenty  years 

of  service  were  eligible  for  early  retirement  and  enhanced  gross 

pension.  The  pension  figure  was  to  be  enhanced  by  increasing  the 

employees’  qualifying  years  of  service  by  five  years  subject  to  a 

maximum of thirty years, and increasing the final sum by 7.5%.  

7. 

The  option  for  the  V.S.S.  exercised  by  the  petitioners  was 

accepted by P.T.C.L., and they were paid all benefits under the V.S.S. 

Several  years  after  receiving  such  benefits  under  the  V.S.S.,  the 

petitioners  have  invoked  the  Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court 

and  seek  a  direction  to  P.T.C.L.  and  Pakistan  Telecommunication 

Employees  Trust  (“P.T.E.T.”)  to  pay  their  pension  along  with  such 

increases  as  were  announced  by  the  Federal  Government  for  civil 

servants from time to time.  

CONTENTIONS  OF 
PETITIONERS:- 

THE 

LEARNED  COUNSEL 

FOR 

THE 

8. 

Learned  counsel 

for 

the  petitioners  submitted 

that 

the 

petitioners had opted for the V.S.S. which was introduced by P.T.C.L. 

on 15.11.2007; that in the V.S.S. forms prepared by P.T.C.L., it was not 

mentioned  whether  the  employees  who  opt  for  the  V.S.S.  would  be 

deprived of pensionary benefits; that the petitioners signed the V.S.S. 

forms  under  coercion;  that  the  petitioners  had  been  threatened  by 

P.T.C.L.  that  they  would  be  thrown  out  if  they  did  not  opt  for  the 

V.S.S.;  that  the  words  “Surplus”, “Not Needed” and  “redundant”  on 

the  V.S.S.  calculation  sheet  led  the  petitioners  to  believe  that  if  they 

did  not  opt  for  the  V.S.S.,  their  services  would  be  terminated;  that 

under  the  Pension  Rules,  1973,  ten  years  of  service  qualifies  an 

employee for pensionary benefits; that in the V.S.S. forms prepared by 

P.T.C.L., it was stated that in order to qualify for  early  retirement, an 

 
4 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

employee had to have a minimum of twenty years of qualifying service; 

that  it  should  have  been  clearly  mentioned  in  the  V.S.S.  forms  that 

those who opted for the V.S.S. would not be entitled to pension if they 

had ten years of service; that the petitioners are not just entitled to the 

payment  of  their  pensionary  benefits  but  also  to  the  increase  in 

pension at the same rate as given by the Federal Government to civil 

servants  from  time  to  time;  that  the  protection  as  to  the  petitioners’ 

terms and conditions of service afforded under Section 9 of the 1991 

Act  and  Sections  35  and  36  of  the  1996  Act  could  not  be  denied  to 

them simply because they had opted for the V.S.S.; that the provision 

in  the  V.S.S.  forms  making  a  minimum  of  twenty  years  of  service  a 

condition  for  the  eligibility  of  early  retirement  and  payment  of 

enhanced  gross  pension  was  unlawful  and 

in  violation  of  the 

protection  of  the  petitioners'  terms  and  conditions  of  service  under 

Section 9 of the 1991 Act and Sections 35 and 36 of the 1996 Act; that 

even though some of the petitioners were employed in P.T.C. after the 

enactment of the 1991 Act, they were nonetheless entitled to be given 

the protection afforded to them under Sections 35 and 36 of the 1996 

Act;  and  that  the  change  in  the  petitioners’  terms  and  conditions  of 

service  on  the  ground  that  they  had  opted  for  the  V.S.S.  is  in 

contravention of the said provisions of the 1991 Act and the 1996 Act.  

9. 

Furthermore, it was submitted that P.T.C.L. had paid pension to 

the  employees  who  had  opted  for  the  V.S.S.  introduced  in  1997-98; 

that under the V.S.S. introduced in the year 2014, employees with less 

than  ten  years  of  service  had  been  given  pension;  that  by  depriving 

the  petitioners  who  opted  for  the  V.S.S.  in  2007  of  their  pension, 

P.T.C.L. meted out discriminatory treatment to them; and that since all 

the  petitioners  had  ten  years  of  qualified  service,  they  were  entitled 

not  just  to  the  payment  of  pension  but  also  the  periodic  increases  in 

pension  commensurate  to  the  ones  announced  by  the  Federal 

Government  for civil  servants  from  time to  time.  Learned  counsel  for 

the petitioners  prayed  for  the writ  petitions  to  be allowed  in  terms  of 

the relief sought therein.  

CONTENTIONS OF THE LEARNED COUNSLE FOR P.T.C.L.:- 

10.  Learned  counsel  for  P.T.C.L.  submitted  that  some  of  the 

petitioners  were  employed  in  P.T.C.  after  the  enactment  of  the  1991 

5 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

Act whereas others were employed in the T&T Department prior to the 

enactment  of  the  1991  Act;  that  for  instance,  23  out  of  the  42 

petitioners  in  writ  petition  No.3625/2016  were  employed  in  P.T.C. 

whereas  the  remaining  19  petitioners  were  employed  in  the  T&T 

Department; that similarly 39 out of the 100 petitioners in writ petition 

No.2114/2016  were  employed  in  P.T.C.  whereas  the  remaining  61 

petitioners were employed in the T&T Department; that in view of the 

law  laid  down  in  the  case  of  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Company 

Limited VS Iqbal Nasir (PLD 2011 S.C. 132), the petitioners employed 

in  P.T.C.  after  the  enactment  of  the  1991  Act  could  not  file  a  writ 

petition  to  agitate  a  grievance  regarding  the  terms  and  conditions  of 

their  service;  that  in  the  said  judgment,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 

held inter alia  that  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  employees 

employed  in  P.T.C.  after  the  enactment  of  the  1991  Act  were  not 

governed  by  statutory  regulations;  that  in  the  said  judgment,  it  was 

also  held  that  the  V.S.S.  was  also  not  under  any  statutory  rules;  that 

since  the  terms  of  the  V.S.S.  were  not  governed  by  any  statutory 

rules, an employee who is aggrieved by any of its terms or who seeks 

their  enforcement  cannot  agitate  his  grievance  in  the  Constitutional 

jurisdiction of this Court; that in the case of State Bank of Pakistan VS 

Imtiaz Ali Khan (2012 SCMR 280), it was held inter alia by the Hon’ble 

Supreme Court that since the employees of the State Bank of Pakistan 

who  had  opted  for  the  V.S.S.  had  neither  retired  from  service  under 

the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  Officers 

(Pension-cum-Gratuity) 

Regulations,  1980  nor  by  application  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan 

Staff  Regulations,  1993  but  had  left  the  service  by  exercising  the 

option  of  accepting  the  V.S.S.,  therefore,  their  cases  were  squarely 

governed  and  controlled  under  the  terms  and  conditions  as  were 

clearly  spelt  out  in  the  V.S.S.;  and  that  in  the  judgment  dated 

27.05.2016  passed  by  the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court  in  writ  petition 

No.5978/2011  titled  S.M.  Abu  Talib  Naqvi  etc.  VS  President/Chief 

Executive  Officer,  PTCL.  it  was  held inter alia  that  the  employees  of 

P.T.C.L.  who  had  availed  the  V.S.S.  package  were  not  entitled  to  the 

increase in pension etc. as were allowed to civil servants vide Finance 

Division’s Office Memoranda dated 05.07.2010. 

6 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

11.  Learned  counsel  for  P.TC.L.  further  submitted  that  since  the 

petitioners  had  more  than  ten  years  of  service  but  had  less  than 

twenty  years  of  service,  they  were  not  qualified  for  or  entitled  to  the 

payment of  enhanced gross  pension under the  V.S.S.;  that the V.S.S. 

was  launched  on  15.11.2007  and  the  final  payment  to  all  the 

employees who opted for the V.S.S. was made by 04.04.2008; that the 

petitioners took all the financial benefits under the V.S.S. and severed 

their relationship with P.T.C.L.; that for eight years, the petitioners did 

not agitate the matter relating to their pension;  and that  the petitions 

filed with an inordinate delay are liable to be dismissed due to laches.  

12.  Furthermore, it was submitted that Section 36(2) of the 1996 Act 

provides  that  the  terms  and  conditions  of  any  transferred  employee 

shall  not  be  adversely  altered  by  P.T.C.L.  except  in  accordance  with 

the laws of Pakistan or with the consent of the transferred employees 

and  the  award  of  appropriate  compensation;  that  P.T.C.L.  complied 

with the requirements of Section 36(2) of the 1996 Act by obtaining the 

petitioners’  consent  regarding  the  execution  of  the  V.S.S.,  and  by 

making  payment  of  compensation  under  the  V.S.S.;  that  under  the 

terms of the V.S.S., only the employees having twenty years of service 

could  be given  pensionary  benefits  whereas  the  employees  with  less 

than  twenty  years  of  service  were  given  a  bonus  in  lump  sum;  that  it 

was  available  to  the petitioners  not  to  have  opted  for  the V.S.S.;  that 

the  acceptance  of  a  V.S.S.  amounts  to  a  written  agreement  between 

the parties; that the V.S.S. was not a statutory scheme but was in the 

nature of an offer which was accepted by the petitioners; that whether 

the  petitioners  were  compelled  or  coerced  to  opt  for  the  V.S.S.  is  a 

disputed  question  of 

fact  which  cannot  be  resolved 

in 

the 

Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court;  and  that  about  29,900 

employees  had  opted  for  the  V.S.S.,  out  of  which  only  a  handful 

employees  have  filed  writ  petitions  asserting  that  they  had  opted  for 

the V.S.S. under coercion. Learned counsel for P.T.C.L. prayed for the 

writ petitions to be dismissed as not maintainable.  

13. 

 I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  writ  petitions  have 

7 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs  2 to 7 above, and need 

not be recapitulated.  

WHETHER  THE  PETITIONS  FILED  BY  THE  PETITIONERS  EMPLOYED 
BY  P.T.C.  AFTER  THE  ENACTMENT  OF  THE  1991  ACT  ARE 
MAINTAINABLE:-   

14.  At  the  very  outset,  I  deem  it  appropriate  to  deal  with  the 

objections  taken  by  the 

learned  counsel 

for  P.T.C.L.  to  the 

maintainability of the petitions. It first needs to be determined whether 

those petitioners who were employed in P.T.C. after the enactment of 

the  1991  Act  could  agitate  a  grievance  regarding  the  terms  and 

conditions  of  their  service  before  this  Court  in  its  Constitutional 

jurisdiction. The answer to this question would depend on whether the 

terms  and  conditions  of such an employee of P.T.C.  are  governed  by 

statutory  rules  or  regulations.  If  such  rules  or  regulations  are  not 

statutory,  the  principle  of  'master  and  servant'  would  govern  the 

relationship between the employee and the employer organization. In 

the  case  of  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Company  Limited  VS  Iqbal 

Nasir  (supra), 

it  has  explicitly  been  held 

that 

the  Pakistan 

Telecommunication  Corporation  Service  Regulations,  1996  framed 

pursuant  to  Section  20  of  the  1991  Act  had  not  been  notified  in  the 

Official  Gazette.  Since  the  said  Regulations  did  not  have  a  statutory 

status,  the  employees  of  P.T.C.  employed  after  the  enactment  of  the 

1991  Act  and  governed  by  the  said  Regulations  could  not  agitate  a 

dispute regarding the terms and conditions of their service (including 

their rights to receive pension) by filing a petition under Article 199 of 

the Constitution. Therefore, the writ petitions filed by such petitioners 

are liable to be dismissed on that score alone.  

WHETHER  THE  PETITIONS  FILED  BY  THE  DEPARTMENTAL 
EMPLOYEES  WHO  AVAILED  THE  BENEFITS  UNDER  THE  V.S.S.  ARE 
MAINTAINABLE:-   

15.  As regards  the  departmental employees who were employed in 

the  T&T  Department  and  transferred  to  P.T.C.  and  subsequently  to 

P.T.C.L. by dint of Section 9 of the 1991 Act and Sections 35 and 36 of 

the  1996  Act,  their  status  would  be  different  from  those  employees 

who had been employed in P.T.C. after the enactment of the 1991 Act 

or who were employed in P.T.C.L. after the enactment of the 1996 Act. 

Section  9  of  the  1991  Act  and  Sections  35  and  36  of  the  1996  Act 

 
 
8 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

protected  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  the  departmental 

employees. In view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court 

in the cases of P.T.C.L. VS Masood Ahmed Bhatti (2016 SCMR 1362), 

Pakistan Telecommunication Employees Trust (PTET) VS Muhammad 

Arif  (2015  SCMR  1472),  and  Muhammad  Riaz  VS  Federation  of 

Pakistan  (2015  SCMR  1783)  such  employees  (i.e.  departmental 

employees)  could  agitate  a  grievance  regarding  the  terms  and 

conditions  of  their  service  in  the  Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this 

Court.  However,  the  door  of  this  Court  exercising  Constitutional 

jurisdiction cannot be left ajar for those departmental employees who 

had  also  opted  to  avail  the  benefits  under  the  V.S.S.  I  say  this, 

because  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 

in  the  case  of  Pakistan 

Telecommunication  Company  Limited  through  Chairman  VS  Iqbal 

Nasir (supra) held as follows:- 

“29.   As to the case of the employees seeking the benefit of VS, no 
relief could be granted to them by the High Court in view of the non-
maintainability of their writ petitions on the ground that their services 
were not governed by any statutory rules and even the VS was not 
offered under, or in terms of, any statutory provisions.” 
(Emphasis added) 

16.  On the basis of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 

in the case of Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited VS Iqbal 

Nasir  (supra),  this  Court,  vide  order  dated  16.02.2017,  dismissed  a 

number  of  writ  petitions  as  not  maintainable  wherein  the  petitioners 

had  sought  to  impeach  the  V.S.S.  entered  into  by  them  on  the  ground 

that they were coerced or arm-twisted into doing so. 

17.  Additionally, the Hon’ble Lahore High Court vide judgment dated 

27.05.2016  passed  in  writ  petition  No.5978/2011  titled  S.M.  Abu  Talib 

Naqvi VS President/Chief Executive Officer PTCL (supra) held that the 

petitioners who had availed the V.S.S. package were not entitled to the 

relief  granted  vide  Finance  Division’s  Office  Memoranda  issued  on 

05.07.2010  regarding  increase  in  pension,  medical  allowance  and  in 

family pension. 

18.  Now,  it  needs  to  be  determined  whether  the  petitioners  are 

agitating  a  dispute  arising  from  and  related  to  the  V.S.S.  which  they 

had  opted  for  and  had  received  benefits  thereunder  years  ago. 

Retirement  in  the  ordinary  course  would  entitle  an  employee  having 

pensionable service to pension. Under the terms of the V.S.S. opted for 

 
9 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

by  the  petitioners,  an  employee  with  twenty  years  of  service  was 

eligible  for  early  retirement,  and  upon  such  early  retirement  the 

employee  was  entitled  to  enhanced  gross  pension.  It  was  also 

explained  in  the  V.S.S.  forms  that  the  employees  with  twenty  years  of 

service would be paid their pension in addition to the benefits under the 

V.S.S.  For  the  purposes  of  clarity,  the  said  explanation  is  reproduced 

herein below:- 

ــ:تیلہا ےیل ےک ٹىمرئٗبٹیر تقو زا لبق" 

20 

 تقو  زا  لبق  يو  ںیہ  ےکچ  رک  لمکم  لبس
سیب  ےک  تمزلام  وج  هیمزلام  يو
 پٓا رگا ںیہ لہا ےیل ےک ےورک لصبح هشىیپ یعومجم رتہب روا دئاوف ےک ٹىمرئبٹیر
 یک  لبیٹ  تمیقوردق  یلبم  یک  دئاوف  نا  پٓا  وت  ںیہ  لہا  ےک  ٹىمرئبٹیر  تقو  زا  لبق
 پٓا رگا ےہ یئگ یک رہبظ ںیم هشىیپ ہوبہبم روا ہلدببم
ربطق
 )رفص(  ہبعش  رہ  ےس  ںیم  نا  ںیہ  ںیہو  لہا  ےک  دئاوف  ےک  ٹىمرئبٹیر  تقو  زا  لبق
 تقو زا لبق ہک ںیہر يبگٓا ےس تبب سا یوببرہم ےئارب ۔ےہ بترک رہبظ وک ےعومجم
 ںیئبج ےید يدحیلع ےس ےتوھجمس ےک یگدحیلع ہواربک بضر دئاوف ےک ٹىمرئبٹیر
 ےک هئلا مئبٹ یربیعم ےک ربک ہقیرط ےک ٹىمرئبٹیر یک لیا یس یٹ یپ زڈىف ہی ۔ےگ
۔
بگ وہ قببطم

تبواوىعےئگ ےید ںیم

(Emphasis added) 

19. 

It  is  an  admitted  position  that none  of  the petitioners  had  twenty 

years  of  service  to  make  them  eligible  for  receiving  enhanced  gross 

pension  under  the  V.S.S.  Nonetheless,  the  petitioners  assert  that  on 

account of the statutory protection under Section 9 of the 1991 Act and 

Sections  35  and  36  of  the  1996  Act,  their  terms  and  conditions  of 

service,  including  their  entitlement  to  receive  pension  with  periodic 

increases,  could  not  have  been  adversely  affected  by  the  V.S.S.  In 

other  words,  the  petitioners  want  pension  to  be  paid  to  them  in  the 

same  manner  as  was  being  paid  to  the  employees  with  pensionable 

service who had not opted for the V.S.S. It is with this avowed purpose 

in mind that the petitioners have thrown a challenge to the provision in 

the  V.S.S.  which  only  entitles  an  employee  having  twenty  years  of 

service  to  early  retirement  and  pension.  Therefore,  the  claim  for 

pension or increase in pension made by the petitioners who had taken 

benefits under the V.S.S. could not be separated from the V.S.S. 

20.  But for the option for the V.S.S. exercised by the petitioners, they 

would  have  continued  to  remain  in  service  for  a  period  so  as  to  make 

their service pensionable. There would have been no occasion for this 

dispute to have arisen had the petitioners not opted for  the V.S.S. Had 

the  petitioners  completed  twenty  years  of  service,  they  would  have 

been entitled to the payment of pension upon retirement. P.T.C.L., in its 

 
 
 
                                                        
                           
        
 
 
 
 
 
10 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

written  arguments,  had  taken  a  categorical  stance  that  all  those 

employees  having  twenty  years  of  qualifying  service  were  being  paid 

their  pension  whereas  employees  having  less  than  twenty  years  of 

qualifying service were not entitled to pension. As mentioned above, it 

is by virtue of the terms and conditions of the V.S.S. that the employees 

with  twenty  years  of  service  were  made  eligible  for  early  retirement 

and therefore to the payment of pension upon such retirement.    

21. 

In the cases at hand, the petitioners did not retire by operation of 

any  statutory  rules  but  due  to  the  option  exercised  by  them  for  the 

V.S.S.  Therefore, 

the 

ratio  set 

in 

the  cases  of  Pakistan 

Telecommunication Company Limited VS Iqbal Nasir (supra), and State 

Bank  of  Pakistan  VS  Imtiaz  Ali  Khan (supra)  are  fully  attracted  in  the 

instant  cases.  Since  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 

has  a  binding  force  on  this  Court,  and  since  the  petitioners’  claim 

arises from and is related to the V.S.S., I hold that the instant petitions 

are not maintainable. 

22. 

In the case of State Bank of Pakistan VS Imtiaz Ali Khan (supra), 

the respondent had opted for the Voluntary Golden Handshake Scheme 

introduced by the State Bank of Pakistan that offered a voluntary exit to 

its  employees  on  payment  of  retirement  benefits  under  the  existing 

rules  in  addition  to  other  normal  benefits  as  compensation.  The  writ 

petition  filed  by  the  respondent  was  accepted  by  the  Hon'ble  High 

Court  directing  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  to  pay  commutation  on  the 

respondent’s  gross  pension  irrespective  of  the  Golden  Handshake 

Scheme. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while allowing the State Bank of 

Pakistan’s appeal against the judgment of the Hon'ble High Court, held 

inter  alia  that  the  respondent  had  not  retired  from  service  by 

application of the State Bank of Pakistan’s Regulations but only after he 

had voluntarily accepted the Golden Handshake Scheme, which was to 

govern  his  case.  In  paragraph  28  of  the  said  report,  it  was  held  as 

follows:- 

“28.  Since the respondent-employees have not retired from service of 
the appellant-Bank by application of the Regulations, 1980 nor under 
the Staff Regulations, 1993 but they have left the service of the 
appellant-Bank at their own exercising their own right of option by 
accepting the Scheme, therefore, their cases are squarely governed 
and controlled under the terms and conditions as was clearly spelt out 
in the Scheme itself. As no reference can be made as to how and 
against  whom  the  respondents  were  differently  treated  in  a 

11 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

discriminatory manner, we have failed to understand as to how there 
was any violation of Article 25 of the Constitution.” 
(Emphasis added) 

23.  Whether  the  petitioners  had  opted  for  the  V.S.S.  under  coercion 

is  a  controversial  question  of  fact,  which  cannot  be  resolved  without 

the  recording  of  evidence.  This  exercise  is  indeed  not  permissible  in 

the  Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court.  Be  that  as  it  may,  this 

Court, in the case of Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited VS 

Muhammad  Dilpazir  (2016  PLC  367)  dealt  with  the  plea  regarding  the 

execution of the V.S.S. under coercion in the following terms:- 

“In the instant case as well the respondents were given option to sever 
their ties from the petitioner company by way of Voluntary Separation 
Scheme. The terms and conditions of the Scheme were circulated 
amongst the employees/private respondents in English as well as Urdu 
and reservations/errors were invited; it is only after the referred fact that 
respondents executed Voluntary Separation Scheme. The bare reading 
of the terms and conditions of the Scheme shows that it is opted by the 
employees  voluntarily  without  any  coercion  or  duress  and  the 
terms/clauses  mentioned  therein  are  accepted.  At  the  end  of  the 
Scheme there is also an acknowledgement and waiver to the effect that 
the employee acknowledges and accepts the terms and conditions and 
waives the right to challenge the same.” 

24. 

It ought to be borne in mind that the petitioners having less than 

ten  years  of  service  had  already  received  a  separation  bonus  of 

Rs.3,00,000/-  whereas  employees/petitioners  having  service  between 

10 to 20 years had received Rs.4,50,000/- as a bonus in lump sum. This 

payment would not have been made to them had they not opted for the 

V.S.S.  and  had  retired  in  the  ordinary  course.  Additionally,  the 

petitioners  would  not  have  received  benefits  like  severance  pay, 

medical benefits, leave encashment, housing allowance, and provident 

fund at a stage much before their retirement in the ordinary course had 

they not opted for the V.S.S.  

25.  The  petitioners  had  also  asserted  that  P.T.C.L.  ought  to  have 

counted  their  training  period  towards  their  length  of  service  while 

determining whether they were entitled to the enhanced gross pension 

on  account  of  having  twenty  years  of  service.  This  matter  was 

conclusively  dealt with  by  the Hon’ble Supreme Court  in the judgment 

dated  18.03.2019  passed  in  civil  appeal  No.2506/2016  titled  Mst. 

Tasneem  Fatima  VS  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Company  Ltd.  and 

connected matters in the following terms:- 

 
  
12 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

“7.  If the appellants genuinely believed that their training period 
should  have  been  counted  towards  their  length  of  service,  and 
consequently, they were entitled to pension then they were not entitled 
to receive the Separation Bonus amount. And, even if we presume that 
the Separation Bonus was paid to them by mistake it was incumbent 
upon them to have stated this and to have returned / refunded it to the 
Company before proceeding to claim a pension on the ground that they 
had served the Company for twenty years or more. Significantly, the 
appellants at no stage, including before us, have submitted that they 
were not entitled to receive the Separation Bonus, let alone offering to 
return it. The appellants’ actions are destructive of their claim to 
pension, because if they had twenty years or more of service they 
should not have received the Separation Bonus. Therefore, leaving 
aside the jurisdictional point which forms the basis of the judgments of 
the learned Judge of the High Court and of the learned Judge of the 
Labour Court the appellants had by their own actions demonstrated 
that they had no grievance and that they were not entitled to pension.”   

WHETHER  THE  PETITIONS  ARE  LIABLE  TO  BE  DISMISSED  DUE  TO 
LACHES:- 

26.  Another  reason  why  I  feel  that  the  instant  petitions  ought  to  be 

dismissed  is  the  inordinate  delay  with  which  the  petitioners  have 

approached  this  Court.  As  mentioned  above,  the  option  for  the  V.S.S. 

was  given  to  the  petitioners  on  15.11.2007  and  they  had  a  period  of 

sixty  days  within  which  to  exercise  the  said  option.  Admittedly, 

pursuant to the option for the V.S.S. being exercised by the petitioners, 

they were all relieved from service in the year 2008. Ever since then the 

petitioners have not been paid any pension. For the several years after 

exercising the option for the V.S.S. and receiving the benefits under the 

V.S.S.,  they  remained  silent  and  accepted  their  disentitlement  to  the 

payment  of  pension.  Writ  petition  No.2345/2015  was 

filed  on 

13.06.2016,  writ  petition  No.2114/2016  was  filed  on  31.05.2016;  writ 

petition  No.3108/2016  was 

filed  on  16.08.2016,  writ  petition 

No.3625/2016  was  filed  on  07.10.2016,  writ  petition  No.494/2018  was 

filed on 09.01.2018, writ petition No.483/2018 was filed on  09.01.2018, 

writ  petition  No.495/2018  was  filed  on  09.01.2018,  and  writ  petition 

No.496/2018  was  filed  on  09.01.2018,  i.e.  more  than  nine  years  after 

the deadline for exercising the option for the V.S.S.  

27. 

It  is  well  settled  that  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  the 

power of a High Court to issue an appropriate writ, order or direction is 

discretionary.  One  of the grounds  on  which relief  can  be refused  by  a 

Court exercising writ jurisdiction is that the petitioner is guilty of delay 

and  laches. 

It 

is 

imperative 

that  where  a  petitioner 

invokes 

 
 
13 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

extraordinary  remedy  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  he  should 

come  to  the  Court  at  the  earliest  possible  opportunity.  An  inordinate 

delay in making the motion for a writ is indeed an adequate ground for 

refusing  to  exercise  discretion  in  favour  of  the  petitioner.  Courts 

cannot  come  to  the  rescue  of  persons  who  are  not  vigilant  regarding 

their  rights.  It  is  unjust  to  give  the  petitioner  a  remedy  where,  by  his 

conduct, he has done that which might fairly be regarded as equivalent 

to  a  waiver.  Thus,  when  a  petitioner  approaches  the  High  Court  with 

undue  delay,  the principle  of laches  disentitles  him  from  discretionary 

relief  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  particularly  when  there  is 

no  plausible  explanation  on  the  petitioner’s  part  for  his  blameworthy 

dilatory  conduct.  Since  the  unexplained  delay  in  filing  the  instant  writ 

petitions is of more than nine years, and taking account of the law laid 

down  by  the  Superior  Courts  in  the  cases  of  Khursheed  Latif  VS 

Federation  of  Pakistan  (2010  SCMR  1081),  Ahmad  and  others  VS 

Ghama  and  others  (2005  SCMR  119),  Shahbaz  Khan  Mohmand  VS 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1975 SCMR 4), and Muhammad Sadiq and 

others  VS The Commissioner Rawalpindi (1973 SCMR  422), which are 

on  the  subject  of delay  in approaching  the Court for the  issuance  of  a 

writ,  laches  is  an  added  reason  why  the  instant  petitions  should  be 

dismissed.  

28.  No plausible explanation was put forth for the inordinate delay in 

the filing of the petitions. The mere fact that the Hon’ble Supreme Court 

in the cases of Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited VS Iqbal 

Nasir (supra),  Masood  Ahmad  Bhatti  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (2012 

SCMR  152),  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Employees  Trust  PTET  VS 

Muhammad  Arif  (supra),  Muhammad  Riaz  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  

through  Secretary  Ministry  of  Information  Technology  (supra),  and 

P.T.C.L.  VS  Masood  Ahmad  Bhatti  (supra)  held  inter alia  that  the 

departmental  employees  (not  being  civil  servants  per se  after  their 

transfer  to  P.T.C.)  were  entitled  to  be  given the same  service  benefits 

as  civil  servants  would  be  entitled  to  receive.  In  none  of  these  cases 

was  it  held  that  the  departmental  employees  who  had  opted  for  the 

V.S.S. would also be entitled to the protection of such service benefits 

regardless of whether the employee had become disentitled to them by 

virtue  of  having  opted  for  the  V.S.S.    On  the  contrary,  as  mentioned 

14 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

above,  in  the  case  of  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Company  Limited 

VS  Iqbal  Nasir  (supra),  it  has  been  held  that  since  the  terms  of  the 

V.S.S. were not statutory, a writ petition  with respect to the same was 

not  maintainable.  Additionally,  in  the  unreported  judgment  dated 

18.03.2019  passed  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  Civil  Appeal 

No.256/2016 

titled  Mst. 

Tasneem 

Fatima 

VS 

Pakistan 

Telecommunication  Company  Limited  and  connected  matters,  it  was 

held  inter alia  that  employees  with  less  than  twenty  years  of  service 

having  opted  for  the  V.S.S.  and  having  received  the  separation  bonus 

thereunder were held not to be entitled to their claim for pension.  The 

Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  had  also  spurned  the  petitioners’  contention 

that  their  training  period  should  have  been  counted  towards  their 

length  of  service.  For  the  purposes  of  clarity,  paragraph  6  of  the  said 

judgment is reproduced herein below:- 

“We have noted that the appellants did not disclose the amounts received 
by them pursuant to VS and particularly the amount of four hundred and 
fifty thousand rupees on account of the Separation Bonus. The appellants 
could only receive the Separation Bonus if they had less than twenty 
years of Qualifying Length of Service. The appellants also did not 
disclose that they had voluntarily participated in the VS, accepted the 
calculations made by the Company and had executed the Waiver Form. 
This constituted nondisclosure of material facts. The appellants had 
instead projected themselves to have been wronged and embarked upon 
unnecessary litigation with a view to obtaining a benefit to which they 
were not entitled to. The fora below however mostly considered whether 
or  not  the  appellants  could  have  filed  grievance  petitions  without 
considering whether they had a grievance. In our opinion, the appellants 
did  not  have  a  grievance  as  they  had  voluntarily  severed  their 
relationship with the Company by availing of the VS, which included a 
substantial amount received on account of Separation Bonus which only 
an employee who had less than twenty years of service could receive. 
The case of P.T.C.L. v. Masood Ahmed Bhatti, which as been relied upon 
by the learned counsel for the appellants, stipulates that where an 
organization is governed by statutory rules then ay action taken by such 
organization in derogation of or in violation of such rules would, if it is 
prejudicial to an employee,  may be set aside however, in the present 
case the Company did not take any action prejudicial to the appellants. 
On the contrary the appellants had voluntarily availed of the VS, 
received payments thereunder, including Separation Bonus which was 
only payable to those employees who had less than twenty years of 
Qualifying Length of Service.” 

29. 

In view of the above, the objections taken by the learned counsel 

for  P.T.C.L.  to  the  maintainability  of  all  the  petitions  succeeds. 

Consequently,  all  the  petitions  listed  in  "Schedule-A"  hereto  are 

dismissed  as  not  maintainable.  Since  I  have  found  these  petitions  not 

be maintainable, I have refrained from giving any finding on the merits 

     
15 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

of  the  petitioners’  claim.  However,  nothing  observed  herein  shall 

operate  to  the  detriment  of  any  party  in  the  proceedings  before  the 

competent forum. There shall be no order as to costs.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2020 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan* 

     (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar  

 
 
 
                                        
16 

W.P.No.2114/2016 

"SCHEDULE-A"  

S.No.  Case No. 

Title 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

W.P.No.2114/2016  Ghulam Sarwar and others VS Federation of 

Pakistan and others 

W.P.No.2345/2016  Waqar Muhammad and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan and others  
W.P.No.3108/2016  Rahmdil and others VS Federation of Pakistan 

and others  

W.P.No.3625/2016  Qasim Bin Ahmad and others VS Federation of 

W.P.No.483/2018 

W.P.No.494/2018 

W.P.No.495/2018 

W.P.No.496/2018 

Pakistan and others  
Muhammad Asif VS Federation of Pakistan 
and others 
Zulfiqar Ali VS Federation of Pakistan and 
others 
Faizan Ahmad VS Federation of Pakistan and 
others 
Syed Shahid Rafique VS Federation of 
Pakistan and others 

 
 
