Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 211 OF 2020 

Waqas & Brothers Enterprises (Private) Limited  

VS 

M/s DHL Express through its CEO, etc.  

APPELLANT BY:      

Mr. Asad Ullah Khan, Advocate.  

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Barrister  Umar  Zia-ud-Din  and  Ms. 
Ammarah Mahmood, Advocates.  

DATE OF HEARING: 

12.02.2021 

========================================  

BABAR SATTAR, J.- Through this Criminal Appeal filed 

under  section  10  of  the  Islamabad  Consumers  Protection  Act, 

1995  (“Act”)  the  appellant  has 

impugned  order  dated 

12.11.2020  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge 

Islamabad,  who  by  accepting  an  application  filed  by  the 

respondent  under  Order  VII  Rule  11  of  the  Code  of  Civil 

Procedure,  1908  (“CPC”),  dismissed  the  complaint  of  the 

appellant  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  as 

consumer under section 2(c) of the Act.  

2. 

Brief facts of the case are that the appellant bought an 

electronic  device  from  Yaspro  Electronics  China  who  hired  the 

services  of  the  respondents  to  deliver  the  consignment  to  the 

appellant in Islamabad. It was submitted that the shipment was 

to  be  delivered  in  Islamabad  before  30.06.2020.  The  shipment 

arrived in Lahore instead of Islamabad and it was finally cleared 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

through  customs  authorities  and  delivered  in  Islamabad  on 

23.07.2020.  The  appellant  claims  that  respondents’  negligence 

in  provision  of  services  caused  substantial  loss  to  the  appellant 

and  it  was  entitled  to  compensation  under  the  provisions  of  the 

Act.  The  appellant  issued  a  legal  notice  to  the  respondents  for 

recovery  of  damages  on  06.08.2020.  This  was  responded  to  by 

the  respondents  through  counsel  on  25.08.2020.  The  appellant 

then filed a consumer complaint under section 10 of the Act and 

sought  compensation  in  the  amount  of  Rs.1.2  Million  for  loss 

suffered  due  to  delay  in  delivery  of  consignment  by  the 

respondents.    In  response  to  the  complaint,  the  respondents 

filed  an  application  under  Order  VII  rule  11  of  CPC  seeking 

rejection  of  the  complaint  for  being  barred  by  law.  The  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge  in  its  capacity  as  Authority  under  the 

Act  allowed  the  application  filed  by  the  respondents  and 

dismissed  the  complaint  of  the  appellant  as  not  maintainable 

through  the  impugned  order  dated  20.11.2020  which  has  been 

challenged before this Court.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  stated  that  the 

respondents  are  liable  under  the  Act  as  they  were  under  an 

obligation to deliver the consignment handed to them by Yaspro 

Electronics  China  to  be  delivered  to  the  appellant  in  Islamabad 

and in breach of the commitment for such delivery, the shipment 

was  instead  routed  through  Lahore  where  it  arrived  on 

27.06.2020,  and  it  then  took  the  respondents  one  almost 

another  month  to  have  shipment  cleared  through  customs  and 

delivered  in  Islamabad  on  23.07.2020.  The  learned  counsel  for 

the appellant submitted that the respondents were negligent and 

 
 
 
 
3. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

irresponsible  and  caused  delay  in  processing  the  customs 

clearance  after  wrongly  shipping  the  consignment  to  Lahore 

instead of Islamabad. And that the negligence and delay caused 

the appellant dearly as the consignment had been ordered by a 

third party, which, due to the delay in delivery of the order that 

had  been  placed  with  the  appellant,  refused  to  make  balance 

payment for the consignment and also severed its contract with 

the  appellant  for  future  orders.  The  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant submitted that as a beneficiary of the consignment, for 

which  it  had  paid  consideration,  and  of  the  service  being 

provided by the respondents subject to payment, partly made by 

Yaspro  Electronics  China  and  partly  by  the  appellant,  the 

appellant  clearly  falls  within  the  definition  of  consumer  under 

section  2(c)(ii)  of  the  Act,  which  was  not  appreciated  by  the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge.  The  learned  counsel  further 

stated  that  in  view  of  the  judgment  reported  as  Muhammad 

Farooq  Khan  v.  Excel-Labs,  through  Central  Executive  Officer 

and  another  (PLD  2015  Islamabad  81)  the  Act  is  a  beneficial 

statute promulgated by the Parliament to protect the interests of 

the consumers and its provisions are not to be given a restrictive 

meaning.  And  that  in  the  instant  case  the  appellant  clearly  falls 

within  the  statutory  definition  of  customer  and  being  a  direct 

beneficiary  of  the  services  rendered  by  the  respondents,  the 

impugned  order  excludes  the  appellant  from  the  scope  of  the 

term  “consumer”  in  breach  of  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word 

used  in  section  2(c)(ii)  of  the  Act.  The  learned  counsel  further 

submitted  that  CPC  is  not  applicable  to  proceedings  under  the 

Act and the learned Additional Sessions Judge erred in law when 

 
 
 
4. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

he entertained an application of the respondents under Order VII 

Rule 11  of CPC and further  when he dismissed the complaint of 

the appellant on the basis of such application. He submitted that 

the  impugned  order  suffers  from  material  illegality,  has  been 

passed  in  breach  of  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  consequently 

the appellant has been denied his right to fair trial under the Act 

which has resulted in breach of his rights protected under Article 

10A of the Constitution. The learned counsel also relied on Allied 

Bank  Ltd.  Faisalabad  v.  Khalid  Mehmood  (2013  CLD  1133), 

Ashfaq  Ahmed  Khan  v.  PTCL  and  others  (PLD  2016  Islamabad 

112)  and      Muhammad  Farrukh  Saif  v.  The  State  and  2  others 

(PLD 2018 Lahore 50). 

4. 

Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the 

appellant is not an end user of the equipment ordered by it and 

admittedly  had  a  contract  to  supply  such  equipment  to  a  third 

party and would therefore  not be regarded as beneficiary under 

section  2(c)  of  the  Act.  He  further  submitted  that  the  appellant 

did  not  pay  for  the  shipment  or  entered  into  a  contract  for 

delivery  of  the  shipment  with  the  respondents  and  the  contract 

for  delivery  of  shipment  was  between  the  respondents  and 

Yaspro Electronics China and as there was no privity of contract 

between  the  appellant  and  the  respondents,  the  appellants 

cannot bring a claim against the respondents. That the contract 

for  delivery  of  the  consignment  between  the  respondents  and 

Yaspro  Electronics  China  provided  a  dispute 

resolution 

mechanism  and  vested  jurisdiction  in  the  courts  in  China.  That 

the appellant did not hire services of the respondents or pay for 

such  services  and  consequently  the  appellant  did  not  fall  within 

 
 
 
5. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

the definition of consumer under the Act. The learned counsel for 

the  respondents  further  submitted  that  there  was  no  agency  or 

sub-agency  agreement  between  the  respondents  and  the 

appellant and thus no liability could be attached to the actions of 

the respondents under the agency principle. The learned counsel 

for  the  respondents  further  submitted  that  “services”  has  been 

defined under section 2(c) of the Act and excludes free of charge 

services.  And  as  the  appellant  did  not  pay  for  the  service 

provided by the respondents for purposes of the Act, it would be 

deemed  that  the  respondents  provided  no  services  to  the 

appellant.  In  response  to  a  question  whether  or  not  an 

application  under  Order  VII  Rule  11  of    CPC  was  maintainable, 

the  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  stated  that  it  is  settled 

law  that  even  if  a  wrong  provision  of  law  is  cited  that  does  not 

prohibit the court for passing the appropriate order to the extent 

that the court is vested with jurisdiction to pass the order that it 

passes and as the impugned order  of dismissal could be passed 

by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  in  exercise  of  powers 

under the Act, it would not matter that such order was passed in 

response to an application under Order VII Rule 11 of CPC. The 

learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  submitted,  on  merits,  that 

no  delay  was  caused  in  the  delivery  of  the  consignment  due  to 

any  negligence  on  part  of  the  respondents.  That  the  shipment 

landed  in  Lahore  due  to  the  extraordinary  situation  created  by 

Covid-19  and  availability  of  limited  flights  at  that  time.  Further 

the time consumed in clearing the consignment was due to delay 

in  providing  documents,  including  Web  Based  One  Custom 

Business  (WEBOC),  Electronic  Import  Form  (EIF)  and  National 

 
 
 
6. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

Tax Number (NTN), by the appellant which were prerequisites to 

have  the  consignment  cleared  and  further  due  to  delay  by  the 

appellant in making payments and electing to challenge the duty 

initially  imposed  by  customs  authorities  for  clearance  of  the 

consignment,  which  challenge  also  failed.  The  learned  counsel 

for  the  respondents  submitted  that  the  respondents  provided 

courier  services  and  were  not  under  an  obligation  to  provide 

customs  clearing  services  to  the  appellant  and  it  was  on  the 

request of the appellant that they provided such service and the 

one  month  period  that  it  took  to  have  the  consignment  cleared 

by  the  customs  authorities  in  Lahore  and  have  it  delivered  in 

Islamabad  was  due  to  delay  by  the  appellant  in  fulfilling  the 

requirements  for  clearance  of  the  consignment  and  not  due  to 

any  negligence    or  contributory  negligence  by  the  respondents. 

He 

further  submitted  that  the  respondents  paid  up  to 

Rs.100,000/-  of  the  clearing  charges  and  fines  out-of-pocket  to 

expedite the clearance of the consignment, at the request of the 

appellant,  which  the  appellant  now  refuses  to  reimburse.  The 

learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  submitted  that  the  instant 

appeal  is  time  barred  as  the  impugned  order  was  passed  on 

12.11.2020 and the appeal was filed on 23.12.2020 even though 

it had to be filed within a period of thirty days in view of section 

10 of the Act read together with section 417(2)(1) of the Code of 

Criminal  Procedure,  1898  (“Cr.P.C”).  The  learned  counsel  has 

relied  on  Bolan  Beverages  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  Limited  v.  Pepsi  Co.  Inc 

and 4 others (PLD 2004 S.C 860), Zia Ullah Malik v. Naeem Baig 

(PLD 2013 Lahore 69), Talat Inayatullah Khan v. Dr. Anis Ahmed 

Sheikh  (PLD  2015  Sindh  134),  Muhammad  Ameer  Qazi  v. 

 
 
 
7. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

Muhammad  Asif  Ali  (PLD  2015  Lahore  235),  Chairman  Pakistan 

Railway  v.  Shah  Jehan  Shah  (PLD  2016  SC  534),  Shifa 

International  Hospital  Ltd.  v.  Mst.  Hajira  Bibi  and  others  (PLD 

2018  Islamabad  372),  Kartaz  Lal  Pirwani  v.  Muhammad  Waqar 

Azeem  and  3  others  (2018  YLR  2219),  Messrs  Walia  Steel 

Industries PLC v. Messrs Saga Shipping and Trading Corporation 

Ltd  and  others  (PLD  2019  Sindh  22),  Messrs  Ash  Associates, 

Islam  Colony,  Sialkot  Road,  Gujranwala  v.  The  chief  Executive 

Officer,  Punjab  Rural  Support  Program  and  2  others  (2019  CLC 

1303)  and  The  General  Manager  Gulberg  Office  of  TCS  and 

another v. Syed Naeem ud Din (PLD 2020 Lahore 757).     

5. 

The questions that arise in the adjudication of this case 

are the following: 

1.  Whether the appellant is a consumer for purposes of 

section  2(c)(ii)  of  the  Act  and  whether  its  complaint 

was competent under section 8 of the Act? 

2.  Whether  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (CPC)  is 

applicable to proceedings under the Act and whether 

the  impugned  order  suffered  from  material  illegality 

for  entertaining  an  application  under  Order  VII  Rule 

11  of  CPC  and  dismissing  the  complaint  for  being 

barred by law? 

3.  Are  the  respondents  liable  to  pay  compensation  to 

the appellant under the Act?  

6. 

The  definition  of  the  complainant  is  provided  under 

section 2(c) of the Act as follows: 

“Consumer” means any person who— 

 
 
 
 
8. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

(i) 

buys goods for a consideration which has been 

paid  or  partly  paid  and  partly  promised  to  be 

paid or under any system of deferred payment 

or hire purchase and includes any user of such 

goods  but  does  not  include  a  person  who 

obtains  such  goods  for  re-sale  or  for  any 

commercial purpose; or 

(ii)  hires any goods or services for a consideration 

which has been paid or promised or partly paid 

and  partly  promised  or  under  any  system  of 

deferred payment and includes any beneficiary 

of such services.  

7. 

There  is  no  standard  definition  of  the  term  “consumer” 

that  has  universal  acceptance.  The  terms  “consume”  and 

“consumer” are defined and used in various tax statutes and also 

in  statutes  promulgated  to  protect  the  interests  of  consumers 

and users of goods and services. The scope and meaning of the 

term consumer thus depends on how it is defined in a statute. As 

the Act defines the term “consumer” for purposes of interpreting 

its scope, dictionary definitions cannot be looked at. But in order 

to appreciate the common understanding of the term as used in 

ordinary parlance, it would be helpful to look at the definition of 

consumer as provided in Black’s Law Dictionary, for example: 

“Consumer.(15c)  1.  Someone  who  buys  goods  or  services  for 

personal,  family,  or household  use,  with  no intention of resale; 

A  natural  person  who  uses  products  for  personal  rather  than 

business  purposes.   2.  Under  some  consumer  protection 

statutes, any individual. 15 USCA SS 1679a (1), 1681a (c).   

"The  term  'consumer'  has  various  legal  meanings.  It  can  be 

used  broadly,  to  mean  citizens  who  'consume'  or  use  goods  or 

services,  ranging 

from  plumbing  to  health  services  and 

education.  Usually  it  is  used  in  a  more  restrictive  way.  

 
 
 
9. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

Statutory  provisions,  designed  to  protect  purchasers  of  goods 

and  services,  contain  specific  measures  applicable  only  to 

consumers. The statutory definitions of 'consumer' often contain 

slight  variations,  but 

there  are  certain  common  core 

features goods  or  services.  In  some  instances,  in  addition  to 

natural  persons,  it  can  also  include  businesses  such  as  sole  - 

traders  and  partnerships,  for  example,  under  consumer  credit 

measures.  Occasion  ally,  even  companies  come  within  the 

definition, if acting outside their normal business activities - for 

example  a  manufacturing  company  buying  a  car  for  a  director. 

"Deborah  Parry,"  Consumer,  "in The  New Oxford Companion  to 

L aw 213, 213 (Peter Cane & Joanne Conaghan eds., 2008).   

8. 

In some judgments defining the term consumer in other 

jurisdictions, it has been held that the word consumer refers to a 

natural  person  who  is  a  consumer  of  goods  or  services  in  his 

personal  capacity  and  is  not  using  goods  or  services  for 

commercial  purpose.  This  is,  however,  not  a  universal  rule,  for 

example, in the Advanced Law Lexicon Volume-1 3RD Edition the 

following is provided:  

“A  construction  corporation  which  purchased  the  vehicle  for 

the purpose of supervision of the works by its officers, comes 

within the ambit of the expression ‘consumer’ under Section 

2  (d)  of  the  Act.  Alson  Automobiles  P.  Ltd.  v.  J  &  K  Project 

Constu.  Corpn.  AIR  2003  J  &  K  15,  16,  para  5  [J  &  K 

Consumer Protection Act (16 of 1987), S. 2(d)]” 

9. 

In  the  context  of  Sales  Tax,  it  was  held  by  the  Indian 

Supreme Court in State of Karnataka VB Raghurama Shetty (AIR 

1981 SC 1206) that: 

“Consumption  in  the  true  economic  sense  does  not  mean 

only  use  of  goods  in  the  production  of  consumer's  goods  or 

final  utilization  of  consumers  goods  by  consumers  involving 

activities  like  eating  of  food,  drinking  of  beverages,  wearing 

of  clothes  or  using  of  an  automobile  by  its  owner  for 

 
 
 
10. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

domestic  purposes.  A  manufacturer  also 

consumes 

commodities  which  are  ordinarily  called  raw  materials  when 

he  produces  semi-finished  goods  which  have  to  undergo 

further  processes  of  production  before  they  can  be 

transformed 

into  consumers'  goods.   At  every  such 

intermediate  stage  of  production,  some  utility  or  value  is 

added to goods which are used as raw materials and at every 

such  stage  the  raw  materials  are  consumed.   State  of 

Karnataka  V.  Raghurama  Shetty,  AIR  1981  SC  1206,  1208. 

(Krnataka Sales Tax Act (25 of 1957), S. 6 (i)] 

It was further held in Inder Singh v. Kartar Singh, (AIR 1979 SC 

1721) that: 

“In its  primary  sense  means  the  act  of  consuming  and  in 

ordinary parlance means the use of an article in a way which 

destroys, washes, or uses up that article. It is not necessary 

that  by  the  act  consumption,  the  commodity  must  be 

destroyed or used up.  Inder Singh v. Kartar Singh, AIR 1979 

SC  1721,  1723.  [Saurashtra  Terminal  Tax  and  Octroi 

Ordinance  (1949),  S.  3,  Rules  (1949),  R.  3,  Sch.  1,  Item 

23]”  

10. 

Given  that  there  is  no  conceptual  agreement  that  on 

what the term consumption entails and there is no standardized 

format  for  consumer  protection  laws  across  jurisdictions,  the 

definition  of  the  term  consumer 

in  statutes 

from  other 

jurisdictions  or  the  structure  and  scope  of  consumer  protection 

laws  enacted  and  applied  in  other  jurisdictions  are  not  very 

helpful in furthering an understanding of the scope of definitions 

provided in the Act. We thus need to rely on the text used by the 

legislature  in  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  its  meaning  as 

deciphered  in  relevant  judicial  pronouncements.  It  was  held  by 

this  Court  in  Muhammad  Farooq  Khan  v.  Excel-Labs,  through 

Central Executive Officer and another (PLD 2015 Islamabad 81) 

 
 
 
11. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

that the Act is a beneficial piece of legislation and the provisions 

of  such  law  are  not  be  given  a  restrictive  meaning.  It  was 

similarly held by this Court in Nargis Sultana Chohan v. Presiding 

Officer  and  others  (2015  PCr.LJ  941)  that  term  “service”  is  not 

been given a restrictive meaning in the Act.  

11. 

In  view  of  the  case  law  in  which  provisions  of  the  Act 

have been interpreted, the term “consumer” is not to be given a 

restrictive me0aning. In the present case, the appellant claims to 

fall  within  section  2(c)(ii)  of  the  Act  that  deals  with  services. 

Section  2(c)(ii)  has  two  prongs.  It  firstly  covers  a  person  who 

hires  any  service  for  consideration  which  has  been  paid  or 

promised  or  partly  paid  or  partly  promised  or  is  subject  to 

deferred  payment.  The  second  prong  deals  with  any  beneficiary 

of  such  service.  It  is  evident  from  the  language  used  by  the 

legislature in section 2(c)(ii) that anyone who hires a service for 

consideration  which  may  or  may  not  be  paid  by  him  directly  or 

fully  would  fall  within  the  definition  of  consumer.  It  further 

provides  that  any  beneficiary  of  a  service,  that  may  have  been 

hired by a third party and may have been paid for a third party 

or in relation to which compensation may or may not have been 

made  and  remains  payable  under  a  deferred  payment 

arrangement, would also fall within the definition of consumer.  

12. 

Section 2(c)(ii) defines services as follows: 

“Services”  includes  of  any  description  which  is  made 

available to potential users and includes the provision of 

facilities 

in  connection  with  banking, 

financing, 

insurance, 

transport,  manufacturing, 

processing, 

accountancy,  supply  of  electrical,  mechanical  or  any 

 
 
 
12. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

other form of energy, boarding or lodging, construction 

work,  amusement,  catering,  security  or  purveying  a 

news  or  other  information,  and  similar  other  services, 

but does not include the rendering of any service free of 

charge or under the contract of personal service;   

As  aforesaid,  it  has  been  held  by  this  Court  in  an  earlier 

judgment  that  the  definition  of  services  is  not  to  be  given  a 

restrictive meaning. 

13. 

In view of the facts of the instant appeal, it is admitted 

that  the  respondents  were  providing  services  to  deliver  a 

consignment  from  China  to  Islamabad  which  service  was 

engaged  by  Yaspro  Electronics  China  subject  to  payment  of 

compensation  to  the  respondents.  It  is  also  admitted  that  the 

respondents provided the appellant its services as clearing agent 

to  have  the  consignment  cleared  by  the  customs  authorities  at 

Lahore and have it delivered in Islamabad. The contention of the 

respondents is that the services were hired by Yaspro Electronics 

China  and  paid  by  such  vendor  and  consequently  the  appellant 

has  received  the  services  free  of  charge  and  therefore  the 

services did not fall within the definition of services under section 

2(c)(ii)  of  the  Act.  This  argument  is  misconceived.  The 

respondents are a commercial enterprise and one of the leading 

courier  companies  providing  courier  services  across  the  world. 

Such  services  are  not  provided  to  ordinary  customers  for 

charitable  reasons  but  on  payment  of  the  respondents’  service 

charges,  which  was  admittedly  done  in  this  case  as  well. 

Whether  or  not  the  appellant  hired  the  services  of  the 

respondents  is  irrelevant  insofar  as  it  is  the  beneficiary  of  such 

 
 
 
13. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

services  and  therefore  clearly  false  within  the  definition  of 

consumer under section 2(c)(ii) of the Act.  

14. 

The  reasoning  of  the 

learned  Sessions  Court 

in 

concluding that the appellant is not consumer for purposes of the 

Act is as follows: 

“In the instant matter, services of respondents were hired for 

the delivery of shipment. Admittedly, said services were not 

hired  by  the  complainant,  rather  the  shipment  was  booked 

by  Yaspro  Electronics  in  China;  it  was  mainly  contended  on 

behalf of complainant that being recipient, the complaint was 

beneficiary of such services in terms of section 2(c)(ii) of the 

Act,  ibid.  The  contention  of  complainant  was  not  strictly  in 

conformity  with  the  scheme  of  consumer  protection  for  the 

reasons that, firstly, consumer protection laws are framed for 

Business 

to  Consumer 

(B2C) 

transactions;  whereas, 

admittedly  complainant  was  not  the  end  user/consumer 

rather it was a commercially/business entity that acted as an 

intermediary/middleman. Secondly, the complainant was not 

privy  to  the  service  deliver  agreement  executed  in  China 

between  Yaspro  Electronics  and  respondents.  Thirdly,  in 

order to come within the ambit of section 2(c)(ii) of the Act, 

id  as beneficiary  of services,  it  is  a condition  precedent  that 

one must also pay for such services as an end user.” 

15. 

With  great  respect,  the  reasoning  of  the  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Court  is  fundamentally  flawed.  It  is  unclear 

wherefrom  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Court  derived  the 

inference  that  the  intent  of  the  legislature  in  the  Act  was  to 

protect  business  to  consumer  transactions  as  stated  in  the 

impugned  order.  The  impugned  order  seems  to  be  relying  on  a 

general  understanding  of  the  purpose  of  consumer  laws  as 

opposed  to  interpreting  provisions  of  the  Act  and  the  legislative 

intent that can be deciphered from the words used in the Act. It 

 
 
 
14. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

is  settled  law  that  when  the  words  used  in  a  statute  provide  a 

clear meaning, it is not for the courts to read into them what is 

not  provided, 

including 

the  presiding  officer’s  academic 

understanding  of  any  concept  employed  in  the  statute.  The 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Court  further  erred  when  it  focused 

its  attention  on  the  use  of  the  goods  that  comprised  the 

consignment  to  be  delivered  by  the  respondents  as  opposed  to 

the services being rendered by the respondents. It appears that 

the  fact  that  the  goods  ordered  by  the  appellant  were  to  be 

delivered  to  a  third  party  influenced  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Court  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was 

not  an  end  user/consumer  of  the  goods  ordered,  and  was 

instead an intermediary and consequently did not fall within the 

definition of consumer. As already discussed above, a beneficiary 

of a service falls within the definition of consumer under section 

2(c)(ii)  of  the  Act.  In  the  instant  case,  the  consumption  in 

question was not that of goods that comprised the consignment, 

in relation to which the appellant might rightly be considered to 

be  an  intermediary.  The  consumption  in  question  was  that  of 

courier  services  provided  by  the  respondents,  of  which  the 

appellant  was  a  beneficiary  and  also  the  end  user.  As  in  the 

instant  case  there  was  no  further  obligation  on  part  of  the 

respondents to deliver the consignment to a third party that the 

appellant had contracted with to provide the equipment ordered 

from  China.  Further  the  language  in  section  2(c)(ii)  used  the 

word  “any”  where  it  speaks  of  a  beneficiary  of  services  and 

consequently  even  if  there  are  multiple  beneficiaries  of  services 

provided,  they  need  not  be  end  users  or  end  beneficiaries  of 

 
 
 
15. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

such  services  to  fall  within  the  definition  of  consumer.  The 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  further  misinterpreted  the 

language and requirements of section 2(c)(ii) when it concluded 

that a beneficiary must pay for the services that have been hired 

and  being  provided  in  order  to  qualify  as  a  consumer.  As  has 

been  explained  above,  there  are  two  different  prongs  within 

section  2(c)(ii)  and  the  second  prong  that  characterizes  a 

beneficiary as a consumer does not require that such beneficiary 

must  also  be  the  person  who  hires  the  services  in  question  or 

pays for them.  

16. 

In view of the above, the answer to the first question is 

that  as  a  beneficiary  of  services  rendered  by  the  respondents, 

the  appellant  would  appear  to  fall  within  the  definition  of 

consumer  as  defined  under  section  2(c)  of  the  Act  and 

consequently  the  complaint  filed  by  the  appellant  could  not  be 

dismissed on the basis that  it was not a consumer  for purposes 

of section 2(c) of the Act and consequently not a complainant for 

purposes of section 8 of the Act.  

17. 

The  second  question  before  the  Court  is  whether  the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Court  erred 

in 

law  when 

it 

entertained  the  application  under  Order  VII  Rule  11  of  CPC  and 

accepted  the  same  whereby  dismissing  the  complaint  of  the 

appellant.  While  it  must  be  conceded  that  the  provisions  of  the 

Act are not happily worded, this much is clear that in its pith and 

substance and in terms of its dominant purpose the Act does not 

seek  to  determine  civil  rights  and  liabilities  of  those  who  fall 

within its scope. The legislature could well have chosen to frame 

 
 
 
16. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

the  statute  such  that  it  was  meant  to  provide  a  summary 

mechanism  to  resolve  the  grievances  of  consumers  and  provide 

for civil remedies alone, as has been done in other jurisdictions. 

But as a matter of policy, the legislature chose not to do so. 

18. 

 The Act is a penal statute that creates mandatory legal 

obligations  for providers of goods and  services under the  threat 

of  penalty  which  extends  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  up  to 

two  years.  The  nomenclature  and  terms  used  by  the  legislature 

are those that belong within a penal statute. Section 8 of the Act 

speaks  of  a  complaint  as  opposed  to  a  claim.  The  term 

“complaint” is defined under section 4(h) of the Cr.P.C. as, “the 

allegation made orally or  in writing to  a Magistrate, with  a view 

to  his  taking  action  under  this  code,  that  some  person  whether 

known  or  unknown,  has  committed  an  offence,  but  it  does  not 

include the report of a police officer”. The use of the word “code” 

obviously refers to the Cr.P.C. And to the extent that provisions 

of Cr.P.C are in conflict with provisions of the Act, the Act, being 

a  special  law  later  in  time,  will  prevail.  The  use  of  the  term 

complaint  in  deliberates  which  is  why  the  definition  of  the  term 

“complainant”  in  the  Act  includes  a  consumer  association,  the 

Federal  Government,  Chief  Commissioner  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  and  the  Capital  Development  Authority  who  would  not 

have  a  pecuniary  claim  of  compensation  against  a  respondent 

named  in  the  complaint.  The  jurisdiction  to  consider  the 

complaint  and  take  cognizance  of  it,  if  a  case  is  made  out,  is 

vested  in  the  Court  of  Sessions  as  opposed  to  the  Civil  Court.  

Section  8A  of  the  Act  empowers  a  Special  Magistrate  appointed 

under  section  14A  of  the  Cr.P.C  to  conduct  a  summary  trial 

 
 
 
17. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

under  section  262  to  265  of  Cr.P.C.,  subject  to  conditions 

provided  therein,  and  an  appeal  against  an  order  of  the  Special 

Magistrate then lies with the Sessions Court. Similarly, section 9 

provides  for  jail  term  of  up  to  two  years  in  a  case  of  breach  of 

rights  of  consumer  protected  under  section  5  of  the  Act  or  in 

cases of false advertisement under section 7 of the Act. Section 

10  provides  the  remedy  of  an  appeal  before  this  Court  and 

explicitly  states  that  provisions  of  Cr.P.C.  are  to  be  applied  in 

respect  of  an  appeal  under  the  Act.  It  is  settled  law  that  an 

appeal  is  a  continuation  of  the  trial.  It  can  therefore  not  be 

countenanced  that  the  Sessions  Court  is  to  conduct  a  trial  and 

adjudicate  a  matter  being  guided  by  the  CPC,  while  the  High 

Court  in  appeal  is  to  be  guided  by  Cr.P.C.  In  view  of  the 

provisions of the Act and intent of the legislature that emanates 

therefrom,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Act  is  a  penal  statute  and  the 

application  of  Cr.P.C.  is  explicitly  provided  for  as  deemed 

necessary by the legislature.  

19. 

In  view  of  the  scheme  of  section  8  of  the  Act  that  a 

complainant is to file a complaint which is then taken up by the 

Sessions  Court  nominated  as  the  Authority  under  section  6  of 

the  Act.  If  the  Sessions  Court  concludes  on  the  basis  of  the 

complaint that rights of a consumer have been infringed, it is to 

issue a notice to the respondent which is required to file a reply 

within  a  period  of  seven  days.  After  considering  the  complaint 

and  reply  and  giving  parties  an  opportunity  of  being  heard  the 

Sessions  Court  is  to  proceed  further.  If  the  Sessions  Court 

concludes  that  a  breach  of  law  is  made  out,  it  can  proceed  by 

framing a charge, recording evidence and providing the accused 

 
 
 
18. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

with  an  opportunity  to  cross-examine  witnesses  and  an 

opportunity to adduce his own evidence, before deciding whether 

the  charge  has  been  established  or  not  in  view  of  the  evidence 

adduced,  in  accordance  with  principles  that  regulate  a  fair  trial. 

In  the  event  that  no  case  is  made  out,  the  Sessions  Court  can 

pass an order akin to that of acquittal under the Cr.P.C. Even at 

the  preliminary  stage,  after  considering  the  complaint  and 

response by the accused, the Sessions Court could conclude that 

no  case  is  made  out  and  pass  an  order  similar  to  that  of 

discharge.  It  is  only  after  considering  the  complaint  by  the 

complainant  and  the  response  by  the  respondent  that  the 

Sessions  Court  can  determine  how  to  proceed  further  and 

whether or not to frame a charge or conduct a trial under section 

9(1) or 9(2) of the Act. The Sessions Court can also come to the 

conclusion that there is a breach but it is not of such nature that 

attracts the penalty of imprisonment  under  section 9(1) or 9(2) 

of  the  Act,  but  the  infraction  as  such  renders  the  respondent 

liability  to  pay  compensation  under  section  9(3)  of  the  Act  for 

any  damage  or  loss  caused  due  to  an  unfair  trade  practice  or 

under  section  7  of  the  Act  for  loss  caused  due  to  false 

advertisement.  However,  the  fact  that  in  such  event  the 

alternate remedy is in the nature of pecuniary compensation and 

not jail term would not automatically attract provisions of CPC to 

the  proceedings  under  the  Act.  This,  however,  does  not  mean 

that in case of award of compensation under section 7(2) or 9(3) 

of the Act, the Sessions Court can act in a whimsical manner in 

breach  of  Article  10A  rights  of  the  person  held  liable  to  pay 

compensation  to  a  complainant.  For  such  purposes  in  order  to 

 
 
 
19. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

determine  the  liability  for  compensation  and  the  quantum  of 

compensation  payable,  the  Sessions  Court  would  be  under  an 

obligation  to  afford  the  parties  an  opportunity  to  adduce 

evidence in support of the case and in defense, respectively, and 

pass  a  reasoned  order  which  affixes  any  liability  to  pay 

compensation  under  section  7(2)  or  section  9(3)  of  the  Act,  as 

the  case  may  be,  which  is  proportionate  to  the  damage  or  loss 

attributable to the respondent.  

20. 

In  relation  to  a  fair  trial,  the  principles  underlying  the 

Cr.P.C.  and  the  CPC  are  not  in  conflict  with  one  another.  Both 

require that a party bringing a grievance to the court should be 

afforded  an  opportunity  to  make  out  a  case,  the  party  against 

whom the case is being made should be afforded an opportunity 

to  defend  himself  by  confronting  the  evidence  adduced  by  the 

complainant  and  be  given  the  option  to  adduce  evidence  in  his 

defense,  and  after  hearing  the  parties  and  considering  the 

evidence,  the  court  is  to  pass  judgment  in  its  capacity  as  a 

neutral arbiter of the law. It has therefore been held in  relation 

to  special  laws  that  deal  with  civil  rights  of  parties  that  even 

when  provisions  of  CPC  are  not  attracted,  the  court  can  derive 

guidance  from  the  principles  underlying  the  CPC.  It  was  in  the 

interest  of  fair  trial  that  this  Court  had  held  in  Ashfaq  Ahmed 

Khan  v.  PTCL  and  others  (PLD  2016  Islamabad  112)  that  for 

such  purpose,  it  may  be  desirable  for  the  Authority  to  frame 

issues and allow parties to lead evidence. However, as aforesaid, 

the provisions of CPC are not applicable to the adjudication of a 

complaint  under  the  Act,  and  for  purposes  of  determination  of 

liability and quantum of compensation principles of fair trial must 

 
 
 
20. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

be  abided  by.  In  case  of  the  Act,  being  a  special  law,  the 

Authority  can  derive  guidance,  for  purposes  of  determining 

entitlement  to  compensation  and  quantum  of  the  compensation 

payable, from principles of fair trial as enunciated in the Cr.P.C, 

provisions of which have been made applicable by the legislature 

explicitly to exercise of authority under Sections 8A and Section 

10 of the Act. The principles of Cr.P.C. would also be attracted to 

guide  the  exercise  of  authority  and  discretion  by  the  Sessions 

Court under Sections 7, 8 and 9 of the Act.   

21. 

The  scheme  of  the  law  suggests  that  the  breaches  for 

which  liability  under  the  Act  can  be  enforced  have  been  strictly 

defined  even  if  the  definitions  of  “consumer”  and  “services”  are 

not strict. Section 9(1) provides that anyone liable for breach of 

the  right  of  a  consumer  protected  under  section  5  of  the  Act  is 

punishable  with  imprisonment  for  upto  two  years.  It  is  only 

under  section  5(1)(a)  and  5(1)(b)  that  a  complaint  against  a 

provider  of  goods  or  services  seems  possible  as  the  rest  of  the 

sub-clauses  of  section  5  seem  to  create  an  obligation  for  the 

State to protect the rights of consumers. Thus, to the extent that 

a  provider  of  goods  or  services  is  marketing  goods  that  are 

hazardous to life and property or refusing to provide information 

in  relation  to  quality,  quantity,  potency,  purity,  standard  and 

price  of  goods  and  services,  such  conduct  of  the  provider  may 

attract  a  penalty  under  section  9(1)  of  the  Act.  Section  9(2) 

seeks  to  punish  a  provider  of  goods  or  services  liable  for  false 

advertisement  in  breach  of  section  7 of  the  Act.  Further  section 

8A empowers the Special Magistrate to punish anyone liable for 

profiteering,  hoarding,  black  marketing,  adulteration  of  food 

 
 
 
21. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

items,  selling  of  expired  items  of  food  and  other  items  unfit  for 

human consumption or charging for goods and services in excess 

of  the  prices  fixed  by  the  competent  authority.  Section  2(f) 

defines  “unfair  trade  practice”  which  essentially  deals  with  two 

sorts of injuries: (i) those in relation to which Special Magistrate 

is  also  empowered  to  act  under  section  8A;  and  (ii)  acts  that 

broadly  fall  within  the  larger  concept  of  deceptive  marketing. 

Thus, to the extent that a complainant alleges that he has been 

injured  by  an  unfair  trade  practice  (in  relation  to  which  the 

Special  Magistrate  may  or  may  not  have  exercised  any 

authority),  he  may  be  found  entitled  to  compensation  by  the 

Sessions  Court  under  section  9(3)  of  the  Act.  Likewise,  if  a 

complainant  alleges 

to  have  been 

injured  by  a 

false 

advertisement  that  falls  within  the  scope  of  section  7  and  the 

Sessions  Court  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  infraction  as 

such does not attract a jail term, it may still award compensation 

to  the  complainant  under  section  7(2)  of  the  Act.  But  as 

delineated  above, 

it 

is  not  every  breach  or  negligence 

attributable to a supplier of goods or services that would attract 

penalties  under  the  provisions  of  the  Act.  While  the  terms 

“consumer” and “services” have been broadly defined in the Act, 

the  concept  of  “unfair  trade  practice”  and  the  penal  provisions 

have been narrowly defined. Consequently, while a wide range of 

a providers of goods and services would fall within the scope of 

the  Act,  the  scope  of  acts  and  omissions  that  attract  penalties, 

as provided under the Act, is fairly limited.  

22. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  Court  has  come  to  the 

conclusion  in  relation  to  question  No.2  that  the  CPC  is  not 

 
 
 
22. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

applicable  to  proceedings  under  the  Act  and  the  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Court  could  not  have  been  entertained  an 

application under Order VII Rule 11 of CPC to determine whether 

or  not  the  complaint  was  barred  by  law  in  view  of  the  law  and 

jurisprudence  developed  in  relation  to  Order  VII  Rule  11  of  the 

CPC.  This  is  not  a  simple  question  of  misstating  a  provision  of 

law,  but  that  of  misconceiving  the  penal  nature  of  the  Act  and 

the  broader  approach  to  procedure  that  must  be  employed  by 

the  Sessions  Court  in  its  capacity  as  Authority  to  adjudicate  a 

complaint  while  upholding  the  Article  10A  rights  of  the 

complainant.  

23. 

The  precedents  cited  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

respondents  do  not  support  the  impugned  judgment.  Talat 

Inayatullah  Khan  and  another  v.  Dr.  Anis  Ahmed  Sheikh  (PLD 

2015  Sindh  134)  and  Kartar  Lal  Pirwani  v.  Muhammad  Waqar 

Azeem  and  3  others  (2018  YLR  2219)  were  cited  for  the 

proposition  that  there  was  no  privity  of  contract  between  the 

parties and  Bolan Beverages (Pvt.) Limited v. Pepsi Co. Inc and 

4  others  (PLD  2004  S.C    860)  was  cited  to  explain  the  agency 

principle in order to argue that the same was not attracted in the 

instant  case.  The  judgments  do  not  help  the  case  of  the 

respondents as the liability, if any, in the instant case is alleged 

to  emanate  from  provisions  of  the  Act  and  neither  from  a  pre-

existing  contractual  relationship  between  the  parties  nor  a 

relationship of principal and agent. As has been discussed above, 

in  terms  of  definitions  of  the  terms  “consumer”  and  “services”, 

the  Act  does  not  set  out  any  precondition  that  in  order  for  a 

consumer  to  be  eligible  to  assert  rights  against  a  provider  of 

 
 
 
23. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

goods  and  services  under  the  Act,  such  consumer  must  have  a 

valid  claim  under  the  Contract  Act,  1872.    Messrs  Walia  Steel 

Industries PLC v. Messrs Saga Shipping and Trading Corporation 

Ltd and others (PLD 2019 Sindh 22) and Messrs Ash Associates, 

Islam  Colony,  Sialkot  Road,  Gujranwala  v.  The  chief  Executive 

Officer,  Punjab  Rural  Support  Program  and  2  others  (2019  CLC 

1303)  were  cited  for  the  proposition  that  an  application 

misstating  a  provision  of  law  does  not  bar  a  court  from 

exercising its power and jurisdiction merely because of incorrect 

reference  to  a  provision  of  the  law.  In  Messrs  Ash  Associates 

(2019  CLC 1303),  cited  by  the  respondents,  the  learned  Lahore 

High Court actually held that an application under Order VII Rule 

11  of  CPC  could  not  be  treated  as  an  application  under  section 

34  of  the  Arbitration  Act,  1940  and  the  revision  was 

consequently  allowed.  This  case  does  not  help  the  respondent. 

Even  the  principle  laid  down  in  Messrs  Walia  Steel  Industries 

(PLD 2019 Sindh 22) is not attracted in the present case.  

24. 

In the present case the error that afflicts the impugned 

order  is  that  the  court  has  misconceived  the  nature  of  the 

statute  and  the  procedure  that  must  be  followed  in  applying  its 

judicial mind while upholding the right of fair trial of the parties 

and  reaching  a  judicious  decision.  The  learned  counsel  for  the 

respondents cited a few judgments which interpret provisions of 

the Punjab Consumer Protection Act, 2005 which do not help the 

respondents’  case  or  further  any  argument  made  by  the 

respondents  on  enunciating  the  meaning  and  definition  of  the 

provisions of the Act.   

 
 
 
24. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

25. 

In  view  of  the  findings  of  this  Court  that  the  appellant 

falls  within  the  definition  of  consumer  under  section  2(c)(ii)  of 

the  Act  and  further  that  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Court 

erred  in  entertaining  an  application  under  Order  VII  Rule  11  of 

CPC  and  dismissing  the  complaint  for  being  barred  by  law,  it 

need  not  to  adjudicate  the  third  question  as  to  whether  the 

respondents can be held liable for any breach under provisions of 

the  Act.  The  learned  Additional  Sessions  Court  has  not  passed 

any  order  after  considering  the  complaint  filed  by  the  appellant 

and  a  response  filed  by  the  respondents  as  required  under 

section  8  of  the  Act.  Adjudication  of  the  merits  of  this  case  by 

this court in an appellate capacity would deny the parties a right 

to  appeal  under  section  10  of  the  Act,  which  would  be  against 

the interest of preserving the rights of the parties to fair trial and 

due process.  

26. 

As this court has already held that the impugned order 

suffers  from  material  illegality  and  cannot  be  allowed  to  stand, 

the question of whether or not there was sufficient cause for the 

delay  of  a  few  days  in  filing  the  appeal,  as  alleged  by  the 

respondent, also becomes insignificant. It was held by this Court 

in  Federal  Board  of  Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education  VS 

Azam Ali Khan (2017 YLR 906) that, “the question that crops up 

in  the  mind  is  when  a  judgment  or  decree  of  the  learned  Civil 

Court is clearly the consequence of misreading of evidence or is 

contrary to the law laid down by superior courts, will a revisional 

court  shut  its  eyes  to  the  illegality  in  such  a  judgment  and 

decree  simply  because  an  appeal  against  the  same  has  been 

dismissed  as  time-barred?  I  think  not.”  The  Court  had  cited 

 
 
 
25. 

  Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 2020 

Muhammad  Swaleh  VS  M/S  United  Grain  &  Fodder  Agencies 

(PLD  1964  SC  97)  and  Town  Municipal  Administration  VS  Rifat 

Hussain (2003 CLC 1370) in reliance. 

25. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  impugned  order  is  set  aside 

for  suffering  from  material  illegality  and  having  been  passed  in 

breach  of  the  provisions  of  the  Act.  The  appeal  is  allowed  and 

the matter is remanded back  to  the learned Additional  Sessions 

Judge to be considered afresh in accordance with the provisions 

of the Act.   

        (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 07.05.2021. 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting.  

Saeed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
