JtlpG.tri,ENT SHEEI
lN THE !9LAU|ABAp,HIGH  cguBr,
ls|,A.M,A,BA.D

Wrlt PeUtlon  No. 2O2gl2O2O
Mst. Rafia Bibi
VS
Atif Mehmood, etc.

Petitioner  by:
Respondents 1&2 by:
Respondent No.3 by:
Date of Decision:

Malik Saqib Mahmood,  Advocate,
Mr. Abdul Kamran Butt, Advocate,
Abdul Hameed Sl,
3'!.p8.202-0.

FIA? AFIUIA,D ANJUU JA,NPBANT .1,- Through the instant
writ petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution  read
with Section 561-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure
('Cr.P.C.'), petitioner  (Mst. Rafia Bibi) impugns the order
dated 17.07.2020, passed by the learned Additional  Sessions
Judge-lV,  lslamabad-East,  whereby her application under
Section 491 Cr.P.C for the custody of respondent  No.2 Saif Ali
(Minor)  was disposed of with observation that the petitioner
may approach the concerned Guardian  Court for the custody
of minor, if so desires.
2.  Facts, relevant for the disposal of instant writ petition
are that the petitioner contracted marriage  with respondent
No.1 (Atif Mehmood)  on 31.05.2015;  the couple  blessed with a
son namely Saif Ali/respondent  No.2,  now aged about three
years; that by the passage of time, relation  of spouses
became strained;  that efforts for compromise culminated
into an agreement dated 15.06.2020, whereby  respondent
No.1 had to pay Rs.15000/- per month as maintenance  to the
petitioner; that an affidavit  to this effect was also executed  by
the respondent  No.1.
3.  According  to petitioner's  stance, respondent No.1 after
giving severe beating, expelled  her out of his house  by
snatching the minor/respondent  No.2; that she filed
applicatlon  under Section  491 of Cr.P.C but the same was

Writ PeUUon  No.2O29 I 2O2O

-2-

dismissed vide impugned  order, hence, the instant writ
petition.
4.  Learned counsel for the petitioner  contends that the
petitioner  being real mother  is entitled to have custody  of the
minor, who is just three years old; that there is no substitute
for love and affection of a mother;  that emotional  attachment
made basis to discard  the claim of the petitioner  was due to
the fact that the minor  is in custody  of respondent  No.1/father
for quite sufficient time and that this factor alone is not the
paramount consideration to determine the eligibility of the
petitioner to have custody of the minor. ln support of his
contentions, learned  counsel  placed reliance upon case laws
reported  as 2019 SCMR 116, 2OO1 SCMR 1782,  PLD 2012  SC
758, PLD 2OO4 SC 1,2020 MLD 740 (Sindh), PLD 2019 Lahore

281, 2019 PCT.LJ  890 (Sindh)  and 2O2O YLR 1 256.
5.  Learned counsel for respondents  No.1&2 repelled  the
above submissions by arguing that the proceedings
conducted  by the learned  ASJ, not only show the intenUwish
of the minor but also the density of the interest of the
petitioner towards the minor. According  to learned counsel,
during the proceedings before the learned ASJ, when the
minor was handed over to the petitioner, he started  crying
and on asking of the learned Judge,  he was relieved  by the
mother and then the minor hugged the respondent  No.1.
Learned counsel further submits that at that juncture
petitioner  herself  asserted that the response of the minor had
been due to the effect that he was in custody of the
respondent No.1 for the last one year and for this reason,  he
was not acquainted  with the petitioner; that the agreemenU
affidavit,  made basis to seek direction for the recovery  of
mlnor was in fact, an undertaking by the respondent  No.1
regarding payment of maintenance to the petitioner  and that,
too, subject to cohabitation and performing  matrimonial
obligations; that except for few months of his birth, the minor
is living with respondent  No.1 and is being nourished  with

Writ PeUtion  No, 2929120.20

-3-

pasteurized milk, he is not a suckling baby and is in
conducive and congenial  atmosphere  in the custody of his
father and parental grandparents;  that if the stance of the
petitioner qua snatching of the minor is presumed to be
correct,  even then she moved the learned  ASJ after a delay
of about one month which,  too, shows her lack of interest
and that the courts remained open despite of pandemic of
Covid-19, to entertain urgent nature work like the one at
hand, therefore, this ground is also not available to the
petitioner. Learned counsel  concludes that the grounds
warranting exercise under Section 491 Cr.P.C  were not
available, therefore, the learned ASJ rightly observed so,
hence, the impugned order is well reasoned and does not call
for any interference. Reliance is placed upon case laws
reported  as 2020 P.Cr.LJ Note 50 [Sindh  (Hyderabad  Bench)J,
2015 P.Cr.Ll 1597 (Lahore),  2015 P.Cr.LJ 880 (Lahore),  PU 2012
Cr.C (Lahore)  175. PLJ  2O1O Cr.C (Lahore) 396 and PL, 2005 Cr.C

(Lahore)  1142.
6.  Arguments of learned counsels appearing  on behalf of
the parties have been heard and record examined with their
able assistance.
7.  At the inception, it is necessary  to mention that the
learned counsel for respondents 1&2 on the preceding  date
i.e. 26.08.2020 and today as well persistently  argued that
during the proceedings before the learned ASJ, the petitioner
was confronted that why the minor was hugging his father
and was not inclined  to go with the petitioner, she replied  that
the minor was with the respondent  No.l for about one year.
8.  On both the stated  occasions,  neither the petitioner  nor
her counsel contradicted the fact that the minor  had been
with the respondent  No.1 for about one year. Moreover, no
ground of snatching the minor has been argued.  These facts,
ipso facto, bring the present  situation out of the ambit
warranting  exercise  of jurisdiction under Article  199 of the
Constitution read with Section  561-A  Cr.P.C. While forming

Writ PetiUon  No.2O29 I 2O2O

-4-

this view, guadance is sought  from the case of frlst. Nadia
Perueen  V, frlst, A-lr?as Noreen an4 otberc (PLD 2012 SC 758)
wherein  at Para-3, it is held that-

"lt has consistently  been held by this Court in the cases of
Muhammad  Javed Umrao v. Miss Uzma Vahid (1988 SCMR
1891),  Nisar Muhammad  and another v. Sultan Zari (PLD
1997 SC 852), Mst. Khalida  Perveen  v. Muhammad Sultan
Mehmood  and another (PLD  2OO4 SC 1) and Naziha  Ghazali
v. The State and another  (2001  SCMR 17821that  the matter
of custody of minor children  can be brought  before a High
Court  under section 491, Cr.P.C. only if the children are of
very tender  ages they have quite recently been snatched
away from lawful  custody  and there is a real urgency in the
matter and also that in such a case the High Court  may only
regulate  interim  custody of the children leaving  the matter of
final custody to be determined  by a Guardian  Judge.  ln
those cases this Court had repeatedly  emphasized  that in
such matters the jurisdiction of a High Court under section
491, Cr.P.C. is to be exercised,  sparingly and such exercise
may be undertaken  only in exceptional  and extraordinary
cases of rea! urgency keeping  in view that even a Guardian
Judge  has the requisite  powers of recovery  of minor
children  and regulating their interim custody. ln the case in
hand the petitioner's children were neither of very tender
ages nor had they been snatched away from the petitioner
and, thus, the petitioner's petition filed before the Lahore
High Court, Lahore  under section 491, Cr.P.C. was
misconceived.  The interim order passed  by this Court  in
connection  with the present  petition on 20-12-2010  shows
that on 7-4-2010 the learned  Guardian Judge, Sialkot  has
already  appointed the paterna! grandmother  of the minors
as the guardian  of their persons and properties. We have
been  informed that the said decision  of the learned Guardian
Judge has not so far been assailed  by the petitioner  before
any higher court.  ln this view of the matter  we have failed to
find any occasion for interference in the matter. This petition
is, therefore, dismissed and leave to appeal is refused."

9.  The learned ASJ in Para-3 of the impugned  order
observed that "this  c.oqtrt is satlsfieC tha
to go Wltlt  h!.s m.other/pe(itione.r due to his own free will and natural
afllliatlon with his father and grpnd{athef'.

The minor is  living in a  congenial  and cordial
atmosphere  with his father. This fact has also been observed
by this Court during the proceedings  of instant  petition. When
the Court permitted  the petitioner  to take the respondent
No.2/minor  in her lap, the minor started  crying  and rushed to
hug his father with full force. At this juncture,  it was noticed

Writ Petition  Nq 2_0.2912020

-5-

that the petitioner  half-heartedly touched the minor.  She
reacted not to be so enthusiastic  to keep the minor in her lap.
The episode, prima  facie, reflects that the minor is very
familiar  and conducive  with respondent  No.1/his  father  and
his parental grandparents, who are statedly living with
respondent No.1. ln the case ol 4ls!. Lalba Sultan  V.
Muhanlned  Navqz  a,nd olhere (PLD 2018  SC 79), it is held
that-

"The attitude/behavior  of the children  as recorded  in the
impugned judgment, and the fact that the peUtioner herself
complained  before us that even now both the children  have
expressed their dislike for her by twitching  and biting her
which, give way to apprehend  that the children,  at least for
now, cannot live with the petitioner  happily, and their
custody with the petitioner  shall not be conducive for their
welfare  and healthy  development."

10. I am also guided  by the law expounded in Flzzg lllai V.
thphh?z llasssal l{hap aOd other (2019 MLD  1722
lslamabad)  wherein it is held that-

"Jurisdiction  under Section 491, Cr.P.C. is exercised  by a
Court so as to "restore" the custody of the detenue to the
person  where it rightfully  and lawfully  belongs. Before
passing an order for the restoration  of custody,  the Court
must form a prima-facie vlew that the custody from which
the detenue is sought to be recovered is "illegal  and
improper", and that there is a real urgency  in the matter.
Where the detenue is a minor, the snatching  or removalfrom
the custody of the applicant has to be an incident of the
recent  past."

11. The Hon'ble Supreme  Court of Pakistan in Naziha
Ghqzall  V. Tlp Qtate qnd oOgF (2001  SCMR 17821has held
that-

"The application  under section 491 Cr.P.C.  is admittedly
filed by the petitioner  on 25th  November,  1999 i.e. after 5/6
months,  alleging  unlawfu!  removal  of the minor from hey
custody.  There is no explanation as to why the petitionei
kept quiet for such long period  if the minor son was removed
illegally  by the respondent. lf the minor was removed  from
her custody unlawfully and without  her consent, in the
normal circumstances,  she would have either filed report
with the police or made a complaint  to the concerned
authorities against the respondent  in accordance  with law. lt
would prima facie appear, from the said conduct  of the

Writ PeUUon  No.2O29 I 2O2O

-6-

petitioner  that the minor  was not removed forcibly  from the
apartment  by the respondent, therefore, ex facie it cannot
be said that the custody  of the minor with his father, the
respondent,  was illegal or unlawful  within the meaning of
section  491, Cr.P.C. We are informed that no proceedings
under the Guardians and Wards Act are pending  before the
Family Court.  ln the circumstances, there is no question of
giving away  the regular custody  of the minor to either of the
parties declaring any of them as a guardian under section 7
read with sections  12 and 25 of the Guardians  and Wards
Act, considering that under section 491,  Cr.P.C., Court has
considered if the person who is required  to be produced  has
been illegally or improperly detained,  whereas under the
Guardians  and Wards Act, the custody of the person of the
minor is to be given to a person  when  it is in the welfare of
the minor by appointing or declaring  him to be guardian of
the said minor which fact is to be determined by Guardian
Court. The provisions of section  491, Cr.P.C. are not
available  for declaring  any person as guardian or for
determining  al! the time questions of custody  of the minor
because the final decision  of the regular custody is to be
decided in the proceedings  under the Guardians  and Wards
Act when initiated  by the party claiming the custody of the
minor before the Guardian Gourt."

12. When  facts of the present case are applied  in the light
of law expounded  by the superior courts, it has become clear
that the petitioner was not living with the minor for the last
more than one year, as per her own contention; that till date
she has not filed any petition for the custody of the minor;
there is not a single  piece of evidence on record to show that
the minor was living with petitioner and was removed from
her custody in illegal or improper way rather there is
impression  that she left the minor at her own and is living with
her parents.
13.  Needless to mention that the parties are close relatives
and the marriage  is intact. The dictums  supra are fully
applicable to the facts of the present  case, and therefore,  it is
held that the petitioner  has not been able to make out a case
for exercising jurisdiction in terms of Section  491Cr.P.C.
14. There is plethora  of case laws on the subject that the
custody of father, being  natural guardian, is not illegal and
improper.  Reliance is placed upon 2020 PCT.LJ Note E0
lSindh (Hydefab-aC B,en-ch)J.  ln another  reported case 2OlS

Writ Pe$$pn.No.202912020

-7-

PCT.LJ 99_0, Hon'ble Lahore  High Court declined to interfere
in the matter where allegedly a nine years daughter  was
removed about one year before filing of petition.
15. The case laws relied upon by learned  counsel for the
petitioner  entail distinct facts and circumstances.  ln case law
reported  as ?019 SPMR  116 there was a suckling baby which
was forcibly taken away from the lawful custody of the
mother. ln PLD 2904 99 1 there was a minor baby girl, the
mother was divorced  and age of the minor was two years.  As
per facts of case law reported as 2920 YLR 12F Lahore. there
was a minor daughter and the mother was divorced while in
2015 PCg.L.f  1957, the High Court refused  to interfere under
Section 491 Cr.P.C where there was no evidence  that the
minor  was forcibly snatched  and the learned  Sessions  Judge
examined  the minor  and found comfortable and showed more

affection  to his father.

ln PLP 2,012  Lahore 1J5, petition for custody of four
years child was declined being not a case of recent
snatching. ln case reported as, 201.9 PCr.L.J  890 Sindh the
mother showed her willingness to go with the father for
welfare of the minor. ln case reported as PLD 201,9  Lahore
281 a compromise was effected between the parties.  Thus,
the referred case laws do not extend  any help to the
petitioner due to having  distinct facts and circumstances.
16. The sequel of above discussion is that the allegation  of
snatching the  minor is not substantiated on record;
petitioner herself admitted that the minor is living with
respondent  No.1/his  father and grandparents  for the last
more than one year; that as observed by the learned ASJ and
by this Court as well the minor retains  immense love and
affection with the respondent No.1 and does not want to
depart away from him; that the claim of the petitioner  is not
borne out of the record as she still has not opted to file an
application  under Section  25 ol the Guardian  and Wards Act,

Writ PetiUon  No.2O29 I 2O2O

-8-

1890 together with an application under Section  12 of the Act
ibid for having custody.
17.  ln view of above, the petitioner  has not been able to
make out a case warranting  exercise  of powers under Article
199 of the Constitution  read with Section 561-A Cr.P.C. The
impugned order,  in the backdrop  of the facts of the present
case,  is well reasoned and does not call for any interference.
Consequently, the instant writ petition is  accordingly
dismissed.

lmran

(FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM JANDRAN)

JUDGE

