ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.3842 of 2018 
Developments In Literacy 
VS
The Assistant Commissioner (City)/Authority under Payment of 
Wages Act, ICT Islamabad and another 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 

Respondents by: 

13.02.2020 
Syed  Hassan  Ali  Raza  and  Mr.  Hamza  Wajid, 
Advocates. 
Syed  Zia  ul  Hassan  Bokhari,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.2. 

_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition, the petitioner, Developments In Literacy through Ms. Sadia 

Hashir, Chief Operating Officer, impugns the order dated 13.09.2018 

passed  by  the  Assistant  Commissioner  (City)/Authority  under 

Payment  of  Wages  Act,  1936  (“P.W.A.”),  whereby  respondent  No.2 

(Sohail Farooq) was held entitled to his claim for gratuity amounting 

to Rs.7,42,960/-. 

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  the  instant  petition  are 

that the petitioner is a society registered under the provisions of the 

Societies  Registration  Act,  1860  (“the  1860  Act”).  A  certificate  of 

registration  was  issued  by  the  Registrar,  Joint  Stock  Companies, 

Islamabad  to  the  petitioner  on  10.03.2003.  As  per  the  petitioner’s 

Memorandum  of  Association  (“MoA”),  its  purposes  and  objects  are 

to encourage and facilitate the improvement and use of educational 

resources  in  literacy  development  in  Pakistan,  and  to  engage  in 

charitable  purposes  and  social  welfare  activities  strictly  on  a  non-

profit  basis.  Paragraph  vi  of  the  petitioner’s  MoA  provides  that  it 

shall confine its activities only to these purposes and objects and the 

income and property derived from whatever source shall be applied 

solely  towards  promoting  its  objects  and  no  portion  of  its  income 

shall  be  paid  by  way  of  dividend,  profit  or  bonus  to  any  member, 

office bearer or otherwise.  

3. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  the  Federal  Board  of  Revenue,  in 

exercise of the powers conferred under Rule 212(1)(b) of the Income 

                
 
 
  
  
2 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

Tax Rules, 2002, approved the petitioner as a non-profit organization 

under Section 2(36) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001. 

4. 

On  04.11.2010,  respondent  No.2  was  appointed  as  a  Site 

Engineer at the petitioner’s Islamabad office. Respondent No.2 was 

to be on probation for a period of three months. During the probation 

period, 

respondent  No.2’s  employment  contract  could  be 

terminated  with  a  notice  of  one  week.  On  04.02.2011,  respondent 

No.2’s  employment  was  confirmed  on  completion  of  his  probation 

period.  Subsequently,  respondent  No.2  was  promoted  to  the 

position of Manager (Construction).  

5. 

Vide 

letter  dated  17.04.2017, 

the  petitioner 

informed 

respondent  No.2  that  his  services  were  no  longer  required.  In  the 

said  letter,  the  petitioner  appreciated  respondent  No.2’s  valuable 

contribution towards his employer. On 06.06.2017, respondent No.2 

filed  an  application  under  Section  15(2)  of  the  P.W.A.  before  the 

“Authority under the Payment of Wages Act for Islamabad Area”. In 

the  said  application,  respondent  No.2  prayed  for  a  direction  to  the 

petitioner  to  pay  gratuity  for  6  ½  years  as  well  as  payment  against 

fourteen  days  per  annum  in  lieu  of  annual  leave  to  him.  The 

petitioner contested the said application by filing a written reply.  In 

the said written reply, the petitioner raised preliminary objections to 

the  maintainability  of  the  said  application  on  the  grounds  that  the 

petitioner did not fall within the definition of a “worker”, and that the 

petitioner was not an industrial establishment. After the recording of 

evidence,  the  Authority,  vide  order  dated  13.09.2018,  turned  down 

respondent  No.2’s  claim  for  payment  against  fourteen  days  per 

annum in lieu of annual leave. However, respondent No.2’s claim for 

the payment of gratuity was allowed by holding that he was entitled 

to  his  claim  for  gratuity  amounting  to  Rs.7,42,960/-.  The  said  order 

dated  13.09.2018  has  been  assailed  by  the  petitioner  in  the  instant 

writ petition. 

6. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  after  narrating  the  facts 

leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition,  submitted  that  Section 

1(4) of the P.W.A. provides that the provisions of the P.W.A. apply to 

the payment of wages to persons employed in any factory, industrial 

establishment  or  commercial  establishment  and 

to  persons 

 
 
3 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

employed (otherwise than in a factory) upon any railway by a railway 

administration  or,  either  directly  or  through  a  sub-contractor,  by  a 

person  fulfilling  a  contract  with  a  railway  administration;  that  the 

petitioner  does  not  come  within  the  meaning  of  an  industrial  or 

commercial  establishment  as  defined  in  Section  2(i)  of  the  P.W.A.; 

that respondent No.2 was not a “permanent workman” as defined in 

Standing  Order  1(b) 

in  the  Schedule  to  the 

Industrial  and 

Commercial  Employment  (Standing  Orders)  Ordinance,  1968  (“the 

1968  Ordinance”);  that  on  16.04.2013,  respondent  No.2  had 

expressly  acknowledged  that  his  employment  with  the  petitioner 

was  governed  by  the  policies  described  in  the  petitioner’s  Human 

Resource  Policy  Manual;  and  that  since  the  authority  did  not  have 

the  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  upon  respondent  No.2’s  claim,  the 

impugned order dated 13.09.2018 is liable to be set-aside. Learned 

counsel for the petitioner prayed for the writ petition to be allowed in 

terms of the relief sought therein. 

7. 

On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No.2 raised 

an  objection  to  the  maintainability  of  the  instant  petition  on  the 

ground that the law had provided an alternative remedy of an appeal 

to  the  Labour  Court against  the  decision  of  the Authority  under the 

P.W.A., and that since the petitioner had not filed an appeal against 

the impugned order dated 13.09.2018, the instant petition is liable to 

be dismissed on that score alone. 

8. 

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  the  impugned  order 

dated  13.09.2018  does  not  suffer  from  any  legal  or  jurisdictional 

infirmity  so  as  to  warrant 

interference 

in  the  Constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court;  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  on  the 

record  to  show  that  respondent  No.2  was  a  worker;  that  the 

petitioner has employed more than 1,600 employees; that under the 

Labour  Policy-2010,  it  is  obligatory  on  industrial  or  commercial 

establishments to pay wages to their employees; that the petitioner 

falls  within  the  meaning  of  a  commercial  establishment;  that  under 

the  Employees’  Cost  of  Living  (Relief)  Act,  1973  (“the  1973  Act”),  a 

commercial  establishment  includes  a  society  registered  under  the 

provisions of the 1860 Act; and that gratuity equivalent to thirty days 

wages,  calculated  on  the  basis  of  the  wages  admissible  to  the 

 
 
4 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

worker in  the last month of his service  or the highest pay drawn by 

him  during  the  last  twelve  months  for  every  completed  year  of 

service was payable to respondent No.2 under Standing Order 12(6) 

of the 1968 Ordinance; that by virtue of Section 2(x) of the Industrial 

Relations Act, 2012 (“I.R.A”), labour laws were fully applicable to the 

petitioner’s  establishment.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2 

prayed for the writ petition to be dismissed.  

9. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. The facts leading to the filing of the instant petition have 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 5 above, and need 

not be recapitulated. 

10. 

I  propose  to 

first  deal  with  the  objection  as  to  the 

maintainability  of  the  instant  petition  raised  by  the  learned  counsel 

for  respondent  No.2.  Indeed,  Section  17  of  the  P.W.A.  provides  the 

remedy of an appeal against a direction made under Section 15(3) or 

(4) of the P.W.A. to the Labour Court constituted under the Industrial 

Relations  Act,  1969.  The  Industrial  Relations  Act,  1969  has  been 

repealed  and  presently  the  Industrial  Relations  Act,  2012  is  in 

vogue.  There 

is  no  provision 

in  the 

latter  statute 

for  the 

establishment of a Labour Court for the Islamabad Capital Territory. 

“Labour Court”  has  been  defined  in  Section  2(xx)  of  the  Industrial 

Relations  Act,  2012  as “a Labour Court established in a province”. 

Even  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  would  be 

included  within  the  meaning  of  a  province,  it  is  nonetheless  an 

admitted  position  that  till  date,  no  Labour  Court  has  been 

constituted  for  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  Since  there  is  no 

forum  before  which  the  petitioner  could  have  preferred  an  appeal 

against the impugned order dated 13.09.2018, I hold that the instant 

petition is maintainable.  

11.  This Court, vide order dated 31.05.2016 passed in writ petition 

No.3671/2015,  titled  “Airblue  Ltd.  VS  Authority  under  Payment  of 

Wages Act, etc.” had spurned an objection to the maintainability of a 

writ petition challenging an order passed by the Authority under the 

P.W.A., in the following terms:- 

 
 
5 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

“There  is  not  cavil  with  the  proposition  that  extra  ordinary 
constitutional  jurisdiction  can  be  invoked  when  no  efficacious 
alternate  remedy  is  available.  The  main  thrust  of  arguments 
advanced by learned counsel for the respondents was based upon 
the provisions of Labour Court envisaged u/s 17 of the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936, which according to them was alternate remedy 
available to the petitioners. I am unable to see to eye to with the 
learned counsel for the respondents for the simple reason that 
there is no Labour Court at Islamabad. As far as NIRC is concerned, 
there is nothing in the Industrial Relations Act, 2012, that it will be 
considered to be appellate authority against the orders passed by 
the Authority under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. As the 
petitioners have not filed appeals, therefore, the question of deposit 
of payable amount does not arise. Thus, I have no hesitation to hold 
that no alternate remedy was available to the petitioners. The 
objection raised by the respondents has no force. Hence, the 
preliminary  objection  is  turned  down  and  the  writ  petitions 
mentioned above are held to be maintainable, which shall be 
decided on merits.” 

12.  The vital question that needs to be determined is whether the 

Authority, under the P.W.A.,  had the  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate upon 

respondent  No.2’s  claim  against  the  petitioner.  Respondent  No.2’s 

assertion  was  that  since  the  petitioner  was  a  “commercial 

establishment” and he  was  a “worker”,  the latter could have filed  a 

claim  for  the  payment  of  gratuity  against  the  former  before  the 

Authority under the P.W.A.  

13.  “Commercial establishment”  has  been  defined  in  Section  2(i) 

of  the  P.W.A.  to  mean  a  commercial  establishment  as  defined  in 

Section  2(b)  of  the  1968  Ordinance  which  is  reproduced  herein 

below:- 

“Commercial establishment” means an establishment in which the 
business of advertising, commission or forwarding is conducted, or 
which is a commercial agency, and includes a clerical department 
of a factory or of any industrial or commercial undertaking, the 
office establishment of a person who for the purpose of fulfilling a 
contract which the owner of any commercial establishment or 
industrial establishment employs workmen, a unit of a joint stock 
company, an insurance company, a banking company or a bank, a 
broker's office or stock-exchange, a club, a hotel, a restaurant or an 
eating house, a cinema or theatre, and such other establishment or 
class thereof, as Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, declare to be a commercial establishment for the purpose 
of this Ordinance;  

14.  The  petitioner  neither  conducts  the  business  of  advertising, 

commission or forwarding nor is it a commercial agency or a clerical 

department  of  a  factory  or  of  an 

industrial  or  commercial 

undertaking.  The  petitioner  is  also not the office establishment  of a 

 
 
 
 
6 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

person for the purpose of fulfilling a contract with the owner of any 

commercial  establishment  or 

industrial  establishment  employs 

workmen.  It  is  not  a  unit  of  a  joint  stock  company,  an  insurance 

company, a banking company, or a bank, a broker's office or stock-

exchange, a club, a hotel, a restaurant or an eating house, a cinema 

or  theatre.  There is  no  notification  of  the government declaring  the 

petitioner to be a commercial establishment for the purposes of the 

1968  Ordinance.  Therefore,  it  would  be  safe  to  hold  that  the 

petitioner  is  not  a  commercial  establishment  within  the  meaning  of 

Section  2(i)  of  the  P.W.A.  read  with  Section  2(b)  of  the  1968 

Ordinance. It was not respondent No.2's case that the petitioner was 

an industrial establishment.  

15.  Section  1(4)  of  the  P.W.A.  provides  inter  alia  that  the 

provisions  of  the  P.W.A.  apply  to  the  payment  of  wages  to  persons 

employed in any factory, industrial or commercial establishment and 

to persons employed (otherwise than in a factory) upon any railway 

by  a  railway  administration  or,  either  directly  or  through  a  sub-

contractor,  by  a  person  fulfilling  a  contract  with  a  railway 

administration.  The  Authority  under  the  P.W.A.  would  have 

jurisdiction  only  with  respect  to  matters  to  which  the  provisions  of 

the P.W.A. have been made applicable by Section 1(4) ibid. Learned 

counsel  for  respondent  No.2,  in  his  arguments  as  well  as  in  his 

written comments, took the position that a society registered under 

the provisions of the 1860 Act is a commercial establishment under 

the provisions of the 1973 Act. It ought to be borne in mind that the 

definition of a commercial establishment given in the 1973 Act could 

be of no avail to respondent No.2 and the Authority under the P.W.A. 

could  not  adopt  the  said  definition  of  commercial  establishment 

since Section 2(i) of the P.W.A. explicitly provided that “commercial 

establishment” means a commercial establishment as defined in the 

1968 Ordinance. 

16. 

In 

the  case  of  Messrs  HALCROW  ULG,  Engineering 

Consultants  VS  The  “Authority”  under  the  Payment  of  Wages  Act, 

Quetta (1999 PLC 362), it was held inter alia that the Authority under 

the  P.W.A.  could  assume  jurisdiction  if  the  applicant  would  satisfy 

that  he  was  a  workman  or  that  he  was  employed 

in  the 

 
 
7 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

establishment  of  Pakistan  Railways.  Applying  the  same  analogy  to 

the case  at  hand, the burden lay on respondent No.2 to satisfy that 

the petitioner was an industrial or commercial establishment so that 

the  Authority  under  the  P.W.A.  could  assume  jurisdiction  in  the 

matter.  Respondent  No.2,  in  his  cross-examination,  has  deposed 

that  he  did  not  have  knowledge  as  to  whether  the  petitioner  was 

engaged  in  any  industrial  or  commercial  activity.  He  also  deposed 

that a Non-Governmental Organization cannot be included within the 

meaning  of  an  industry.  The  evidence  on  the  record  shows  that 

respondent No.2 was unable to discharge the burden of proving that 

he was employed in an industrial or a commercial establishment.  

17. 

In  holding  that  respondent  No.2  was  not  employed  by  a 

commercial  or  an  industrial  establishment  so  that  the  Authority 

under  the  P.W.A.  would  have  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  upon  his 

claim  for  the  payment  of  gratuity  etc.,  reliance  is  placed  on  the 

following case law:- 

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Saeed  Bhatti  VS  Presiding  Officer, 

Punjab Labour Court No.8 (2007 PLC 508), the Hon'ble Lahore 

High Court held inter alia as follows:- 

“To invoke the provision of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, it 
is necessary according to subsection (4) of section 1 of the 
Payment  of  Wages  Act,  1936  that  employer  must  be  a 
industrial  establishment  or  commercial 
Factory, 
establishment. If all these three essentials are not present the 
employer would not fall within the definition of employer and 
the employee/workman would not be able to file grievance 
petition against his employer. To determine the nature of 
work, which was being performed by Government Employees 
Cooperative Housing Society Limited, Bahawalpur, it may be 
mentioned  that  learned  Presiding  Officer  in  his 
,judgment/order has clearly held that the aforementioned 
Cooperative  Society,  was  not  a  Factory/industrial  or 
commercial establishment. This finding of fact was actually 
rendered after considering all the evidence produced on the 
record, by the learned Presiding Officer, Punjab Labour Court 
No.8, Bahawalpur. Learned counsel for the petitioner has not 
been able to controvert this finding of fact that Government 
Employees Cooperative Housing Society Limited, Bahawalpur 
was not working as a factory. He has not established from the 
record that it was an industrial or commercial establishment. 
…  Government  Employees  Cooperative  Housing  Society 
Limited, Bahawalpur is not an establishment in which the 
business of advertising commission of forwarding is being 
conducted; it is not a commercial agency; it is not a clerical 
department  of  a  factory,  industrial  or  commercial 
undertaking. So, the definition of section 2(b) "commercial 

 
 
 
8 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

establishment" is not also applicable to the aforesaid Society. 
Same is the case with the definition applicability of section 
2(f) of the West Pakistan (Standing Orders) Ordinance, 1968 
under which the Society is not a "factory" as defined in clause 
(j) of the section 2 of the Factories Act, 1934 and nor it is 
railway as defined in clause (iv) of section 3 of the Railways 
Act nor an establishment of a contractor, who directly or 
indirectly employ workman tier an establishment of a person, 
who  directly  or  indirectly  perform  the  business  of 
construction of industries.”  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Holy  Family  Hospital  Society  VS  Third  Sind 

Labour Court,  Karachi  (PLD 1975 Karachi  529),  the petitioner 

was  a  charitable  non-profit  making  society  registered  under 

the  1860  Act  and  according  to  its  MoA,  its  object  was  to 

perform  work  of  a  charitable,  social,  corporeal,  and  spiritual 

nature  and  to  establish  and  maintain  all  types  of  medical 

institutions  for  the  preservation,  promotion  and  restoration  of 

health. It was held by the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh that the 

petitioner did not fall within the meaning of the commercial and 

industrial  establishment  defined 

in  the  1968  Ordinance, 

therefore  the  Labour  Court  had  no  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate 

upon  the  claim  filed  by  a  workman  seeking  the  reinstatement 

of his services.  

(iii) 

In the case of Mst. Sakina Younas VS Administrator, Women’s 

Christian Hospital, Multan (1991 PLC 798), the Hon'ble Lahore 

High  Court,  after  going  through  the  MoA  of  the  Women’s 

Christian  Hospital,  Multan  which  was  a  society  registered 

under the  1860 Act, and was a charitable  organization run  on 

no  profit  basis,  held  that  the  said  organization  was  not  a 

commercial  or 

industrial  establishment 

to  attract 

the 

provisions  of  the  1968  Ordinance  or  the  Industrial  Relations 

Ordinance, 1969. 

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Pakistan  National  Centre  VS  Presiding  Officer, 

Punjab Labour Court No.2 (1976 PLC 693), it was held inter alia 

that the guarantees as contained in the 1968 Ordinance would 

apply  to  a  party  if  he  was  a  workman  at  an  industrial  or 

commercial  establishment  as  defined  in  the  said  Ordinance. 

Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  a  society  registered  under  the 

1860  Act  whose  main  function  was  to  project  programs  and 

 
 
 
 
9 

W.P.No.3842/2018 

ideas leading to the object of integration of Pakistan, and was 

rendering services to the community or the nation for no profit, 

was  not an industrial or commercial  establishment  as  defined 

in the 1968 Ordinance.   

18.  The petitioner, in its written  reply to respondent No.2’s claim, 

had  explicitly  taken  an  objection  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Authority 

under  the  P.W.A.  In  the  impugned  order  dated  13.09.2018,  the 

Authority  under  the  P.W.A.  has  relied  upon  the  definition  of 

"commercial establishment" in the 1973 Act, and proceeded further 

to decide the claim on merits. The Authority under the P.W.A. could 

not  have  relied  on  the  definition  of  "commercial  establishment"  in 

the  1973  Act  since  Section  2(i)  of  the  P.W.A.  had  adopted  the 

definition of "commercial establishment" in the 1968 Ordinance and 

not 

in 

the  1973  Act.  Unlike 

the  definition  of 

'commercial 

establishment'  in  Section  2(e)  of  the  1973  Act,  the  definition  of 

'commercial  establishment' in  the 1968 Ordinance does  not include 

a society registered under the 1860 Act.  

19. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  allowed;  the 

impugned  order  dated  13.09.2018  is  set-aside;  and  it  is  declared 

that  the  Authority  under  the  P.W.A.  did  not  have  he  jurisdiction  to 

adjudicate upon respondent No.2's claim under Section 15(2) of the 

P.W.A. against the petitioner. There shall be no order as to costs.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2020 

Qamar Khan* 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                                    (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
