2012 C L C 840 

[Islamabad] 

Before Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, J 

NOORISH SABAH----Petitioner 

VS

FEDERAL  PUBLIC  SERVICE  COMMISSION  through  Chairman  and  2  others----
Respondents 

Writ Petition No.3304 of 2011, decided on 23rd January, 2012. 

Competitive Examinations Rules, 2010--- 

----Rr.  7(v)  &  18---Constitution  of  Pakistan,  Art.199---Constitutional  petition---Petitioner 
appeared in the written examination of Central Superior Services (CSS), and cleared the same---
Process  of  verification  of  documents  of  the  petitioner,  revealed  that  domicile  certificate  and 
permanent  resident  certificate  submitted  by  the  petitioner  at  the  time  of  applying  for  the 
examination were bogus---After issuing the petitioner the show-cause notice, she was disqualified 
for  competitive  examination  and  was  debarred  from  employment  under  Government---No 
authentic proof was available to establish that decision taken on the proceedings commenced from 
show-cause notice was communicated to the petitioner---Bona fide of the petitioner was evident 
from the aspect that she herself approached the respondent authorities concerned for holding of an 
inquiry  regarding  issuance  of  domicile  certificate  and  permanent  resident  certificate---Deputy 
Commissioner, on inquiry, issued direction of fresh domicile and permanent resident certificate to 
the petitioner---No mens rea existed on the part of the petitioner, her career was required to be 
protected,  if  she  otherwise  had  qualified---Order  disqualifying  the  petitioner  for  competitive 
examination and debarring her from employment under Government, was set aside, with direction 
to the authorities to take into consideration, the inquiry report of domicile issuing authority and 
issuance of permanent resident certificate and domicile to the petitioner and pass a fresh order in 
accordance with law. 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Haris Azmat for Petitioner. 

Kamran Raffat, Asstt. Director,  FPSC and Mumtaz Hussain Shaukat,  Asstt. Director FPSC for 
Respondents. 

Date of hearing: 23rd January, 2012. 

JUDGMENT 

SHAUKAT  AZIZ SIDDIQUI, J.--- Brief facts glean out  from the petition are that, petitioner 
appeared in the Central Superior Services (CSS) Written Examination in the year 2010, and cleared 
the same. During the process of verification of documents it transpired that domicile certificate 
dated 22nd December, 2009 and permanent resident certificate dated 23-12-2009 submitted at the 
time  of  applying  for  CSS  examination  were  bogus.  Resultantly,  respondent  No.2  (Director 
Competitive Examination, FPSC) issued show-cause notice dated 3rd May, 2011. The petitioner 
was also called upon to appear for personal hearing on 10th of May, 2011. The Show-cause notice 
was issued on the strength of rule 7(v) of Competitive Examinations Rules 2010. Second show-
cause notice dated 11th May, 2011 was issued after hearing the petitioner in person on 10th of 
May, 2011. It was replied by the petitioner on 23rd May, 2011. 

The grievance of the petitioner is that after receipt of reply of second show-cause notice dated 23rd 
May, 2011, petitioner was not informed about the result of the proceedings initiated against her 
despite the fact  that petitioner kept  on requesting for the same. Petitioner finally wrote a letter 
dated  27th  of  October,  2011  to  respondent  No.2  which  was  replied  vide  letter  dated  12th  of 
November,  2011.  Respondent  No.2  informed  the  petitioner  that  under  rule  18  of  rules  ibid, 
petitioner was supposed to apply within 30 days and representation of the petitioner is time-barred. 

2. Petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of this court by way of filing the instant writ 
petition with the following prayer:--- 

"In the light of the foregoing, it is most respectfully prayed that this honourable Court may be 
graciously pleased to:--- 

            
            
            
  
  
            
  
            
  
(I) Set aside the Impugned Letter as illegal and void; 

(II) Direct the respondents Nos.1 and 2 to communicate the decision to the petitioner; 

(III) Direct the respondents Nos.1 and 2 to give the petitioner a full opportunity to explain her case 
and prove her innocence; 

(IV) Direct the respondent No.3 to make a fresh new domicile of the petitioner in accordance with 
law; 

(V)  Direct  the  respondent  No.2  to  accept  the  new  domicile  and  deal  with  the  petitioner  in 
accordance with the law; 

Any other relief deemed appropriate by this honourable Court may also be granted." 

3.  Vide  order  dated  9-12-2011,  respondents  Nos.1  and  2  were  called  upon  to  file  a  report 
and parawise comments through which main reliance has been placed on rule 7(v) of the rules ibid, 
which is reproduced hereinbelow:--- 

"A  candidate  who  knowingly  furnishes  particulars  which  are  false,  or  suppresses  material 
information, or attempts to influence the Commission, or officers or members of the staff of the 
Commission, or tries to obtain support for his/her candidature by improper means, or deliberately 
submits  forged  certificates,  or  tampers  with  the  entries  in  his/her  age,  educational  and  other 
certificates, or misbehaves in the examination hall or uses unfair means/copying, or is found guilty 
of  misconduct  during  examination/medical,  Viva  Voce  Tests  and  uses  filthy  and  unethical 
language in the Answer Book(s) during written examination, may be disqualified for this and/or 
subsequent  examinations/selections  held  by  the  Commission  and/or  criminally  prosecuted  and 
debarred from employment under Government." 

4. Vide order dated 20-12-2011, respondents were directed to produce the original record through 
which petitioner was communicated about the decision of FPSC, perusal whereof reveals this fact 
that there is  no authentic proof to  establish that decision taken on the proceedings commenced 
from show-cause notice was communicated to the petitioner. Postal receipt does not contain full 
particulars and address of the petitioner. 

  
  
  
  
            
  
            
  
5. It appears that petitioner has been deceived by the tout mafia working within the premises of 
the courts who for their petty interest play havoc with the career of brilliant students/candidates, 
like  petitioner.  The  bona  fide  of  the  petitioner  is  evident  from  this  aspect  that  she  herself 
approached  the  authorities  concerned  for  holding  of  an  inquiry  regarding  issuance  of  domicile 
certificate  and  permanent  resident  certificate    and    Assistant    Commissioner    Gulshan-e-
Iqbal,  Karachi Estate, vide Report No.AC/GI/05/2012, Karachi, dated 4-1-2012 submitted to the 
Deputy Commissioner, Karachi Estate, gave following opinion:--- 

OPINION:-- 

In view of my opinion, during inquiry she produced CNICs. Copies of her Grand Father/Mother 
(Maternal), Grand Mother (Paternal), and Service Book of her father is proving that her family 
belongs to permanent in Karachi City and she travelling from Karachi due to her father service in 
Pakistan Army as a Military Officer (Major) and posted at different places during his service she 
got education at different places in Pakistan after retirement of her father she is living in Karachi 
permanently since last 4 years (2007 to 2011) and According to section 17 of Citizenship Act 1951, 
"Where Federal Government is satisfied that any person has ordinarily resided for a  period not 
less than one year immediately". 

In  view  of  the  above  circumstances  and  in  the  light  of  above  quoted  Rule,  she  is  entitled  for 
Domicile and Permanent Resident Certificate (P.R.C) from Karachi City and it may be issued and 
resolve grievances of Mrs. Noorish Sabah daughter of Sabahuddin, in the interest of justice and 
further previous domicile with the signature of defunct D.D.O (Revenue) Korangi Town, which 
was in possession of applicant and the same was submitted in Federal Public Service Commission, 
Islamabad,  was  bogus/forged,  fabricated  and  manipulated  by  agent  mafia  and  in  account  of 
cheating with the applicant it is therefore, the forged, fabricated and manipulated domicile and 
PRC, may be treated as Null and Void." 

6.  In  pursuance  of  inquiry,  the  Deputy  Commissioner  issued  direction  of  fresh  domicile  and 
permanent resident certificate to the petitioner which bears number PRC No.580/2012, dated 5-1-
2012 and No.559/2012 of even date. 

This court observes that there is no mensrea on the part of the petitioner; therefore, her career is 
required to be protected, if she otherwise qualifies. 

  
  
            
            
  
            
            
In this view of the matter order dated 13th of June, 2011, disqualifying the petitioner of competitive 
examination 2010 and debarring her from employment under Government is set aside with a result 
that  respondents  are  directed  to  take  into  consideration,  the  inquiry  report  of  domicile  issuing 
authority  and  issuance  of  fresh  PRC  and  domicile  to  the  petitioner  and  pass  a  fresh  order  in 
accordance with law. 

H.B.T./42/Isl.                                                  Order accordingly. 

  
  
  
  
 
