JUDGMENT  SHEET.
ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P No.245512019.

Naveed Abdul Wahid  VS

Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Islamabad (West)/Ex-Oflicio
Justice  of Peacer lslamabad  etc.

Petitioner by:

Sardar  Shabbir Hussain,  Advocate.

Respondents  by:

Barrister Ayesha  Siddique  Khan, State
Counsel.

Arshad,  ASI, P.S Shalimar,  Islamabad.

Date of Decision: 

10.12.2019.

MOHSIN AKIITAR KAYAI\II. J:- Through  this writ petition, the

petitioner has assailed  the order  dated 22.06.2019, passed by learned Ex-Officio

Justice  of Peace/Additional  Sessions  Judge-West,  Islamabad,  whereby  application

filed by the petitioner  for registration of criminal  case has been tumed down.

2. 

Leamed counsel for the petitioner  contends  that the petitioner moved an

application  to the SHO, P.S Shalimar  for registration  of criminal case regarding

theft  of his personal  belongings  from his house  No.129,  street  No.65,  sector F-lll4

but the SHO refused to register  the case and later  on submitted  report  before  learned

Justice  of Peace  by converting the instant  matter  into family  dispute,  which  resulted

into dismissal  of his application  U/S 22-A & 22-8,  Cr.P.C despite the fact that

cognizable  offence is made out from the contents  of application  filed by the

petitioner.

3.  Conversely,  leamed State  Counsel  contends  that petitioner's  wife  has

already left his abode  and is separately  living with her parents  and entire  record

demonstate  that there  was family dispute;  that learned Justice of Peace has rightly

dismissed the application through  impugned  order.

4. 

I have  heard  the arguments and gone through  the record.

W.P No.2455/2019

2

5. 

Perusal  of the record  reveals  that  the petitioner filed an application  to the

SHO, P.S Lohi Bher, Islamabad  that  he was abroad  in connection with  his job in

Malaysia and when came to Pakistan on 17.09.2018  his house hold articles

including  the vehicle,  cash  amount  and  other jewellery  were  stolen by five to seven

unknown  persons,  however,  his application  was not entertained  by the SHO  and

even his application UIS 22-A &22-8, Cr.P.C  was dismissed on the police report.

6. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner  has been confronted whether the

petitioner has any claim against his wife or her family  members, whereupon he

categorically  stated  that the petitioner  has some dispute  with his wife but he is not

leveling  any allegation against  his wife or her family  members rather  his house  hold

articles  were  stolen by some  unknown persons  and his family  dispute  has nothing to

do with the stolen articles.

7. 

Be that  as it may,  the application filed by the petitioner  to the SHO  discloses

commission of cognizable  offence.  Leamed  Justice of Peace  has not appreciated the

issue  in terms of law and gone beyond  his jurisdiction  by declaring that the matter

in question  is civil dispute, which  is against  the facts.

8. 

In view  of the above reasons,  the instant  writ petitionis  allowed,  impugned

order dated  22.06.2019 is set aside. SHO, P.S Shalimar is directed to register the

FIR fonhwith.

RAnjm

(M

JUDGE

