ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

R.F.A.No.74 of 2014 
Rafaqat Hussain Raja and others 

VS          

Mujib-ur-Rehman Kiani 

Date of Hearing:   
Appellants by: 

Respondent by: 

22.10.2019  
M/s  Muhammad  Saleem  and  Birjis  Rizvi, 
Advocates 
Mr.  Mujib-ur-Rehman  Kiani/respondent 
person. 

in 

______________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

regular 

first  appeal, 

the  appellants/defendants 

impugn 

the 

judgment and decree dated 30.05.2014 passed by the Court of the 

learned  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad  whereby  suit  for  damages  for  an 

amount of Rs.30,00,000/- instituted by the respondent/plaintiff was 

partially decreed for an amount of Rs.15,00,000/-. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  submitted  that  the 

respondent had no cause of action against the appellants; that the 

pleadings 

in  the  respondent’s  suit  are  not 

just  vague  and 

ambiguous  but  are  also  scandalous;  that  the  facts  of  the  case  did 

not justify a decree of Rs.15,00,000/- against the appellants; that in 

the  suit,  the  respondent  had  alleged  that  the  termination  of  his 

services  were  caused  by  appellant  No.1; 

that  since 

the 

respondent’s  appeal  against  the  termination  of  his  services  had 

been  dismissed  by  the  Federal  Service  Tribunal,  his  claim  for 

damages  for  the  termination  of  his  services  was  correctly  turned 

down  by  the  learned  Civil  Court;  that  the  learned  Civil  Court 

awarded damages in the respondent’s favour only on the ground (i) 

that  an  allegation  had  been  made  against  the  respondent  that  he 

had  committed  zina  with  a  female  employee,  and  (ii)  that  the 

respondent’s  wife  had  left  him  due  to  the  baseless  allegations 

against  the  respondent;  that  grave  error  was  committed  by  the 

learned  Civil  Court  by  giving  credence to  the  respondent’s  stance 

that appellant No.1/defendant No.1 had alleged that the respondent 

had  committed  zina  with  a  female  employee;  that  the  respondent 

had  produced  no  independent  evidence  to  prove  that  such  an 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

allegation  had  been  made  by  appellant  No.1  against  him;  and  that 

the mere fact that the respondent’s wife had left him could not ipso 

facto  entitle  the  respondent  to  the  award  of  damages  by  the 

appellants. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  further  submitted  that  at 

no  material  stage  was  any  F.I.R.  registered  against  the  appellants 

at  the respondent’s  instance;  and  that the learned  Civil Court  was 

correct  in  holding  that  the  respondent’s  claim  for  damages  for 

injury caused to him by the appellants was barred by time. Learned 

counsel  for  the  appellants  further  submitted  that  while  the  instant 

appeal  was  pending,  the  respondent  had  initiated  execution 

proceedings  against 

the  appellants; 

that 

in 

the  execution 

proceedings,  the  appellants  had  furnished  a  surety;  that  even 

though  the  property  with  respect  to  which  the  surety  was  given 

was  reported  to  have  been  owned  by  appellant  No.1,  the  learned 

Executing Court nonetheless required appellant No.1 to deposit the 

decreetal  amount  to  his  extent  in  cash;  that  appellant  No.2  is 

appellant  No.3’s  son;  that  after  appellant  No.3  passed  away  on 

26.02.2017, the decree holder on 10.01.2018 had made a statement 

that he had waived his right to recover Rs.5,00,000/- from appellant 

No.3;  that  appellant  No.2  paid  Rs.4,90,000/-  to  the  respondent  in 

satisfaction  of  the  decree  to  his  extent.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

appellants prayed for the impugned judgment and decree to be set-

aside and for an order of restitution to be made. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  respondent  appeared  in  person  and 

submitted  that  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the 

learned  Civil  Court  does  not  suffer  from  any  illegality;  that  the 

damages  awarded  in  the  respondent’s  favour  were  less  than  the 

amount claimed by him in his suit; that the respondent had suffered 

grave mental stress and agony at the hands of the appellants; that 

appellant  No.1  had  become 

inimical  against  the  respondent 

because the latter had not fulfilled the former’s desire to marry his 

daughter;  that  this  had  enraged  appellant  No.1  who  caused  the 

respondent’s  services  to  be  terminated;  that  in  order  to  lower  the 

respondent  in  the  estimation  of  the  public,  appellant  No.1  had 

falsely  alleged  that  the  respondent  had  committed  zina  with  a 

3 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

female employee; that the anxiety caused to the respondent by the 

termination  of  his  services  and  the  baseless  allegations  of  zina 

against him disrupted his family life resulting in his wife leaving for 

China; that the appellants had also thrown acid on the respondent 

and  had  tried  to  strangle  him  with  a  rope;  that  since  there  was 

nothing  on  the  record  to  contradict  the  evidence  adduced  by  the 

respondent, the learned Civil Court did not commit any illegality in 

passing  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree;  that  the  learned 

Executing Court had executed the impugned judgment and decree 

by  following  the  procedure  prescribed  by  law;  and  that  the 

respondent  had  shown  leniency  to  appellants  No.2  and  3  by 

accepting  Rs.4,90,000/-  instead  of  Rs.10,00,000/-  from  them.  The 

respondent prayed for the appeal to be dismissed. 

5.  We have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

appellants  and  the  respondent  and  have  perused  the  record  with 

their able assistance. 

6. 

The  record  shows  that  vide  letter  dated  07.07.2001,  the 

respondent was employed as Administrative Officer (BPS-17) in the 

Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock on contract basis for a 

period  of  two  years.  Clause  14  of  the  respondent’s  employment 

contract  provided  that  his  appointment  during  the  period  of 

contract was liable to termination on thirty days' notice or payment 

of  basic  pay  in  lieu  thereof  without  assigning  any  reason.  Vide 

notification  dated  18.11.2002, 

the 

respondent’s  contract 

appointment  was  terminated  pursuant  to  clause  14  of  the  said 

employment contract. 

7. 

The  respondent  assailed  the  termination  of  his  contract 

appointment  before  the  Federal  Service  Tribunal,  Islamabad  in 

appeal  No.364(R)(CS)2003.  Vide  order  dated  20.01.2004,  the  said 

appeal  was  dismissed.  The  said  order  dated  20.01.2004  was  not 

challenged any further. 

8. 

On  26.02.2003,  a  legal  notice  was  sent  on  the  respondent’s 

behalf to appellant No.1, wherein a claim of damages amounting to 

Rs.20,00,000/-  had  been  made.  In  the  said  legal  notice,  appellant 

No.1  was  accused  of  committing  corruption  and 

financial 

irregularities  in  the  Ministry  of  Food,  Agriculture  and  Livestock. 

4 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

Appellant No.1 was  also accused  of  harassing  and  humiliating  the 

respondent. 

9. 

On  05.04.2004,  the  respondent  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of 

damages  amounting  to  Rs.30,00,000/-  against  the  appellants 

before the learned Civil Court. In the said suit, it was pleaded inter 

alia that the respondent had declined a proposal sent on appellant 

No.1’s  behalf  for  the  respondent  to  marry  appellant  No.1’s 

daughter; that appellant No.1 had made a baseless allegation that 

the  respondent  had  committed zina  with  a female  employee in the 

Ministry  of  Food,  Agriculture  and  Livestock;  that  an  inquiry  had 

resulted 

in  a  finding  that  the  respondent’s  character  was 

aboveboard;  that  appellant  No.1  had  passed  a  bill  by  bribing 

officials, including the Accountant General Pakistan Revenue; that 

appellant  No.1  was  offended  by  the  respondent’s  objection  to  the 

release of the said bill; that the respondent had brought the corrupt 

practices committed by appellant No.1 to the notice of the Minister 

and National Accountability Bureau; that appellant No.1, in order to 

get  rid  of  the  respondent,  referred  the  post  against  which  the 

respondent  was  working 

to 

the  Federal  Public  Service 

Commission;  that  at  the 

instance  of  appellant  No.1,  severe 

thrashing was given to the respondent by appellants No.2 and 3 on 

03.09.2002; that appellant No.3 put a rope around the respondent’s 

neck  whereas  appellant  No.2  threw  acid  on  the  respondent  which 

caused  burns  to  the  left  side  of  his  right  leg;  that  due  to  these 

incidents,  the  respondent’s  wife,  who  is  a  Chinese  national,  felt 

insecure  and  decided  not  to  take  Pakistani  nationality;  that 

appellant  No.1  had  employed  armed  men  to  threaten  the 

respondent  and  his 

family;  that 

in  order  to  humiliate  the 

respondent, he was made by appellant No.1 to travel to Gujranwala 

in  a  truck  carrying  transformers;  that  the  respondent  was 

terminated from service at appellant No.1’s instance; that after his 

termination,  the  respondent  was  not  able  to  get  employment 

elsewhere;  that  due  to  the  acts  of  the  appellants,  the  respondent 

suffered  extreme  mental  and  physical  torture;  that  these  events 

caused  the  respondent’s  wife  to  leave  Pakistan;  that  the  cause  of 

action  had  accrued  to  the respondent on  03.09.2002;  and  that the 

5 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

respondent  was  entitled 

to  compensation  amounting 

to 

Rs.30,00,000/-. We do not deem it appropriate to mention the name 

of  the  female  employee  with  whom  the  respondent  was  alleged  to 

have committed zina. 

10.  The  appellants  contested  the  said  suit  by  filing  a  written 

statement.  In  the  said  written  statement,  it  was  pleaded inter alia 

that  the  National  Accountability  Bureau  had  probed  into  the 

allegations of irregularities in the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and 

Livestock/National  Veterinary  Laboratory,  and  the  officials  of  the 

said  Ministry  were  exonerated;  and  that  the  respondent’s  appeal 

against  the  termination  of  his  services  was  also  dismissed  by  the 

Federal Service Tribunal.  

11.  From  the  divergent  pleadings  of  the  contesting  parties,  the 

learned Civil Court, vide order dated 12.07.2004, framed issues. On 

25.04.2005,  the  appellants  were  proceeded  against  ex parte.  The 

respondent  appeared  as  PW-1  and  his  ex parte examination-in-

chief  was  recorded  on  08.07.2005.  Subsequently,  the  appellants 

filed  an  application  for  setting  aside  the  order  dated  25.04.2005 

whereby  they  were  proceeded  against ex parte.  Vide  order  dated 

24.02.2006,  the  said  application  was  allowed  and  the  order  dated 

25.04.2005  was  recalled  and  the  matter  was  adjourned  for  the 

cross  examination  of  the  respondent/PW-1.  On  17.04.2007,  the 

respondent/PW-1 was cross-examined.  

12.  Since 

the  valuation 

in 

the 

respondent’s  suit  was 

Rs.30,00,000/-, 

the  said  suit  being  beyond 

the  pecuniary 

jurisdiction of the learned Civil Court was transferred to this Court. 

On  03.12.2008,  this  Court  appointed  a  local  commission  to  record 

the  evidence  of  the  parties.  The  local  commission’s  report  dated 

22.06.2009 shows that the respondent had raised an objection over 

the  appointment  of  a  new  counsel  by  the  appellants.  The 

respondent  had  insisted  that  only  the  appellants’  counsel  before 

the  Civil  Court  could  represent  the  appellants,  or  alternatively  the 

appellants  should  conduct  their  case  themselves.  The 

local 

commission noted that the objection raised by the respondent was 

against the well-settled law and practice. It was also noted that the 

respondent  “got annoyed and did not come forward to cross 

6 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

examine  the  witnesses  of  the  defence  in  protest”.  The  local 

commission had accepted the appellants’ request to produce their 

evidence in the shape of affidavits.  

13.  As  a  consequence  of  the  judgment  of  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court  in  the  case  of  Sindh  High  Court  Bar  Association  VS 

Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2009  S.C.  879),  the  Islamabad  High 

Court  ceased  to  exist  and  the  suit  was  transferred  back  to  the 

learned  Civil  Court.  The  respondent  filed  an  application  for  the 

setting aside of the local commission’s report. The said application 

was not decided.  

14.  The  record  shows  that  on  17.12.2011,  the  appellants  were 

once  again  proceeded  against  ex  parte  and  the  matter  was 

adjourned  for  the  respondent’s ex parte  evidence.  Although  after 

this  stage  no  further  evidence  was  recorded,  on  21.11.2012,  the 

learned  Civil  Court  received  the  respondent’s  written  arguments 

and on 18.12.2012, the respondent’s suit was dismissed.  

15.  On  21.01.2013,  the  respondent  preferred  an  appeal  before 

the Court  of the learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad.  The 

appellants  had  appeared  in  the  said  appeal.  Vide  judgment  dated 

20.11.2013,  the  said  appeal  was  allowed  and  the  matter  was 

remanded to the learned Civil Court. 

16. 

In  the  post  remand  proceedings,  the  suit  was  entrusted  for 

adjudication to the Court presided over by Mr. Muhammad Shabbir, 

learned  Civil  Judge  1st  Class,  Islamabad.  Vide  order  dated 

27.01.2014, the learned Civil Judge directed the contesting parties 

to  appear  before  the  learned  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad  on 

29.01.2014. In the said order, the learned Civil Judge had recorded 

the  observations  adverse  to  the  respondent.  For  the  purposes  of 

clarity, these observations are reproduced herein below:- 

“After dismissal of the suit vide above mentioned judgment, the 
attitude of the learned counsel towards the undersigned became 
arrogant and insulting. Mr. Mujeeb-ur-Rehman while appearing in 
different cases has been shouting on each and every date of 
hearing and stated that he is an advocate and this is his personal 
case. He at one occasion while appearing in case titled “Mujeeb-
ur-Rehman v/s Rafaqat Hussain” stated that I (Muhammad Shabbir) 
am bent upon to ruin his (Mr. Mujeeb-ur-Rehman’s Practice) as he 
will not let me work as a Judge in Islamabad as a large number of 
advocates are at his back and they will set everything right.” 

 
7 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

17.  On 30.01.2014, the suit was transferred to the Court presided 

by Raja Farrukh Ali Khan, learned Civil Judge (East) Islamabad. On 

30.05.2014,  the  learned  Civil  Court  decreed  the  respondent’s  suit 

to  the  extent  of Rs.15,00,000/-.  The  said  judgment  and  decree has 

been assailed by the appellants in the instant appeal.  

18.  As  mentioned  above,  on  18.12.2012,  the  learned  Civil  Court 

had dismissed the respondent’s suit. Since the value of the suit was 

Rs.30,00,000/-,  as  is  apparent  from  paragraph  24  of  the  suit,  an 

appeal  against  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  18.12.2012  lay  to 

this  Court  and  not  to  the  Court  of  the  learned  District  Judge, 

Islamabad.  This  is  because  the  Court  of  the  learned  District 

Judge’s  jurisdiction  was  to  adjudicate  upon  appeals  arising  from 

suits  having  valuation  less  than  Rs.25,00,000/-.  Since  the  Court  of 

the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  did  not  have  the  pecuniary 

jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  upon  the  respondent’s  appeal,  therefore 

the judgment dated 20.11.2013 passed by the Court of the learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad  was  without  jurisdiction  and 

coram non judice.  The  post  remand  proceedings  pursuant  to  the 

said  judgment  dated  20.11.2013  were  equally  without  jurisdiction 

and non est. Be that as it may, since we heard the appeal at length, 

we propose to decide the instant appeal on merits. 

19.  Perusal  of  the 

impugned 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

30.05.2014  shows  that  the  learned  Civil  Court  did  not  award  any 

damages on account of the  respondent’s termination from service 

since  such  termination  had  been  upheld  by  the  Federal  Service 

Tribunal  vide  judgment  dated  20.01.2004.  The  learned  Civil  Court, 

in  the  last  paragraph  of  the  impugned  judgment,  has  clarified  the 

basis  on  which  damages  of  Rs.1.5  million  were  awarded  in  the 

respondent’s favour. The learned Civil Court held that the basis for 

the award of damages were:- 

(i)  wrong allegation of zina against the respondent; and  

(ii) 

torture  caused  by  baseless  allegation  and  maltreatment 

suffered by the respondent due to which his wife left for China.  

20.  For the purpose of clarity, the last paragraph of the impugned 

judgment is reproduced herein below:- 

8 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

“It is worthwhile to mention here that though plaintiff has not 
succeeded to prove his entire case, but still he succeeded to 
prove to the extent of wrong allegation of zina and torture due to 
the fact his wife left to China after these baseless allegations and 
mal-treatment. The said allegation is of course serious in nature 
and caste very negative effects on the character of the aggrieved 
person and that too last for whole life. Plaintiff is undoubtedly not 
only qualified person but also married to foreign national. In order 
to measure, quantum of damages it is not always necessary that 
plaintiff has to place on record plethora of documents to prove his 
case rather his character, education, marital status are sufficient 
to prove this fact. Plaintiff’s wife also left Pakistan due to the 
problems caused to plaintiff and that too has created lots of fuss 
and torture to the plaintiff and quantum of damages is very 
difficult to determine in such like scenario. However, in the light 
of  attending  circumstances,  suit  of  the  plaintiff  is  partially 
decreed to the extent of Rs.1.5 million. No order as to the costs. 
Decree sheet be drawn up. File be consigned to record room after 
its due completion/compilation” 
(Emphasis added)  

21. 

In  support  of  his  suit,  the  respondent  appeared  as  a  sole 

witness.  The  respondent  did  not  produce  any 

independent 

evidence to substantiate his allegations against the appellants. As 

regards the allegation of zina, the respondent did not produce any 

witness  before  whom  such  an  allegation  had  been  made  by 

appellant  No.1.  No  record  pertaining  to  any  inquiry  in  which  the 

respondent had been exonerated had been brought on the record. 

For  the  learned  Civil  Court  to  have  passed  a  decree  against 

appellant No.1 on the bare testimony of the respondent is violative 

of the settled norms of justice.  

22.  The  respondent  also  claimed  that  he  had  suffered  mental 

stress  and  agony  at  the  hands  of  the  appellants,  and  to 

substantiate  this  claim,  he  had  produced  a  prescription  (Exh.P-I(i) 

to P-I(iii) which is in the Chinese language. The English translation 

of the said  prescription  by  some  unnamed  person  in  shop  No.123, 

B/G,  Crystal  Arcade,  E-13,  Ayub  Market,  F-8  Markaz,  Islamabad 

was  produced  along  with  the  said  prescription.  Since  the  authors 

of  the  said  prescription  and  the  translation  were  not  produced  as 

witnesses,  the  same  could  not  have  been  given  evidentiary  value 

by the learned Civil Court. The prescription, dated 01.10.2002 from 

the Federal Government Services Hospital, Islamabad,  was on the 

record, but not formally exhibited. Therefore, the said prescription 

could not have formed the basis for the decree. 

9 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

23.  As regards the learned Civil Court awarding damages against 

the  appellants  for  the  respondent’s  wife  having  left  him  and 

rejoined him later is also most peculiar. If not any other witness, the 

respondent  should  have  produced  his  wife  to  testify  that  she  had 

left  him  because  of  the  adverse  circumstances  created  by  the 

appellants.  

24.  The  respondent’s  wife  leaving  him  did  not  ipso facto  entitle 

the  respondent  the  award  of  damages  against  the  appellants.  In 

paragraph  19  of  the  suit,  it  was  pleaded  that  “obsessed by these 

untoward events”, the respondent’s wife left for China. What these 

“untoward  events”  were  are  not  specified 

in  the 

impugned 

judgment.  The  termination  of  the  respondent’s  employment;  the 

respondent not being able to get employment after his termination; 

and  the  alleged  physical  injury  caused  to  the  respondent  by  the 

appellants could not have made the basis for an award of damages 

by  the  learned  Civil  Court  in  the  respondent’s  favour.  The  only 

event that the  learned  Civil Court appears  to  have  found  to  be the 

cause of torture to the respondent is the “wrong allegation of zina”.  

25. 

In  his  examination-in-chief,  the  respondent  deposed  that 

appellant  No.1  had  accused  him  of  committing zina  with  a  female 

officer  and  had  complained  to  Khair  Muhammad  Junejo,  Minister 

for Food about the respondent, and that the Minister had sent Talib 

Hussain  (Private  Secretary)  and  Muhammad  Ishaq  (Driver)  to 

inquire  into  the  matter.  The  respondent  did  not  even  apply  to  the 

Court to issue summons to Khair Muhammad Junejo, Talib Hussain 

or Muhammad Ishaq so that they could give testimony in support of 

the respondent’s case. 

26. 

It  was  incumbent  upon  the  respondent  to  prove  that  it  was 

only  the  allegation  of zina  made  against  him  levelled  by  appellant 

No.1 that had put him in such anguish as to cause the respondent’s 

wife  to  leave  him.  Since  the  respondent  failed  to  prove  that 

appellant  No.1  had  hurled  the  allegation  of  zina  against  the 

respondent,  the  question  of  him  being  awarding  damages  for  his 

wife  leaving  him  did  not  arise.  In  his  suit,  the  respondent  had  not 

even  pleaded  that  appellants  No.2  and  3  had  made  allegation  of 

10 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

zina against him. This being so, the award of damages against the 

said appellants was uncalled for.    

27.  The  pleading  in  the  suit  against  appellants  No.2  and  3  was 

that on 03.09.2002, they had given a severe thrashing in the office 

premises to the respondent, and thereafter appellant No.3 had put 

a rope  around  the  respondent’s  neck  whereas  appellant  No.2  had 

thrown acid on the respondent. Even though the alleged thrashing 

was said to have taken place in the office premises, the respondent 

chose not to produce any witnesses to support or buttress such an 

allegation.  Now,  for  compensation  for  injury  to  the  person,  Article 

22  of  the  First  Schedule  to  the  Limitation  Act,  1908  provides  for  a 

limitation  period  of  one  year  from  the  date  when  the  injury  was 

committed.  Consequently,  the  learned  Civil  Court  held  that  the 

respondent’s  claim  for  damages  against  the  appellants  on  the 

ground that acid was thrown on him or that an attempt was made to 

strangulate  him  with  a  rope,  were  “hit  badly  by  the  law  of 

limitation”.  Since  the  respondent’s  claim  on  the  basis  of  bodily 

injury was held by the learned Civil Court to be time barred, it is not 

understandable  as  to  how  the  learned  Civil  Court  could  award 

damages against appellants No.2 and 3.  

28. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  paragraph  20  of  the  suit,  it  was 

pleaded  that  appellants  had  also  caused  extreme  mental  and 

financial  stress  to  the  respondent.  If  the  learned  Civil  Court  had 

held  the  respondent’s  claim  for  damages  on  the  basis  of  physical 

injury to be barred by time, how could it award damages for mental 

or financial stress caused by such physical  injury. It is  equally  out 

of  the  ordinary  for  the  learned  Civil  Court  to  have  awarded 

damages against the said appellants when there was no finding of 

any  criminal  Court  much  less  any  law  enforcing  agency  against 

them.  

29.  The respondent’s claim for damages against the appellants is 

based on torts. In paragraph 20 of the suit, the respondent pleaded 

that  he  had  “suffered  extreme  mental  and  physical  torture, 

financial stress and irreparable loss, humiliation in the society and 

relations”.  He  attributed  such  loss  and  injury  to  the  “illegal, 

unlawful, malafide, biased, prejudicial and malicious actions” of the 

11 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

appellants.  For  a  plaintiff  to  be  successful  in  claiming  damages  of 

the  nature  sought  against  the  appellants,  he  had  to  establish  that 

the  party  against  whom  damages  were  prayed  for  had  acted  in  a 

calculated  manner  with  malice  and  bad  intent  to  cause  physical, 

mental or psychological injury, without legal justification or excuse. 

Reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the  law  laid  down  in  the 

case  of  Ahmed  Hassan  VS  Muhammad  Arshad  (2016  PLC  (C.S.) 

845).  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  respondent  had  not  been  able  to 

discharge  the  said  legal  burden  so  as  to  justify  his  claim  for 

damages  against  the  appellants.  Bare  allegations  of  malice  and 

prejudice cannot be made the yardstick for the award of damages 

of the amount that the learned Civil Court so generously awarded in 

the respondent’s favour.  

30.  Another vital aspect of the case that escaped the attention of 

the learned Civil Court was that the respondent in paragraph 22 of 

his suit had pleaded that the cause of action had accrued to him on 

03.09.2002.  In  the  said  suit,  there  is  no  date  subsequent  to 

03.09.2002 on which the respondent claims to have suffered at the 

appellants’  hand.  It  is  not  disputed  that  on  26.02.2002,  the 

respondent  had  sent  a  legal  notice  to  appellant  No.1  claiming  an 

amount  of  Rs.2  million  against  him.  For 

filing  a  suit 

for 

compensation for illegal, irregular or excessive distress, Article 28 

of  the  Schedule  to  the  Limitation  Act,  1908  provides  a  limitation 

period of one year from the date of the distress. The period of one 

year after the date on which the respondent claims that the cause 

of  action  accrued  to  him  expired  on  03.09.2003,  whereas  the  suit 

was  instituted  by  him  on  05.04.2004.  Instead  of  dismissing  the 

respondent’s  suit  as  time barred,  the learned  Civil Court  held  that 

since  the  limitation  period  for  filing  a  suit  for  recovery  of  money 

was three years, the respondent’s suit was within time. The prayer 

clause of the respondent’s suit makes it clear that the said suit was 

for damages.   

31.  What  also  prevailed  over  the  learned  Civil  Court  in  passing 

said decree was that the respondent had not been cross-examined. 

The learned Civil Court held that since the respondent had not been 

cross-examined  on  his  deposition  regarding  the  allegation  of  zina 

12 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

made against him, and his wife having left Pakistan for China, such 

deposition  would  be  treated  as  true.  We  are  of  the  view  that  the 

learned Civil Court ought to have considered the case in its totality 

by  giving  due  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  respondent  had  not 

produced any independent evidence or even his wife to support his 

deposition. In the case of Shazia Qamar VS Bashira Bibi (2016 CLC 

15),  it  has  been  held  inter alia  that  a  statement  made  during  the 

examination-in-chief and not controverted in the cross-examination 

nevertheless  is  to  be construed  in the light  of the  pleadings  of the 

party  and  the  other evidence  produced  and  placed  on  the  record. 

In the case at hand, the learned Civil Court did not even determine 

whether  the  respondent’s  claim  for  damages  was  on  the  basis  of 

the tort of libel or slander. Even though in paragraph 20 of the suit, 

the  respondent  pleaded  that  he  had  suffered  humiliation  “in the 

society and relations”,  yet  he  did  not  produce  any  member  of  the 

society or any of his relations to depose that the allegations (if any) 

made against  him  had  brought him  in  disrepute.  In  the absence of 

such  evidence, 

the  decree  against 

the  appellants 

is  not 

sustainable. 

32. 

In view of the above discussion, the instant appeal is allowed; 

the impugned judgment and decree dated 30.05.2014  is set aside; 

and  as  a  result,  the  respondent’s  suit  for  damages  is  dismissed. 

Since we are of the view that the proceedings in the suit against the 

appellants were not just frivolous and vexatious, but a gross abuse 

of the process of the Court, we are allowing this appeal with costs 

throughout in addition to costs of Rs.1,00,000/- in terms of Section 

35(1)(iii) C.P.C. as amended by the Costs of Litigation Act, 2017.  

33. 

It  is  an  admitted  position  that  Rs.5,00,000/-  was  paid  by 

appellant  No.1  to  the  respondent  through  the  learned  Executing 

Court  whereas  appellants  No.2 and  3 had  paid  Rs.4,90,000/-to  the 

respondent  out  of  Court  in satisfaction of the  decree to  the  extent 

as  against  the  said  appellants.  Since  we  have  found  that  the 

impugned  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court 

is liable to be set-aside and the respondent’s suit dismissed, he  is 

placed  under  a  continuing  obligation  to  restitute  the  amount 

received from the appellants on the basis of the said judgment and 

13 

R.F.A.No.74/2014 

decree. In the case of Sh. Mehraj Din VS Ghulam Muhammad (PLD 

1965 Lahore 374), the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Akram (as he 

then  was)  held  that  restitution  of  property  follows  automatically 

upon the decree being varied or reversed in appeal and a specific 

direction  for  restitution  is  not  necessary  to  be  made  by  the 

appellate Court. In the case of Khalid Rasool VS Muhammad Sharif 

(1987 CLC 253), it was held inter alia that restitution of possession 

to  a  party  who  succeeds  in  getting  an  adverse  order  reversed  in 

appeal  is  nothing  more  than  retracing  the  steps  to  nullify  the 

proceedings whereby the party who was not entitled to the benefit 

had obtained it from the Court under false colours. 

34.  Section  144  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (“C.P.C.”) 

provides  inter alia  that  when  a  decree  passed  against  a  party  is 

reversed,  the  Court  of  first  instance  shall,  on  the  application  of 

such  a  party,  entitle  to  benefit  by  way  of  restitution  may  make 

orders,  including  orders  for  refunds  etc.  Section  144  is  an 

embodiment of the doctrine of restitution and has been held not to 

confer  any  new  substantive  right  which  an  aggrieved  party  does 

not  possess  under  the  general  law.  It  is  well  settled  that  a  Court 

has  the  inherent  power  to  direct  restitution,  and  that  Section  144 

C.P.C. 

is  not  exhaustive.  Where  an  appellate  Court  orders 

restitution  it  does  so  in  exercise  of  its  inherent  powers  under 

Section 151 C.P.C. and not under Section 144 C.P.C. It has been so 

held in the case of Mahmood ul Hassan VS District Judge, Chakwal 

(2009  YLR  780).  Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  the  application  for 

restitution under Section 144 C.P.C. could be made to the Court of 

first  instance  where  the  decree  is  varied  or  reversed  by  such 

Court. 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

    (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

       JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2019 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

               (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan*        APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
