IUDGMENT  SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT

ISLAMABAD

Criminal Revision  No.  7 6/2078

GuIZaman

VS

The State,  etc.

Petitioner  by:

Mr. Muhammad Sadiq Kharu Advocate.

Respondents  by:

Barrister  Ayesha Siddique Khan,  State Counsel.
Mr. Tariq M. Khan  Marwat,  Advocate.
Muhammad  Khan  & Ibrar, S.Is.

Date of Decision: 17.1.2.2019.

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, I. Through  this criminal revision, the

petitioner  has called  in question  the order dated L3.07.2018,  passed by learned

Additional  Sessions  Judge (West), Islamabad,  whereby  respondents  No.2, 3 &

4 namely Muhammad  Irfan,  Muhammad  Asad and Tehmina Irfan,  accused in

case FIR No.L02,  dated  09.03.2018,lJ/S  302,34 PPC, P.S. Tarnol, Islamabad

were  discharged  from the said  case in terms  of Section 255-D Cr.P.C.

2. 

Learned  counsel for the petitioner  contends  that respondents  No.2  to 4

were involved in commission of murder of deceased  Imdad ul Haq on

0S/09.03.2018 in a brutal  manner with the help of fourth accused  Saeedullah

(P.O),  and the I.O after conclusion  of evidence  submitted  the challan U/5173

Cr.P.C.  before  the Court but learned  trial Court discharged the accused

without  any basis; that minimum requirement  to discharge the accused  U/S

265-D Cr.P.C. is when  from the perusal of police report, complaint and other

documents  as well as from the statements  of witnesses  recorded U/S 161,

Crl. Revision No.7612018

2

Cr.P.C.,  no offence is made ou! that learned  trial Court has ignored  the record

of the case  and assumed  all those facts which require  thorough  probe and

determination  during  the course  of trial at pre-trial stage; that the legality and

admissibility of evidence  has been  appreciated  by the trial Court on the basis

of assumption and prosecution  was not allowed to produce  the evidence

which  is mandatory requirement  in terms of Article L0-A of the Constitution

of Islamic  Republic  of Pakistan,l973.

3.  Conversely,  learned  counsel  for respondents  No.2 to 4 contends that all

three respondents  were  nominated by the I.O but no direct evidence was

available  against  them rather the I.O linked the respondents/accused  persons

with the crime of murder  of Imdad ul Haq by way of CDR  only which is a

corroborative piece of evidence having no nexus with the direct evidence.

Similarly it has been  argued  that principal accused Saeedullah  is absconder

and all other  respondents who were made accused  in this  case  have  been

involved  due to relationship  with Saeedullah  and  as such  learned trial Court

has rightly discharged the accused persons as no material  substance is

available  to connect the respondents with the alleged crime.

4. 

Learned  State Counsel  contends  that challan has been submitted  in the

Court, whereby  investigation  report  reveals that deceased  Imdad ul Haq was

murdered with planning  of Tehmina  kf.anf rcspondent  No.4  who called  the

deceased by way of SMS on a particular place where Saeedullah  has

committed murder of deceased  and as such respondents  are in league  with

each other  for the murder  of deceased; that as per report  deceased  Imdad ul

Haq was in relationship with Tehmina Irfan prior to the said occurrence  and

on this issue, there was a family dispute  among the parties, however, the

deceased  was forced to shift from Islamabad  to his native village but he again

Crl. Revision No.7612018

3

came  back to town alter 4/5 years; that respondent  No.4 Tehmina  Irfan  was

linked with the deceased which has been proved through CDR and

respondent No.2/Irfan  is her husband and Muhammad  Asad/respondent

No.3 is the brother of Tehmina  Irfan who all have direct motive  against the

deceased to restore their honour; that learned  trial Court has passed the order

while appreciating  evidence without giving due opportunity of hearing to the

petitioner/  complainant  of this case.

5.  Arguments  heard, record  perused.

6.  Perusal of record reveals that petitioner Gul Zamanf  complainant  of

case FIR No.1.02, dated 09.03.2018,lJ/S  302,34  PPC, P.S. Tarnol, Islamabad,

got lodged  the complaint  with the allegations  that his brother Imdad ul Haq,

aged about 22 years,  teacher in a private  school  was found murdered in the

cricket ground of Dhoke Paracha.  The I.O during the course  of investigation,

obtained  call data record (CDR) of deceased's mobile  phone and identified

two suspicious  mobile  numbers  and started investigation  and came to the

conclusion that Tehmina lrf.anfrespondent  No.4 was using Sim No.0337-

9210966,  which was confirmed  on the statements  of Benish  as well as

Muhammad  Rizwan  Ali, was used  by Tehmina and she sent SMS to deceased

on the fateful night, where-after  his dead body was recovered. I.O arrested

respondent  No.3 brother of Tehmina and discovered  that murder  was

committed by one Saeedullatu  (the brother in law of accused  Asad and

Tehmina),  who is Afghan national.

7.  The investigation  report reveals that Tehmina has some relationship

with deceased and due to said relationship family of Tehmina has grudge

against the deceased.

Crl. Revision No.7612018

4

8. 

The  deceased was assaulted by family members  of Tehmina 4/5 years

back due to which he was sent to his native village by his parents  and family

members,  however,  he again c€rne  back in recent past and joined as private

school  teacher  and having contact with Tehmina  again.

9.  The I.O has submitted  the investigation report on the following

grounds:-

(a) Deceased  Imdad ul Haq  was murdered due to relationship  with

Tehmina/ respondent  No.4.

(b) Tehmina sent sMS to deceased Imdad  ul Haq on the fateful  night
where-#ter  he was murdered  in cricket  ground of Dhoke

Paracha.

(c) Asad (brother of Tehmina/respondent  No.4)  during  the course  of

investigation  admitted  that murder  was committed  by Saeedullah

on the planning  and motivation of Tehmina  and Asad'

(d) saeedullah (Afghan National),  brother in law of Tehmina and
Asad  accused, who committed murder  and fled away  to

Afghanistan  and presently  absconder.

(e) I.O has collected CDR of deceased  comprisingbf  113 pages'

10.  The  above  referred  details were appreciated by the learned trial Court

when  challan  has been submitted, however,learned  trial Court has discharged

all three accused  mainly  on the ground  that statement  of one accused  against

the other co-accused  in police custody could not be considered as extra

judicial confession,  neither can the same be used  against  the co-accused in

terms  of Article 38 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  19U. The other important

reason for passing  of the impugned order is the status of CDR of suspicious

cellular phone number  which  was allegedly  under  the use of Tehmina  lu:f.an,

no ownership  proof or record was established  by the I.O to establish  the link

between the deceased  and Tehmina  Irfan.  As such the'iD hasjeclared the

\

third  accused  Irfan (husband  of Tehmina) as innocent  and his n une was

placed in column  No.2 of the challan  U/5173 Cr.P.C.

Crl. Revision No.7612018

5

11,. Learned  trial Court at the stage of framing of charge  passed the

impugned  order, therefore,  it is necessary to go through the relevant provision

of law as to what are the requirements  which  are essential for framing of

charge  in terms  of Section  265-D Cr.P.C.

12.  Section  265-C  Cr.P.C.  provides the concept of supply of copies of

statements and documents to the accused  comprising of 'A' first information

report,'B' police repor!'C' statement  of witnesses  recorded  U /5 1'61  Cr.P.C.

&.1.64Cr.P.C.,'D'  Inspection note recorded  by the I.O on his first visit  of place

of occurrettce,'E'  recovery details. These documents  when  handed over  to the

accused  persons with object to make  him understand  the pima-facle  evidence

and incriminating  material and for his preparation  to answer  when the charge

is framed.

13.  Learned trial Court  while considering  the entire record including the

above mentioned  documents  mentioned  in Section 265-C  Cr.P.C., if comes  to

the conclusion  that "there is a ground.for  proceeding ulith the trial of acansed.

it shall frame in znritins a charse  asainst the accused" otherrn ise, there is no

need to frame the charge  and accused persons  have to be discharged.

1,4. While considering  the requirement  of Section  255-D  Cr.P.C.  alongr,r'ifl1

Chapter  XIX of the relevant  provision  Section  22'1. to 240 Cr.P.C. have to be

considered that the charge  has to be framed in a specific  manner with each

and every detail  so that an accused  person cannot wriggle  out from his

criminal liability.  Trial  Court is under  responsibility to keep the relevant law

on the subject in mind coupled with  Section  265-C Cr.P.C.  at the time of

formulating  the charge so as to avoid future agony  and injustice to the parties.

Reliance  is placed upon 20L7 YR7567 (Zeeshan  VS Iahangir\.

15.  In this case learned trial Court while  exercising  the powers  U/S 265-D

Cr.P.C. examined  the record  before  framing  of charge,  perused  all the

Crl. Revision No.7512018

5

documents  placed by the prosecution,  there was no ground to proceed further

with the trial of accused  and such scrutiny  was carried  out before framing the

charge against  the accused  persons. It is trite law that powers conferred U/S

265-D  Cr.P.C.  were to be exercised sparingly. Whereas  ordinarily and in

normal course of nature, the prosecution should  be allowed to produce their

evidence, however, in appropriate cases when the facts alleged by the

prosecution,  did not constifute  or commission of an offence,  was prima-face

not established,  the court, could  not and should not desist to discharge an

accused  U/S 265-D Cr.P.C. The framing  of charge, was not an automatic

process  and the trial Court was not supposed  to act like a Post Office,  just to

stamp  on the ipse dixit of Police and if the material  on record was not

sufficient,  the Court could discharge  the accused  U/S 265-D  Cr.P.C.  Reliance

is placed upon 2017 MLD  976 (State VS- Shukoor  lan) and

P.Cn.L.I 672

(Saiid laoed  VS Ailditional  Sessions  ludge'West lslamabadr.

1.6. After  application of the above  referred  facts alongwith law  discussed

above, this Court is of the view that deceased was murdered  by one

Saeedullah as per police repor! although  this aspect  is yet to be investigated,

whereas there is no direct evidence  against  accused  Asad as well as Tehmina

Irfan regarding the murder  of deceased  rather  they are only linked  with the

hideous crime of murder  of Imdad ul Haq to the extent of abetrnent and

conspiracy, whereas there is no role of accused Irfan in this case, who was

declared innocent  by the police  and placed his name in column  No.2  of the

challan  U/S 173 Cr.P.C. However, at this stage when  the principle accused

Saeedullah  absconder  is not arrested, nor he has been investigated,  therefore,

offence of conspiracy is yet to be established  which  could only  be possible  if

principal  accused  Saeedullah would be arrested  in future,  therefore,  while

considering  the detailed  order passed  by learned  Additional  Sessions Judge,

Crl. Revision No.7612018

7

Islamabad, it has been observed that no illegality  has been  committed, nor

jurisdiction vested in the learned  trial Court has been exercised  against the

law and the order impugned  is based upon valid reasons.  Hence, instant

criminal revision  is not maintainable and the same is hereby  dismissed.

However, when police  arrest absconder  accused Saeedullatu  and if any

incriminating  material or evidence  comes on record against present accused

persons  who have been discharged,  the prosecution may again  proceed under

the law in the tight of any new evidence. The police is also  not restricted from

further investigation  of the alleged crime  of murder.

Z.hid

IUDGE

