ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.3805 of 2021 

Khalique Zaman Chaudhary and others 

VS          

Shabbir Anjum Mehdi and others  

Dates of Hearing: 
Petitioners by: 
Respondents by:  

19.11.2021 & 17.01.2022 
Mr. Taimoor Aslam Khan, Advocate  
Mr. Ali Nawaz Kharal, Advocate for  
respondents No.1 and 2 
Mr. Mudassar Hussain Malik, Advocate for  
respondent No.4, 
Mr. Wasim Abid, Advocate for respondent  
No.5. 

___________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB  J.-  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition, the petitioners impugn the order dated 18.10.2021 passed by 

the  Court  of  the  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad,  dismissing 

their application under Order I, Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 

1908  (“C.P.C.”)  for  impleading  them  as  defendants  in  the  suit  for 

declaration  and  partition  of 

immovable  property 

instituted  by 

respondent No.1 (Shabbir Anjum Mehdi).  

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  the  instant  writ  petition 

are  that  vide  registered  lease  deed  dated  08.02.1983,  the  Capital 

Development  Authority  (“C.D.A.”)  granted  to  M/s  Conforce  Limited 

leasehold rights in 16 industrial plots bearing Nos.333 to 340 and 349 

to  356  all  measuring  39,111  square  yards  situated  in  the  Industrial 

Area, Sector I/9, Islamabad. 

3. 

Vide  registered  sale  deed  dated  04.11.1984,  seven  persons 

namely  (i)  Muhammad  Yousaf  Mehdi  (predecessor  of  respondents 

No.3(a)  to  3(d)),  (ii)  Mobeen  Anjum  Mehdi  (respondent  No.2),  (iii) 

Shabbir  Anjum  Mehdi  (respondent  No.1),  (iv)  Ch.  Muhammad  Gul 

Bahar, (v) Zulfiqar Ahmad, (vi) Mukhtar Ahmed, and (vii) Tariq Masood 

(respondent No.4) purchased the leasehold rights in the said 16 plots 

from  M/s  Conforce  Limited.  Vide  letter  dated  24.11.1985,  the  Estate 

Management Directorate of the C.D.A. transferred the allotment of the 

said 16 plots in favour of the said purchasers. 

 
                
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

4. 

Vide registered sale deed dated 02.02.1986, the leasehold rights 

in  4 plots  bearing  Nos.339,  340,  355 and  356  were  purchased  by  M/s 

British  Biscuit  (Pvt.)  Company  Ltd.  (“M/s  British  Biscuit”).  On 

23.12.1985, Muhammad Yousaf Mehdi submitted an application to the 

C.D.A.  for  issuance  of  a  No  Objection  Certificate  (“NOC”)  for  the 

transfer of the  leasehold rights in the said 4 plots.  This application is 

on  the  letterhead  of M/s  British  Biscuit.  Vide letter  dated  16.01.1986, 

the C.D.A. issued an NOC for the transfer of the said leasehold rights 

subject to the payment of a transfer fee. The transfer fee amounting to 

Rs.4,30,211/- was paid to the C.D.A. on 12.03.1986.  

5. 

The  transferees  of  the  leasehold  rights  in  the  16  plots  made  an 

arrangement  under  which  8  plots,  bearing  Nos.333,  334,  335,  336, 

349,  350,  351  and  352,  went  to  (i)  Ch.  Muhammad  Gul  Bahar,  (ii) 

Zulfiqar  Ahmad,  and  (iii)  Mukhtar  Ahmad  whereas  8  plots  bearing 

Nos.337, 338, 339, 340, 353, 354, 355 and 356, went to (i) Muhammad 

Yousaf Mehdi, (ii) Mobeen Anjum Mehdi, (iii) Shabbir Anjum Mehdi, and 

(iv)  Tariq  Masood.  In  this  way,  the  16  plots  were  bifurcated  into  two 

lots  of  8  plots  each.  The  C.D.A.,  vide  its  letter  dated  17.04.1989, 

recognized and recorded this bifurcation. This letter makes reference 

to  a  mutual  agreement  between  (i)  Muhammad  Yousaf  Mehdi,  (ii) 

Mobeen  Anjum  Mehdi,  (iii)  Shabbir  Anjum  Mehdi,  (iv)  Tariq  Masood, 

and  (v)  M/s  British  Biscuit.  Vide  letter  dated  17.08.1993,  the  C.D.A. 

informed M/s British Biscuit that the C.D.A. Board, in its meeting dated 

25.11.1991, had decided to extend the lease period of all the industrial 

plots  including  plots  Nos.339,  340,  355  and  356  “up  to  99  years  i.e., 

"up to 25.08.2064.” 

6. 

On 15.05.2008, Shabbir Anjum Mehdi filed a suit for declaration 

and  partition  of  immovable  property.  The  subject  matter  of  the  suit 

was  the  8  plots  that  had  fallen  in  the  lot  of  Muhammad  Yousaf  Mehdi 

etc. The plaintiff in the said suit (respondent No.1 herein) prayed for a 

declaration  to  the  effect  that  respondent  No.4  (Tariq  Masood)  was 

only a benami owner in the said plots, and that his name recorded as a 

co-transferee in the sale deed as well as the transfer letter issued by 

the C.D.A. was benami in nature. In the said suit, it was also pleaded 

that  the  transfer  of  the  4  plots  in  favour  of  M/s  British  Biscuit  was  a 

 
3 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

“paper  transfer”  necessitated  purely  for  the  purpose  of  securing 

loans, and that there was never an intention of selling any of the plots 

to  the  said  Company.  Respondent  No.1  wanted  the  partition  of  the  8 

plots  between  himself  and  respondents  Nos.2  and  3(a)  to  3(d) 

excluding  respondent  No.4.  During  the  proceedings  before  the 

learned  Trial  Court,  respondent  No.2  (originally  defendant  No.2)  was 

transposed  as  plaintiff  No.2.  M/s  British  Biscuit  is  not  a  party  in  the 

said suit.  

7. 

Along  with  the  said  suit,  respondent  No.1  had  also  filed  an 

application  for 

interim 

injunction.  Vide  ad-interim  order  dated 

20.06.2008, the learned Trial Court restrained the parties from selling 

or  altering  the  character  of  the  suit  plots  until  further  orders. 

Subsequently,  vide  order  dated  23.12.2008,  the  learned  Trial  Court 

disposed of respondent No.1’s application for interim injunction in the 

following terms:- 

“The order dated 20.06.2008 is confirmed and the status quo to the 
effect that no party shall sell or alter the character of the suit plot, 
shall continue till the final disposal of the suit.” 

8. 

During  the  pendency  of  the  said  suit,  two  sale  deeds  dated 

13.03.2012  were  executed.  Through  the  first  sale  deed,  plot  No.339 

was  sold  by  M/s  British  Biscuit  (through  its  Chief  Executive  Officer, 

namely  Tariq  Masood  /  respondent  No.4)  to  (i)  Ms.  Amna  Sultan,  and 

(ii)  Ch.  Khalique  Zaman,  and  through  the  second  sale  deed,  plot 

No.340 was sold by M/s British Biscuit to (i) Mrs. Anam Sultan, and (ii) 

Ch. Khalique Zaman. The said sales were made by M/s British Biscuit 

(through 

its  Chief  Executive  Officer,  namely  Tariq  Masood 

/ 

respondent No.4). These deeds are not registered.  

9. 

On 19.05.2021, the petitioners filed an application under Order I, 

Rule 10 C.P.C. praying for their impleadment as defendants in the said 

suit.  In  the  said  application,  it  is  not  mentioned  as  to  when  the 

petitioners came to know about the pendency of the said suit.  

10.  Vide order dated 18.10.2021, the said application was dismissed 

by  the  learned  Trial  Court.  The  primary  reasons  why  the  said 

application  was  dismissed  was  that  the  sale 

in  favour  of  the 

petitioners  had  taken  place  during  the  existence  of  an  injunctive 

order, and that M/s British Biscuit (from whom the petitioners claim to 

 
 
4 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

have purchased  plots  No.339 and  340)  was  not  impleaded  as  a party 

in the suit. The said order dated 18.10.2021 has been assailed by the 

petitioners in the instant writ petition.  

11.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  after  narrating  the  facts 

leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition,  submitted  that  the 

petitioners were bonafide purchasers of plots No.339 and 340 through 

sale deeds dated 13.03.2012 executed with M/s British Biscuit, which 

was  the  lawful  owner  of  the  said  plots;  that  the  petitioners  had 

purchased  the  said  plots  for  Rs.13  million;  that  since  respondents 

No.1 and 2 had transferred 4 plots including plots  No.339 and 340 to 

M/s  British  Biscuit  through  registered  sale  deed  dated  02.02.1986, 

they  could  not  assert  that  M/s  British  Biscuit  had  not  become  the 

owner of the said plots; that respondents No.1 and 2’s father had also 

applied  to the C.D.A.  to  transfer  the  leasehold  rights  in  the  4 plots  in 

favour of M/s British Biscuit; that the NOC for the transfer of the said 

leasehold  rights  in  favour  of  M/s  British  Biscuit  had  been  granted  by 

the  C.D.A.  on  the  application  of  Mr.  Muhammad  Yousaf  Mehdi;  that 

through  resolution  dated  12.03.2012  passed  by  M/s  British  Biscuit’s 

board  of  directors,  respondent  No.4  was  authorized  to  sell  plots 

No.339  and  340;  that  since  respondent  No.1  had  not  impleaded  M/s 

British Biscuit  as  a  defendant in the suit,  the  injunctive  order  passed 

by  the  learned  Trial  Court  was  not  applicable  to  it;  that  respondent 

No.4,  who  had  executed  the  sale  deeds  dated  13.03.2012,  cannot 

adequately protect the petitioners’ interests in the litigation before the 

learned  Trial Court;  that  neither  do the petitioners  have  the  intention 

of  protracting  the  proceedings  in  the  suit  nor  do  they  intend  to  turn 

the  clock  back  by  seeking  to  file  a  written  statement  or  reframe  the 

issues; and that since the suit is  at  the stage of cross-examination of 

the defendants’ witnesses, the petitioners seek their  impleadment as 

the  defendants  in  the  suit  so  as  to  cross-examine  the  defendants’ 

witnesses.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  prayed  for  the  writ 

petition to be allowed and for the impugned order dated 18.10.2021 to 

be set-aside.  

12.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

submitted that the petitioners were well aware of the injunctive order 

 
5 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

passed by the learned Trial Court when they claim to have purchased 

plots  No.339  and  340;  that  since  the  petitioners  are pendente 

lite purchasers, 

the  doctrine  of  lis  pendens  would  apply; 

that pendente lite purchasers 

have 

no 

right 

of 

getting 

themselves impleaded as  defendants  in  the  suit;  that  the  petitioners 

cannot  set  up  a  case  independent  from  the  party  which  is  their 

predecessor-in-interest; that the suit has been pending since the past 

13 years and the impleadment of the petitioners as defendants  in the 

suit would delay the conclusion of the trial;  that respondent No.4 has 

made a false  assertion that  through  an agreement  dated  03.02.1998, 

he had purchased 8 plots from Muhammad Yousaf Mehdi; that the said 

agreement  has  been  held  to  be  inherently  void;  that  a  suit  for  the 

specific  performance  of  the  agreement  had  been  withdrawn  by 

respondent  No.4;  that  in  order  to  secure  a  loan  from  the  Industrial 

Development  Bank  of  Pakistan  for  M/s  British  Biscuit,  a  sham  sale 

deed dated 02.02.1986 was executed and registered whereby 4 plots 

bearing  Nos.339,  340,  355  and  356  were  transferred  to  M/s  British 

Biscuit; that the name of M/s British Biscuit has never been recorded 

in the C.D.A.’s record as the owner of the said plots; that  respondent 

No.4  had  no  authority  to  execute  sale  deeds  in  favour  of  the 

petitioners since he had never been appointed as the Chief Executive 

Officer  of  M/s  British  Biscuit;  that  respondent  No.4  holds  only  9.5% 

shares in M/s British Biscuit; that the petitioners have played fraud on 

this  Court  by  basing  their  rights  on  unregistered  sale  deeds  dated 

13.03.2012 which are fake documents; that in fact the title in the said 

plots  never  vested  in  M/s  British  Biscuit  and  therefore,  the  alleged 

sale in favour of the petitioners is void; that at best M/s British Biscuit 

could  claim  interest  in  2,444  square  yards  which  constitutes  only  1 

plot; and that the impugned order whereby the petitioners’ application 

under Order I, Rule 10 C.P.C. was dismissed does not suffer from any 

legal  infirmity.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  prayed  for  the 

writ  petition  to  be  dismissed.  In  making  his  submissions,  the  learned 

counsel  for  respondent No.1 placed  reliance on  the judgments  in  the 

cases of Muhammad Sabir Khan VS Rahim Bakhsh (PLD 2002 SC 303) 

 
6 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

and  Saleem-ud-Din  VS  Municipal  Committee,  Tando  Allahyar  (2000 

SCMR 460).  

13. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition  have 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 10 above, and need 

not be recapitulated.  

14.  The  petitioners  claim  to  have  purchased  plots  No.339  and  340 

through sale deeds dated 13.03.2012 during the pendency of the suit 

and subsistence of injunctive order dated 23.12.2008. The petitioners 

do not claim to have derived title in plots No.339 and 340 from any of 

the  parties  to  the  suit  but  from  M/s  British  Biscuits,  who  respondent 

No.1  chose  not  to  implead  as  a  defendant  in  the  suit.  According  to 

respondent  No.1,    M/s  British  Biscuit  was  established  only  for  the 

purpose  of  securing  a  loan  and  for  this  purpose  a  sham  agreement 

was  executed  whereby  four  plots  (including  plots  No.  339  and  340) 

were  transferred  to  said  company.  For  the  purposes  of  clarity, 

paragraph 5 of the suit and paragraph 6 of the written comments filed 

by  respondent  No.2  /  Mobeen  Anjum  Mehdi  before  this  Court  are 

reproduced herein below:-  

Paragraph 5 of the suit:- 

 “5.  That the Mehdis (sans Defendant No.2) had already purchased 
a complete biscuit plant in UK which was brought into Pakistan. A 
factory was constructed on four plots Nos.339, 340, 355 & 356, 
entirely at their own expense. A company by the name of British 
Biscuit Co. Ltd. was also formed. Defendant No.1 wanted Defendant 
No.2 to work in the factory, hence he was given 2.5% shares therein 
again  without  any  contribution.  At  the  time  of  formation  of  the 
Company, as submitted above the plots were held jointly in the names 
of the buyers shown in the Sale Deed and no partition inter se between 
the co-owners had taken place. The said Company was a private 
family concern. In 1986, i.e. at any early point of time, a paper transfer 
of four plots was made in the name of the British Biscuits Company, 
which was necessitated purely for purposes of securing loans of a 
loan giving institution. The paper transfer was not formalized in the 
CDA. There never was any intention of selling any part of the plots to 
any outside party, as the British Biscuits Company was a family 
concern of the Mehdis with which M/s Gulbahar also had no concern.”  

Paragraph 6 of respondent No.2’s written comments:-  

 “6.   That in 1985 in order to secure Bank loans from IDBP for the 
Company  a  sham  Partition  Deed  was  registered  which  showed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

transfer/vesting only of 2444 sq. yds from plots No.339, 340, 355 & 356 
in favour of BBC which was also so recorded in another sham sale 
deed dated 2-2-1986. Ownership was never vested in the Company 
which continue to vest in the 4 registered owners. Name of BBC as 
transferee was never recorded in CDA title registers nor in CDA 
Transfer Letter dated 23-4-1989.” 

15.  Whether  or  not  the  transfer  of  plots  No.339  and  340  to  M/s 

British  Biscuit  was  a  sham  transaction  is  yet  to  be  decided  by  the 

learned Civil Court. Presently,  however, M/s British Biscuit is a going 

concern  and  has  a  legal  personality  distinct  from  its  shareholders.  It 

has  not  been  struck  off  the  register  of  companies  by  the  Securities 

and Exchange Commission of Pakistan. An incorporated company, as 

is well known, has a separate existence and the law recognizes it as a 

juristic person, separate and distinct from its members. A company in 

holding its property and carrying on its business is not the agent of its 

shareholders. The liability of shareholders in the liability of a company 

is  limited  to  the  extent  of  unpaid  amount  on  his  shares  unless 

otherwise  provided  in  its  memorandum.  In  the  case  of  Solomon  VS 

Solomon & Co. Ltd. (1897 AC 22), the House of Lords held that in law, 

a company is a person altogether different from its shareholders and 

directors and the shareholders and Directors of the company are not 

liable  for  the  debts  of  the  company  except  to  the  extent  permissible. 

Law  to  the  said  effect  has  also  been  laid  down  in  the  cases  of  Haji 

Khuda  Bux  Nizamani  VS  Election  Tribunal  (2003  MLD  607),  Eastern 

Federal  Union  Insurance  Company  Limited  VS  State  Life  Insurance 

Corporation  of Pakistan  (1987 CLC  1408),  Rai  Bahadur  Mohsin Singh 

Oberoi  VS  Rai  Bahadur  Jodha  Mal  Kuthalia  (PLD  1961  SC  6)  and 

E.B.M. Company Ltd. VS Dominon Bank (AIR 1937 PC 279).  

16.  The  petitioners  assert  that  the  sale  deeds  with  respect  to  plots 

No.339  and  340  were  signed  by  Tariq  Masood/respondent  No.4,  who 

had  been  authorized  to  sell  plots  No.339  and  340  through  resolution 

dated  12.03.2012  passed  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  M/s  British 

Biscuit. Although respondent No.4 is a party in the suit, he signed the 

said  sale  deeds  dated  13.03.2012  in  his  capacity  as  the  person 

authorized by M/s British Biscuit, which has a legal personality distinct 

from  respondent  No.4.  Therefore,  prima  facie,  the  petitioners 

 
 
8 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

purchased  the  said  two  plots  from  M/s  British  Biscuit  and  not  from 

respondent No.4. 

17.  Respondent  No.1  herein  is  the  plaintiff  in  the  suit  and  as 

dominus litis  he  preferred  not  to  implead  M/s  British  Biscuit  (which 

according to respondent No.1 never became the actual or true owner 

of plots No.339 and 340) as a defendant in the suit. The general rule in 

regard  to  impleadment  of  parties  is  that  the  plaintiff  in  a  suit,  being 

dominus litis,  may  choose  the  persons  against  whom  he  wishes  to 

litigate  and  cannot  be  compelled  to  sue  a  person  against  whom  he 

does  not  seek  any  relief.  Consequently,  a  person  who  is  not  a  party 

has  no  right  to  be  impleaded  against  the  wishes  of  the  plaintiff.  But 

this  general  rule  is  subject  to  the  provisions  of  Order  I,  Rule  10(2)  of 

C.P.C.,  which  provides  for  impleadment  of  proper  or  necessary 

parties.  

18.  Respondent  No.4,  in  his  individual  capacity,  was  a  co-owner 

along  with  respondents  No.1  and  2  and  the  predecessor  of 

respondents  No.  3(a)  to  3(d)  in  plots  No.339  and  340  prior  to  their 

disputed  transfer  to  M/s  British  Biscuit.  Although  respondent  No.1 

admitted  that  M/s  British  Biscuit  was  indeed  incorporated  albeit  to 

secure  a  loan,  he  asserts  that  the  transfer  of  plots  in  favour  of  said 

company was a “paper transfer.” 

19.  The  C.D.A.,  in  its  written  statement,  has  pleaded  that  plots  No. 

339  and  340  were  owned  by  M/s  British  Biscuits.    Now,  in  the  event 

respondent No.1 succeeds in proving that plots No.339 and 340 were 

never in fact transferred to M/s British Biscuit, and therefore the latter 

could  not  transfer  them  further  to  the  petitioners,  the  petitioners’ 

rights acquired in the said plots through sale deeds dated 13.03.2012, 

albeit pendente lite and during the subsistence of an injunction, would 

be  most  adversely  affected.  The  outcome  of  the  suit  may  have 

significant  consequences  for  the  petitioners  in  that  if  respondent 

No.1’s  suit  is  decreed  in  the  petitioners’  absence,  they  would  lose 

their ownership rights in the said plots. The petitioners’ apprehension 

that  in  their  absence  from  the  proceedings  the  parties  to  the  suit 

might collude against them is understandable. To deny them the right 

to be impleaded as parties to the suit so that they could protect their 

 
9 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

interest  in  the  said  plots  would  be  unjust.  It  is  for  the  learned  Trial 

Court to decide whether or not M/s British Biscuit is a necessary party 

and  should  have  been  impleaded  as  a  party  in  the  suit.  However,  for 

the omission on respondent No.1’s part to implead M/s British Biscuit 

as  a  defendant  in  the  suit,  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  penalized  the 

petitioners by dismissing their application for impleadment as parties 

in the suit.  

20.  True,  vide  interim  order  dated  23.12.2008,  the  learned  Trial 

Court  restrained  the  parties  to  the  suit  from  selling  or  altering  the 

character of the suit plots. The injunctive order issued by the learned 

Trial Court bound the  parties to  the suit but  not M/s British Biscuit or 

the petitioners, who are admittedly not parties to the suit. Therefore, I 

am  of  the  view  that  the  learned  Trial  Court’s  order  dismissing  the 

petitioners’  application  for  impleadment  as  defendants  in  the  suit  is 

perverse and arbitrary.  

21. 

In the case of  Thomson Press (India) Ltd.  VS Nanak Builders  & 

Investors  P.  Ltd.  (AIR  2013  SC  2389),  the  question  that  fell  for 

consideration  before  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  was  whether  a 

transferee  pendente lite  having  notice  and  knowledge  about  the 

pendency of the suit for specific performance and order of injunction 

can be impleaded as a party under Order I, Rule 10 C.P.C. on the basis 

of sale deeds executed in his favour by the defendant in the suit. In the 

said  case  the  learned  counsel  for  the  defendant  had  given  an 

undertaking  to  the  effect  that  the  defendant  would  not  transfer  or 

alienate  the  suit  property.  Notwithstanding  the  order  passed  by  the 

Court regarding the undertaking, the defendant sold the suit property 

to a third party, who filed an application under Order I, Rule 10 C.P.C. 

for 

its 

impleadment  as  a  party 

in  the  suit.  After  taking 

into 

consideration the relevant facts, the Supreme Court of India held that 

the  third  party  purchaser  had  entered  into  a  clandestine  transaction 

with the defendant and got the suit property transferred in its favour, 

and  therefore  the  third  party  purchaser  cannot  be  held  to  be  a 

bonafide purchaser without  notice.  Nevertheless, the Supreme  Court 

of  India  set  aside  the  concurrent  orders  of  the  Delhi  High  Court 

whereby the third party purchaser’s application under Order I, Rule 10 

 
10 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

C.P.C.  was  dismissed,  and  the  said  application  was  allowed  “for the 

ends of justice” to  be  met. Furthermore  at  paragraph  52,  it  was  held 

that the  sale  in  favour  of  the  third  party  purchaser  in  breach  of  the 

injunction  could  not  be  rendered  ineffective,  and  that  “the party 

committing the breach may incur the liability to be punished for the 

breach committed by it but the sale by itself may remain valid as 

between the parties to the transaction subject only to any directions 

which the competent Court may issue against the vendor.”   

22.  The  petitioners’  case  is  on  a  better  footing  than  the  one  in  the 

aforementioned  case  inasmuch  as  the  petitioners  do  not  claim  to 

derive title in plots No.339 and 340  from any party in the suit but from 

M/s British Biscuit, which is admittedly not a party in the suit.  

23.  The doctrine of lis pendens is predicated on the legal maxim ‘lite 

pendente nihil innovetur’  which  means  during  legal  proceedings 

nothing 

new 

should 

be 

introduced. 

This doctrine is 

embodied in Section 52 of the  Transfer  of  Property  Act,  1882  which 

reads thus:-  

“52.  Transfer of property pending suit relating thereto. During the 
pendency in any Court having authority in Pakistan or established 
beyond the limits of Pakistan by the Federal Government of any suit 
or proceeding which is not collusive and in which any right to 
immovable property is directly and specifically in question,  the 
property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party 
to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party 
thereto under any decree or order which may be made therein, 
except under the authority of the Court and on such terms as it may 
impose.  

Explanation. For the purpose of this section, the pendency of a suit or 
proceeding shall be deemed to commence from the date of the 
presentation of the plaint or the institution of the proceeding in a 
Court of competent jurisdiction and to continue until the suit or 
proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree or order and 
complete satisfaction of discharge of such decree or order has been 
obtained, or has become unobtainable by reason of the expiration of 
any period of limitation prescribed for the execution thereof by any 
law for the time being in force.” 
(Emphasis added)  

24.  Section  52  of  the  Act  ibid  does  not  declare  a  pendente lite 

transfer  by  a  party  to  the  suit  as  void  or  illegal  but  only  makes  the 

pendente  lite  purchaser  bound  by  the  decision  of  the  pending 

litigation. The effect of the applicability of the doctrine if lis pendens is 

that it does not annul the conveyance but only renders  it subservient 

 
 
 
 
11 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

to  the  rights  of  the  parties  to  the  litigation.  In  the  case  of  Rashid 

Ahmad  VS  Mst.  Jiwan  and  5  others  (1997  SCMR  171),  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  considered  the  question  whether  the  doctrine  of  lis 

pendens  could  be  set  up  as  a  bar  to  an  application  by  a  transferee 

pendente lite  from  being  impleaded  as  a  party  to  the  pending 

proceedings. It was held that Section 52 of the Transfer of Property 

Act, 1882 did not envisage any such prohibition. Additionally, in the 

case  of  Surraya  Begum  VS  Subhan  Begum  (1992  SCMR  562),  the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:-  

“Under section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, a transfer of 
immovable  property  in  suit  to  which  any  right  is  directly  or 
specifically  claimed,  is  not  completely  prohibited.  What  is 
contemplated  by  this  provision  is  that  the  property  cannot  be 
transferred or otherwise dealt with, without permission of the Court 
by any party to suit or proceedings so as to affect rights of any other 
party thereto d under any decree or order which might be passed 
therein. Subject to these reservations, property can be transferred 
even without permission of the Court, but the transferee or donee or 
assignee would acquire right thereto or interest therein only subject 
to the judgment or order of the Court in the suit.”  
(Emphasis added)  

25. 

It  is  also  well  settled  that  there  is  no  absolute  rule  that  the 

transferee pendente lite without leave of the Court should in all cases 

be  allowed  to  join  and  contest  the  pending  suits.  A pendente lite 

purchaser has no automatic right to be impleaded and the same is the 

discretion  of  the  Court  based  on  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 

case.  The object of Order I, Rule 10 C.P.C. is to discourage contests 

on  technical  pleas,  and  to  save  honest  and  bonafide  claimants  from 

being  non-suited.  The  power  to  strike  out  or  add  parties  can  be 

exercised  by  the  Court  at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings.  Under  this 

rule,  a  person  may  be  added  as  a  party  to  a  suit  when,  without  his 

presence,  questions  in  the  suit  cannot  be  completely  decided.  For 

deciding  an  application  under  Order  I,  Rule  10  C.P.C.,  no  elaborate 

inquiry is required but a purchaser pendente lite should ordinarily be 

made a party in the pending proceedings to enable him to protect his 

interest. Where  the  trial  Court  sees  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  an 

applicant  to  complicate  and  delay  the  pending  suits,  it  ought  not  to 

show  equity  in  his  favour.  Where  a  pendente lite  purchaser  is 

permitted  to  be  impleaded  as  a  party  to  a  suit,  he  would  not  be 

entitled  to  defend  the  suit  independently  from  the  party  through 

 
 
12 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

whom  he  claims  ownership  rights.  The  transferee pendente lite  will 

be  bound  by  the  result  of  the  suit  or  proceeding,  whether  or  not  he 

had notice of the suit or proceeding. The judgment delivered and the 

findings recorded against the pendente lite seller would be binding 

on the pendente lite purchaser in the same manner and to the same 

extent  as  it  was  binding  on  the  pendente lite  seller  of  the  suit 

property.  

26.  The  doctrine  of  lis pendens  will  apply  to  a  pendente lite  sale 

where  the  predecessor-in-interest  of  the  transferee  is  a  party  to  the 

litigation.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  petitioners  have  not  purchased 

plots  No.339  and  340  (which  in  addition  to  6  other  plots  are  the 

subject matter of the suit) from any defendants in the suit but from M/s 

British Biscuits.  Since the petitioners did not purchase the said plots 

from  any  of  the  parties  in  the  suit,  the  sale  transaction  between  M/s 

British Biscuits and the petitioners would, in my view, not be hit by the 

doctrine  of  lis pendens.  In  holding  so,  reliance  is  placed  on  the  law 

laid down in the following judgments:-  

(i) 

In the case of Muhammad Ashraf Butt VS Muhammad Asif Bhatti 

(PLD  2011  SC  905),  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court,  after  making 

reference  to  Section  52  of  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act,  1882, 

has authoritatively interpreted the said provision in the following 

terms:- 

 “The virtual and true object of lis pendens is to protect and 
safeguard the parties to the suit and their rights and interest 
in the immovable suit property against any alienation made by 
either of the parties, of that property, during the pendency of 
the suit in favour of a third person. The rule unambiguously 
prescribes  that  the  rights  of  the  party  to  the  suit,  who 
ultimately succeed in the matter are not affected in any 
manner whatsoever on account of the alienation, and the 
transferee  of  the  property  shall  acquire  the  title  to  the 
property  subject  to  the  final  outcome  of  the  lis. …  The 
foundation of the doctrine is not rested upon notice, actual or 
constructive, it only rests on necessity and expediency, that 
is, the necessity of final adjudication that neither party to the 
litigation should alienate the property so as to effect the rights 
of his opponent. If that was not so, there would be no end to 
litigation and the justice would be defeated.” 
(Emphasis added)  

Furthermore,  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Ashraf  Butt  VS 

Muhammad  Asif  Bhatti  (supra), 

it  was  clarified  that  the 

 
 
 
 
13 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

doctrine  of lis pendens would  not be  attracted  to  a sale  of  the 

suit  property  prior  to  the  institution  of  the  suit  or  sale  of  the 

suit property by a person prior to his impleadment as a party in 

the suit. In this regard it was held as follows:-    

 “9. Now considering the instant case in the light of the 
principles mentioned above, it is clearly spelt out from the 
record  that  the  appellants  have  purchased  the  property 
during the pendency of the suit and Yaqoob son of Ishaq was 
a party to the suit who was duly implead as a defendant on 14-
2-1980 and had sold the property to Yaqoob son of Khuda 
Bakhsh on 2-4-1980 from whom the appellants via Jamshed 
acquired  their  title  subsequently  on  12-10-1984.  In  this 
context, it may be elucidated that Khalid had sold the property 
to Yaqoob son of Ishaq prior to the institution of the suit, 
therefore, if the latter was not impleaded as a party, and had 
made any transfer even during the pendency of the suit, such 
alienation would not have attracted lis pendens as being not a 
party thereto, but when the afore-named was arrayed as a 
defendant on 14-2-1980, from that point of time he shall for the 
purposes of section 52 ibid be the party to the suit, and thus 
for all considerations thereof was the predecessor in interest 
of the appellants, notwithstanding the fact that Yaqoob son of 
Khuda Bakhsh, who himself had purchased the property from 
him during the pendency of the suit was made a party to the 
suit or not.”  

In  the  said  report,  reference  was  also  made  to  the  case  of 

Simla  Banking  Industrial  Co.  Ltd.  VS  Firm  Luddar  Mal  (AIR 

1959 Punjab 490), wherein it was held as follows:-  

 “The rule of lis pendens lays down that whoever purchases a 
property during the pendency of an action, is held bound by 
the judgment that may be made against the person from whom 
he derived his title (to the immovable property, the right to 
which is directly and specifically in question in the suit or 
proceeding) even though such a purchaser was not a party to 
the action or had no notice of the pending litigation....” 

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Amit  Kumar  Shaw  VS  Farida  Khatoon  (2005  (11) 

SCC 403), the Indian Supreme Court held as follows:-   

 “16. The doctrine of lis pendens applies only where the lis is 
pending before a court. Further pending the suit, the transferee 
is not entitled as of right to be made a party to the suit, though 
the  court  has  a  discretion  to make  him  a  party.  But  the 
transferee pendente lite can be added as a proper party if his 
interest in the subject-matter of the suit is substantial and not 
just peripheral. A transferee pendente lite to the extent he has 
acquired interest from the defendant is vitally interested in the 
litigation, where the transfer is of the entire interest of the 
defendant; the latter having no more interest in the property 
may not properly defend the suit.”  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  West  Virginia  Pulp  and  Paper  Co.  VS  Cooper 

(106  S.E.  55,  60,  87  W.Va.  781),  wherein  it  was  held  that “the 

doctrine of lis pendens is that one who purchases from a party 

pending suit a part or the whole of the subject-matter involved 

in the litigation makes it subject to the final disposition of the 

cause and is bound by the decision that may be entered 

against the party from whom he derived title." 

27. 

It  ought  to  be  reiterated  that  the  petitioners  have  not 

purchased plots No. 339 and 340  from any of the parties to the suit. 

If the petitioners are not permitted to be impleaded as parties to the 

suit, they would not be bound by the final outcome of the suit. In the 

case  of  Kala  Chand  VS  Jagannath  (AIR  1927  PC  108),  it  was  held 

that  a person who applied to be made a party but was refused is not 

bound  by  the  decision  in  the  suit.  The  concepts  of  complete 

adjudication  of disputes  and  avoidance of multiplicity  of  proceedings 

would  also  be  defeated  if  the  petitioners  are  not  allowed  to  be 

impleaded as parties in the suit.  

28. 

I  am  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the  order  dated  18.10.2021 

passed by the learned Trial Court whereby the petitioners’ application 

under Order I, Rule 10 C.P.C. was dismissed has been assailed in the 

instant  petition  filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  The 

discussion  herein  above  would  show  that  I  have  come  to  the 

conclusion  that  the  order  impugned  in  the  instant  petition  is  not  in 

accordance  with  the  law,  and  is,  therefore,  outside  the  jurisdiction 

conferred  on  it.  This  is  reason  enough  for  interference  with  the  said 

order.  In  the  case  of  Fazli  Hakeem  VS  Secretary,  State  of  Frontier 

Regions Division, Islamabad (2015 SCMR 795), it was held as follows:- 

“It cannot be ignored altogether that a repository of executive, 
judicial or quasi judicial power is required to act in accordance with 
the law. For the very condition for the conferment of such power is 
that it has to act in accordance with the law. If and when it would go 
wrong in law it would go outside its jurisdiction. An order thus passed 
would be non-est. Such order cannot be protected simply because 
the repository of such power has the power to pass such order.” 

29.  Additionally, 

in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Ashraf  Butt  VS 

Muhammad  Asif  Bhatti  (supra),  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  spurned 

the  objection  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  to  interfere  with  a 

 
 
 
15 

                                           W.P.No.3805/2021   

revisional  order  of  the  Court  of  the  Additional  District  Judge,  by 

issuing a writ of certiorari, in the following terms:-  

“10. … Suffice it to say that on account of the provisions of Article 4 
of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, it is an 
alienable right of every citizen to enjoy the equal protection of law 
and to be treated in accordance with law, therefore, if a revisional 
Court has passed an order which does not qualify the test of Article 
4  ibid  and  suffer from  a  patent  error,  of  fact,  such  as  non-
reading/misreading of the facts on the record or has committed a 
grave illegality in applying the correct law, such as the error of 
misapplication and non application of correct law, thus being an 
illegality of a sheer nature can always be rectified by the High 
Court while exercising its constitutional jurisdiction under Article 
199,  as  no  bar/limitation  in  this  behalf on the  exercise  of 
constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court either emanates from 
the plain reading of the Article or can be read into it.” 

30.  For  the  reasons  aforementioned,  I  have  no  other  option  but  to 

allow  the  instant  petition  and  hold  that  the  impugned  order  dated 

18.10.2021 is unsustainable. It is set aside accordingly. The matter is 

remanded  to  the  learned  Trial  Court  for  a  decision  afresh  on  the 

petitioners’  application  under  Order  I,  Rule  10  C.P.C.  This  judgment 

shall  have  no  bearing  on  the  learned  Trial  Court  while  deciding  the 

main  suit  filed  by  respondent  No.1.  There  shall  be  no  order  as  to 

costs.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON 05/04/2022 

Qamar Khan*  APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                             (JUDGE) 

Uploaded by IT Department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
