Form  No:  HOD/C-121 
JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

W.P. No.169/2022 

Abdul Jabbar 
VS
The State, etc. 

Petitioner By 

Mr.  Taimoor Aslam Khan, Advocate. 

Respondents By 

Irfan  Ahmed,  Special  Prosecutor, 

Mr. 
NAB. 
Shahzad  Durrani,  Assistant  Director/LO, 
NAB. 

Date of  Decision 

03.02.2022. 

AAMER  FAROOQ,  J.  - 

This  consolidated  judgment  shall  decide  the 

above-mentioned  writ  petition  as  well  as  Writ  Petition  No.170/2022,  as  they 

involve common questions of law and facts. 

2. 

The petitioners  (Abdul Jabbar and Muhammad Shabbir) are co-accused in 

Reference No.4/2019  filed  by  National Accountability  Bureau against them  which 

is  pending before learned Accountability Court No.  II,  Islamabad. 

3. 

The  petitioners  were  arrested  on  10.03.2019  pursuant  to  warrants  of 

arrest  issued by the  Bureau on  06.03.2019. They  were  served grounds of  arrest 

on  11.03.2019  and  were  committed  to  judicial  custody  on  28.03.2019.  Initial 

interim  Reference was  filed  against the  petitioners  on  02.04.2019,  in  which  they 

were  arrayed as  accused at  Sr.  Nos.  5  &  6  of  the  Reference. They filed  petitions 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  seeking  bail  after  arrest  on  13.04.2019, 

which  were  dismissed  by  this  Court  on  29.07.2019.  The  referred  decision  was 

challenged  by  way  of  leave  to  appeal  before  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan through  Civil Petitions No.3566 & 3567/2019,  which were disposed of on 

W.P.  Nos.169  &  170/2022 

2 

23.06.2020,  with  the  direction  to  learned  Trial  Court  to  decide  the  matter 

expeditiously.  Second bail  applications were  filed  (W.P.  Nos.2925 &  2926/2020) 

by  the  afore-mentioned  petitioners  on  07.10.2020,  which  were  dismissed vide 

orders  dated  21.12.2020.  The  referred  orders  were  also  challenged  by  way  of 

leave to  appeal through  Civil  Petitions No.1326 &  1330/2021  and the  same was 

allowed vide order  dated  07.07.2021 and the  matter  was  remanded to  this  Court 

to  render fresh decision on merit and otherwise. 

4. 

During the  course of  pendency of  the  matter,  the  National Accountability 

Ordinance,  1999 was  amended  and  learned Accountability  Court  was  conferred 

jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  bail  applications;  due  to  the  referred  development, 

the  afore-noted  writ  petitions were dismissed on  17.11.2021. The  petitioners filed 

applications  for  release  on  bail  before  learned  Accountability  Court  No. 

II, 

Islamabad, which  were  dismissed vide order dated 23.12.2021,  hence the  instant 

petitions. 

5. 

Learned counsel for  the  petitioners,  inter  alia, contended that  the  instant 

case  is  a  classic  one  whereby  the  petitioners  suffer  hardship  due  to  delay  in 

conclusion of  the  trial.  In  this  behalf,  it  was  pointed  out  that  petitioners  are  in 

custody for  almost  three  years and  conclusion of  the  trial  is  not  in  sight;  it  was 

argued that  where  such is  the  case,  petitioners are entitled  to  concession of  bail. 

Reliance  was  placed  on  case  reported  as  Muhammad  Iqbal  Khan  Noori  and 

another  VSNational  Accountability  Bureau (NAB)  and  others  (PLD 2021  SC 

21Q).  It  was  also  submitted  that  the  allegations  levelled  against  the  petitioners 

are  borne  out  in  the  Reference as  well  as  grounds  for  arrest  served  on  the 

petitioners. In  this  behalf, it was contended that  the gist of allegations against the 

petitioners  is  that  being  partners  in  M/s  Pink  Residency, they  acquired  07-Acres 

land  situated  in  Deh  Safooran,  Sector 40,  Scheme 33,  District  Malir,  Karachi in 

connivance with  officials of  the  Board of  Revenue, Government of  Sindh, to  have 

W.P.  Nos.169  &  170/2022 

3 

the  land  regularized which  caused loss  to  the  National Exchequer in  the  sum of 

Rs.800 Million. It  was submitted  that  another  allegation against the  petitioners  is 

that  sum of  Rs.  67  Million was paid through  fraud/benami  bank accounts. It  was 

contended that  officials  of  Board of  Revenue and  other  officials  who  regularized 

the  land  in  question  have  not  been  arrayed  as  accused persons;  that  another 

accused  namely  Aftab  Ahmed  Memon  was  granted  bail  by  this  Court  on 

28.04.2021,  in  Writ  Petition  No.898/2021.  It  was  contended  that  out  of  45 

prosecution witnesses, only 09 have been recorded. 

6. 

Learned  Special  Prosecutor,  National  Accountability  Bureau,  inter  alia, 

contended that  petitioners  are not  entitled  to  the  concession of  bail  inasmuch as 

earlier  petitions  stand  dismissed  on  merit.  It  was  contended  that  trial  is 

in 

progress  and,  if  released  on  bail,  the  petitioners  might  hinder  the  expeditious 

conclusion of  the  same.  It  was  also  argued  that  petitioners  are  beneficiary  in 

regularization of  land, hence are directly involved. 

7. 

Arguments advanced by learned counsel for  the  parties have been heard 

and documents placed on record examined with  their  able assistance. 

8. 

As  noted,  this  is  second rather third  round of  litigation  in  the  bail  matter 

of  petitioners.  Allegations against them  as  spelt out  in  the  grounds of  arrest  are 

that  they  purchased land situated in  Deh  Safooran, Sector 40, Scheme 33, District 

Malir,  Karachi  from  one  Muhammad  Saleem  Qureshi  vide  Conveyance  Deed 

No.3228,  dated  23.06.2017  and  had  the  same  regularized  in  connivance  with 

officials of the  Board of  Revenue and also paid consideration of  Rs.67 Million from 

fake  bank accounts in  the  name of  M/s A-one International,  Ibrahim  Linkers and 

Umair Associates. It  is  an admitted  position that  out  of  45  prosecution witnesses, 

only 09 have been recorded and it  shall take  considerable time  for  the  trial  to  be 

concluded despite  direction  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan. In  this 

view  of  the  matter,  petitioners  are  incarcerated for  the  last  about  three  years. 

W.P.  Nos.169  &  170/2022 

4 

Learned  Special  Prosecutor,  National  Accountability  Bureau,  as  well  as 

Investlqatlnq  Officer  was confronted  as  to  the  confiscation of  evidentiary  record; 

they  frankly  conceded that  they  have taken  in  possession the  same. It  was also 

inquired whether  there  is  any chance of  petitioners absconding during  the  course 

of  trial,  the  candid  reply  was  in  the  negative. While  adjudicating  the  parameters 

of  bail  after  arrest  in  matters  of  arrest  out  of  investigations  conducted  by  the 

National Accountability  Bureau or  Reference filed  by them,  the  Hon'ble Supreme 

Court of  Pakistan in  case titled  Muhammad Iqbal  Khan Noori and another  VS

National Accountability  Bureau {NAB) and others  (PLD 2021SC916)  observed as 

follows:- 

"5. 

Under our  democratic constitutional  scheme, firmly  anchored in  the  rule 

of  law,  the  constitutional  courts  are  to  jealously  protect  and  safeguard  the 

fundamental  rights  of  a  person.  The  High  Court,  under  Article  199,  has  the 

power  to judicially  review the order passed by  the Executive, viz,  Chairman NAB 

or some other  authorized officer of the NAB,  regarding  arrest and detention of a 

person.  Article  4 mandates that  no  action  detrimental  to  the  life,  liberty,  body, 

reputation  or property  of any person  shall be  taken  except in  accordance with 

law.  Article  9  is  a  cherished fundamental  right  of a  person,  which,  inter  alia, 

guarantees  right  to  liberty,  which  may  be  curtailed  ''save  in  accordance with 

law. "  The  phrase  except or  save in  accordance with  law  implies  that  not  only 

should  the  procedural  requirements  of  the  ''law"  be  fully  met  but  also  its 

substantive  content  i.e.,  there  must  be  sufficient  material/  evidence  on  the 

record 

that  can 

justify 

the  application  of  such  a 

''law.  "  Therefore, 

material/evidence  must  be  sufficient  enough  to  persuade  the  constitutional 

court  to  deprive  an  individual  of  his  fundamental  right.  The  requirement  of 

sufficiency  of material  is  also echoed in  the  right  guaranteed  under Article  10, 

which requires  that  any person  who is arrested shall not  be detained in  custody 

without  being  informed  of  the  grounds  for  such  arrest.  The  word  ''grounds" 

used  in  Article  10  is  not  limited  to  mere  allegations  but  means  a/legations 

supported  by  sufficient  material/evidence  connecting  the  person  with  the 

offence justifying  his  arrest  and  detention.  Article  10-A  creates a  constitutional 

obligation  to  conduct a  fair  trial  and ensures due process.  The  spectrum  of fair 

trial and due process is extensive and over-arching;  an arrest and detention  of a 

person  without  any sufficient  incriminating  material/  evidence would  offend  his 

right  to  fair  trial.  Right  to  dignity  under Article  14 is  an  absolute  constitutional 

W.P.  Nos.169  &  170/2022 

5 

standard,  which  is  not  subject  to  law.  This  is  because  dignity  inheres  in  a 

human  person  and  is  not  granted  by  law  or  cannot  be  taken  away  by  law. 

Human  dignity  encapsulates the  notion  that  every person  has  inherent  equal 

worth;  no  one's  life  and  liberty  is  more  important  than  any  other  person's. 

Arresting  and  detaining  a person  without  any incriminating  material  offends his 

or  her  right  to  dignity.  This  brings  us  to  the  most  familiar  maxim  in  criminal 

justice:  the presumption  of innocence -  the principle  that  a person is presumed 

innocent  until  proven  guilty  by  a  court  of  law.  This  principle  is  pillared  on 

constitutional  right  to liberty,  fair  trial  and human dignity.  This presumption  can 

only be dislodged if there is sufficient  incriminating  material  against a person as 

underlined and reinforced  by  the  aforesaid constitutional  rights.  Over the years 

reasonableness  and  proportionality  have  also  come  to  be  recognized  as 

established  grounds  of judicial  review  of  the  executive  action.  Thus,  while 

exercising jurisdiction  under  Article  199,  the  High  Court  has  to  examine  the 

order  of arrest  and detention passed by  the  Chairman NAB  and see if it passes 

the  constitutional  muster.  The  High  Court while exercising its jurisdiction  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  for  the  enforcement  of  fundamental  rights  can 

pass  appropriate  orders,  which include  an  unconditional  release or  release on 

bail,  to  grant  the  relief  to  the  aggrieved person.  It  is  for  the  enforcement  of 

fundamental  rights  under  the  Constitution  and  not 

the  sub-constitutional 

statutory  grounds  provided  in  section  497,  Cr.P.C., 

that  this  Court  has  been 

granting  bails to  the  accused persons in  NAB  cases  in  exercise of constitutional 

jurisdiction  under Article  199 read with Article 185(3)  of the  Constitution, mainly 

on the grounds  of:  (i)  delay in  conclusion of the  trial,  (ii)  life-threatening  health 

condition  of  the  accused,  and  (iii)  non-availability  of  sufficient  incriminating 

material against the accused. 

6. 

The  Ordinance  requires  the  Chairman  NAB  to  form  an  ''opinion"  if 

proceedings  are  to  be initiated  against any person  and  the  matter  referred  for 

inquiry  or investigation. After  appraising the material  and the evidence collected 

during  the  inquiry  or  investigation,  the  Chairman  NAB, 

if  finds  that  there  is 

''sufficient  material"  to  justify 

filing  of  a  reference,  refer  the  matter  to  the 

Accountability  Court for  trial.  While  section 24(a)  of the  Ordinance provides  that 

the  Chairman  NAB  shall  have  the  power,  at  any  stage  of  the  inquiry  or 

investigation  under  this  Ordinance,  to  direct  that  the  accused, 

if  not  already 

arrested,  shall  be arrested. Section 24( d)  mandates  that  NAB  shall,  as soon as 

may  be,  inform  the  accused of the  ''grounds" and  ''substance" on  the  basis of 

which he has been arrested. Section S(a) defines that  "accused" shall, inter  alia, 

include a  person  in  respect of whom there are  ''reasonable grounds"  to  believe 

that  he  is or  has been involved in  the  commission of any  offence  triable  under 

W.P.  Nos.169&  170/2022 

6 

this  Ordinance. Section 12(a) states  that  the  Chairman NAB or  the  Court trying 

an accused for any offence as specified under the Ordinance, may,  at any time, 

if  there  appear  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that 

the  accused  has 

committed  such  an  offence,  order  the  freezing  of his property.  The  combined 

reading  of all  these provisions  of the  Ordinance leaves no  room  for  doubt  that 

the  law  authorises proceedings against  a person  accused of an  offence  under 

the  Ordinance,  and  for  the  freezing  of  his  property,  only  when  there  are 

reasonable grounds  for  believing  that  the  accused has  committed  an  offence 

triable under the Ordinance. 

7. 

In  order  to  ascertain  whether  ''reasonable grounds"  exist  or  not,  the 

Court  should  not  probe  into  the  merit  of  the  case,  but  restrict  itself  to  the 

material  placed  before  it  by  the  prosecution  (NAB)  to  see  whether  some 

tangible  material/  evidence is available against the  accused which may lead  to 

the inference of his guilt.  Mere accusation of an offence  would not  be sufficient 

to  disentitle  an  accused from  being  bailed  out.  There should  be  ''reasonable 

grounds"  as  distinguished  from  mere  allegations  or  suspicion.  It  is  for  the 

prosecution  (NAB} to show reasonable grounds  to  believe that  the accused has 

committed  the  crime.  If  the  Court  is  not  satisfied  that  there  exist  reasonable 

grounds  to  believe  that  the  accused  is  guilty,  the  Court  is  to  grant  bail  in 

enforcement  of the  aforesaid fundamental  rights.  Pre-trial  arrest  and  detention 

of the accused casts a heavy burden on the conscience of the court. If  after  trial 

the accused is acquitted  there is no recompense or reparation  for the loss of his 

valuable  years  spent  behind  bars 

including 

its  economic,  social  and 

psychological impact  on the accused, as well as,  his family  or near ones due  to 

denial of bail.  The  sufficiency of material/  evidence connecting the accused with 

the  crime  must  therefore  be  viewed  with  utmost  care and  caution  at  the  bail 

stage." 

This  Court  in  case  titled  Taha  Raza  VS The  state  and  others  (W.P. 

No.158512021 and others}, observed as follows:- 

"18. 

It  is admitted  at  all  ends that  the  co-accused placed  at higher  rung  has 

been  released on  bail,  hence the  present  petitioners/accused  are  also  entitled 

for  grant  of  bail  on  the principle  of  consistency. Reliance is placed  on  a  case 

titled  as  "Ghulab Khan  V.  Chairman  N.A.B and  another"  (2020  SCMR 

~ 

The  same principle  has been laid  down  in  cases titled  as  "Muhammad 

Daud  and  another  V.  The  State  and  another''  (2008  SCMR  173), 

"Sheraz V.  The State" (2021  MLD 292)  and  "Muhammad Azam  V.  The 

State" (2008  SCMR 249). 

W.P.  Nos.169  &  170/2022 

7 

19. 

It  has been held by  the Hon 'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in  case  titled 

as  "Khawaja  Anwer Majid  VS  National Accountability Bureau  through 

Chairman  NAB and another'' f PLD 2020 SC 635}  that: 

"Condition  of  the  Petitioner,  ever  since  the  rejection  of  the  previous  bail 

application,  has  deteriorated  alarmingly.  cardiac  physicians  have  suggested 

surgery  involving  intensive procedure.  Such procedure  needs to  be  undertaken 

free from  custodial stresses. Concession of bail was extended. " 

Reliance  is  also  placed  on  cases  2017  SCMR  1194,  2JJJl2 

SCMR 282  and 2016 SCMR 1225. 

20. 

As  the  entire  case  depends on  documentary  evidence,  which has been 

collected  by  the  NAB/Investigating  Agency,  in  this  regard  guidance  be  taken 

from  a  case titled  as  ''Saeed Ahmed  VS  The State"  (1996  SCMR  1132} 

that: 

"The case entirely  depends upon documentary evidence which seems to 

be  in  possession  of  the  prosecution  and  cha/Ian  has  already  been 

submitted.  It  has  further  been  held  that  as  there  is  no  possibility  of 

tampering  with  the  evidence,  which  is  entirely  documentary  in  nature 

and  in  possession of  the  prosecution":  Reliance is  also placed  upon  a 

case titled  as  ''Muhammad Shabbir  V.  The  State  and  others"  (2020  YLR 

Note 22). 

21.  While allowing  the bail after  arrest of the accused facing trial in the NAB, 

Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in  a  recent judgment  titled  as  "DINSHAW 

HOSHANG  ANKLESARIA  VS  NATIONAL  ACCOUNTABILITY  BUREAU 

(NAB)  THROUGH  CHAIRMAN  and  others" (2021  SCMR  699}  has  held 

that: 

''It  has  been  brought  to  our  notice  that  the  petitioner  was  taken  into 

custody  on  23. 04.2019  and  since  then  he  is  behind  the  bars.  Though 

Reference has been filed but  there are 86  witnesses whose testimony is 

to  be  recorded  before  the  Trial  Court.  Rest  of  the  evidence is  in  the 

possession  of  the  prosecution,  which  is  in  the  documentary  form  and 

there  is  no  likelihood  of any  tampering  or  manipulation.  The  petitioner 

has  already  suffered  20  months  of  incarceration  without  even 

commencement of trial,  which clearly reflects  that  the  conclusion of the 

same is not  in sight in near future.  Even otherwise, it has been informed 

that  there  are 27  accused in  all and  the  majority  of the  same including 

the co-accused are enjoying liberty and free fife. 11 

W.P.  Nos.169&  170/2022 

8 

22. 

It  has  been  held  by  the  Hon 'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a 

judgment  reported  as PLO 2019SC11  {Talat Ishaq  VS  NAB) that: 

(d) 

In  an  appropriate  case  through  exercise of its jurisdiction  under 

Article  199 of the Constitution a  High Court may grant  bail to an accused 

person  arrested  in  connection  with  an  offence  under  the  National 

Accountability  Ordinance, 1999 and  section  9(b)  of  the  said  Ordinance 

does not  affect  the jurisdiction  of a  High Court conferred  upon it by  the 

Constitution.  The  constitutional jurisdiction  of a  High  Court is,  however, 

an  extraordinary  jurisdiction  meant  to  be  exercised  in  extraordinary 

circumstances and not in run  of the mill cases  or as a  matter  of course. 

(f) 

Ordinarily bail is allowed  to  an accused person  on  the ground  of 

delay  only  where  the  delay in  the  trial  or  the  period  of  custody of the 

accused  person  is  shocking,  unconscionable  or  inordinate  and  not 

otherwise.  The  primary  consideration for  grant  of bail  on  the ground  of 

such delay is undue hardship and more often  than not prima  facie merits 

of  the  case  against  the  accused person  are  also  looked  into  before 

admitting  him  to bail on the ground of delay. 

23. 

It  has  been  held  by  the  Hon'ble Supreme Court  of Pakistan in  a  case 

titled  as  "Muhammad Jahangir Sadar  VS  The State  and  others" {PLO 

2003 SC 5251 that: 

"There is  no  cavil  with  the  proposition  that  the  State  machinery  has a 

right-  to  arrest  the  culprits  and  put  them  to  trial,  for  the  purpose  of 

establishing  guilt  against  them  but  it  has  not  been  bestowed  with  an 

authority  to play  with  the liberty  and life  of an accused under detention 

because no  one  can  be  allowed  to  remain  in  custody  for  an  indefinite 

period  without  trial  as it  is  a  fundamental  right  of an  accused that  his 

case  should  be  concluded as  early  as  could  be  possible particularly  in 

those cases  where law has prescribed a period  for  the  completion of the 

trial.  As  in  the  instant  case  under  section  16(a)  of  the  Ordinance the 

Court is bound  to  dispose of the  case  within  30  days.  It  may  be noted 

that  inordinate  delay  in  the  prosecution  case  if  not  explained,  can  be 

considered a ground  for  bailing out an  accused person depending on the 

nature  and circumstances on account of which delay has been caused.  " 

24. 

In  the  above  case, 

the  august  Supreme  Court  after  examining  the 

earlier judgments  held as follows: 

W.P.  Nos.169  &  170/2022 

9 

''In  the  above  noted  case  bail  was  granted  to  Zulfiqar  Ali  petitioner 

because  he  remained  in  custody  for  27  months  and  the  delay  in  the 

conclusion of trial  was attributed  to  both  the parties.  Against  the  above 

prevailing  consistent  view only  one exceptional principle  can be pressed 

into  service  namely  that  if  the  trial  of  the  case has  commenced  then 

instead  of  releasing  the  accused on  bail  direction  should  be  made  for 

expeditious disposal of the case  by adopting  certain modalities to ensure 

that  the  accused, 

is  not  detained  further  for  an  indefinite  period. 

Reference in  this behalf is made to  the case of (i)  Allah Ditta  and others 

v.  The  State  (1990  SCMR  307)  and  (ii)  Iftikhar  Ahmad  v.  The  State 

(1990 SCMR  607). " 

25. 

It  has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in a reported 

judgment  2015  SCMR  1092  titled  as  "Himesh  Khan  VS  The  National 

Accountability Bureau  (NAB),  Lahore  and others" that: 

"The  Court  cannot  ignore  shocking  delay  in  conclusion  of  the  trial.  In 

such  circumstances,  the  accused  cannot  be  left  at  the  mercy  of  the 

prosecution  to  rot in jail.  As  the  real  beneficiaries  were granted  bail,  it 

makes it a fit case  for grant  of bail to the Petitioner. " 

26. 

The  Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has granted  bails to  the accused 

facing  investigation/trial  of  NAB in  the  cases  titled  as  "Muhammad  Saeed 

Mehdi  VS  The State and 2  others" (2002 SCMR  282J  "Himesh Khan  VS 

The  National Accountability Bureau  (NAB),  Lahore  and  others" (2015 

SCMR  1092),  "Ghulab Khan  VS  Chairman  N.A.B and another" (2020 SCMR 

285), "Khawaja  Salman  Rafique  and another VS  National Accountability 

Bureau  through Chairman  and others" (PLD  2020 SC 456),  ''Nazir Ahmed 

Shaikh  and  others  VS  National  Accountability Bureau  and  others" 

(2020 SCMR  297),  and  "Muhammad  Jawed Hanif Khan  and anothers VS 

National Accountability Bureau  Sindh and others" (2020 SCMR  185). 

27. 

In  the  light  of above  law  enunciated by  the  august  Supreme Court  of 

Pakistan,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  petitioners  are  entitled  to  the  relief, 

particularly 

in  view  of  the  principles  and  law  laid  down  in  the  cases  of 

OINSHAW  HOSHANG  ANKLESARIA  VS  NATIONAL  ACCOUNTABILITY 

BUREAU  (NAB)  THROUGH  CHAIRMAN  and  others"  and  "Muhammad 

Jehangir Sadar  V.  The  State and others" supra.  The  prosecution  has not 

been  able  to  satisfy  us  that  the  inordinate  delay  in  conclusion  of  trial  is  not 

partly  attributed  to it. 

W.P.  Nos.169& 

170/2022 

10 

28. 

It  is  important 

to  remember  that  bail  is  not  to  be  withheld  as  a 

punishment.  There is  no  legal  or  moral  compulsion  to  keep  the  people  in jail 

merely  on  the  allegation  that  they  have  committed  offences punishable  with 

death  or  transportation,  unless  reasonable  grounds  exist  to  disclose  their 

complicity.  The  ultimate  conviction  and  incarceration  of  a  guilty  person  can 

repair  the  wrong caused by a mistaken relief  of bail after  arrest granted  to him, 

but  no  satisfactory  reparation  can  be  offered  to  an  innocent  man  for  his 

unjustified  incarceration at any stage of the  case  albeit  his acquittal  in  the long 

run.  Reliance is placed on a case  reported  as  "Manzoor  and 4 others VS  The 

State" (PLO  1972 SC 81 J'~ 

29. 

It  has  been  held  in  a  case  titled  as  ''Zaigham  Ashraf  v.  The  State 

and others" (2016  SCMR 18} that: 

"9.  To  curtail  the  liberty  of a person  is a serious step  in  law,  therefore, 

the Judges shall apply judicial  mind  with  deep thought  for  reaching at a 

fair  and proper  conclusion albeit  tentatively  however,  this  exercise shall 

not  to  be carried out  in  vacuum or  in a  flimsy  or  causal manner as that 

will  defeat  the  ends  of  justice  because  if  the  accused  charge,  is 

ultimately  acquitted  at the  trial  then no reparation  or  compensation can 

be  awarded  to  him  for  the  long  incarceration,  as  the  provisions  of 

Criminal Procedure Code  and  the  scheme of law  on  the  subject  do  not 

provide  for  such arrangements  to  repair  the  loss,  caused to  an accused 

person,  detaining him in jail  without just  cause and reasonable ground. " 

9. 

The  petitioners  are the  only accused persons who  are  behind bars in  the 

Reference in  question.  Investigation  against  them  stands  completed  and  their 

continued 

incarceration  would  not  serve  any  purpose.  The  evidence  is 

documentary  in  nature  primarily  which  is  in  custody  of  National  Accountability 

Bureau, hence it  is  unlikely that  they will tamper with  the  same. On  merit, officials 

of  the  Board of  Revenue, who  regularized the  land,  have  not  been  arrayed  as 

accused.  There  is  no  proof  of  payment  as  such  of  any  money/amount  as 

corruption.  Part payment  of  consideration for  obtaining  property  was  made from 

allegedly fake  back accounts, the  effect  of which  is  to  be seen at the  time  of trial 

through  evidence  i.e.  whether  the  accounts are fake  or  benami and/or  on  what 

basis  or circumstances, the  payment was made therefrom. 

W.P.  Nos.169&  170/2022 

11 

10. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petitions  are  allowed  and  impugned 

order  dated  23.12.2021,  whereby  the  bail  applications  of  the  petitioners  were 

dismissed are set-aside; consequently, the  bail  applications of the  petitioners are 

allowed  and  they  are  admitted  to  bail  subject  to  terms  and  conditions  already 

mentioned in  our short  order. The above are the  reasons of our short order dated 

03.02.2022. 

(SARDAR  EJAZ ISHAQ  KHAN) 

JUDGE 

(AAMER  FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

M.  Shah/* 

