ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl. Misc. No.918-B  of 2020 

MANSOOR  KHAN. 

VS

THE STATE  AND  ANOTHER. 

Petitioner  by: 

State  by: 

Dr.  M.  Saleem  Chishii,  Advocate 

Mr.  Talat  Rizuian,  State  Counsel. 
Mr.  Mohsin,  ASI. 

Complainant  by: 

Syed  Riaz  Hussain,  Advocate. 

Date  of decision: 

27.08.2020 

LUBNA  SALEEM PERVEZ; J: 

Petitioner  Mansoor  Khan  s/o  Qazi 

Ahmed seeks  post  arrest  bail  in  case  FIR No.297/19,  dated  12.09.2019, 

u/s  395, 412,  400  &  109 PPC, registered  with P.S Khanna,  Islamabad. 

2. 

The  Petitioner/ accused  applied  for  bail  after  arrest  before Judicial 

Magistrate  Sec. 30 (East), Islamabad  which was dismissed,  vide order  dated 

16.03.2020,  whereas,  his  similar  request  was  also  declined  by the  learned 

Additional Sessions  Judge  (East), Islamabad,  vide order  dated  08.08.2020; 

hence,  this  petition  for bail after arrest. 

3. 

The brief facts  of the  case  are  that  the  Petitioner along with four other 

co-accused  committed  theft  by  entering  into  the  farm  house  of  the 

Complainant  and  robbed  watches,  Gold Ornaments,  Debit  Cards  of HBL 

and  Bank  Al Falah,  Nine Driving Licences and  arms  from  the  house  of 

Complainant  and  also  took away 500 Euros,  300  Dollars and  an  amount  of 

Rs. Five Lac Forty Thousand  (Rs. 5,40,000/-).  Accused  while fleeing from 

the  scene  took MP-5 Gun  from complainant's  Guard  and  also complainant's 

vehicle, White Colored Corolla, registration  No. ADT / 016,  which  was  later 

on found from the  Iqbal Town, Express  Highway, Islamabad.  Age of three  of 

the  accused  persons  was  reported  to be about  30 years,  whereas,  two were 

aging between  80 to  85 Years; one of the  accused  was  short  heighted  with 

blue  eyes,  whereas,  attire  of  other  four  accused  was  not  mentioned, 

[2] 

Crl. Misc.  No.  918-B/2020 

however, it  was  apprised  that  three  of the  accused  persons  were wearing 

gloves. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for Petitioner  submitted  that  Petitioner  has  falsely 

been  implicated  in  the  instant  case  and  story  narrated 

in  the  FIR is 

concocted  and 

ill-founded  which  is  aimed  at  ulterior  motives;  that 

petitioner  is  not  nominated  in  the  FIR nor  any  role has  been  attributed  to 

the  petitioner  as  the  FIR was  registered  against  five unknown  persons;  that 

attire  of the  accused  is also not  mentioned  in the  FIR; that  the  identification 

parade  has  been  conducted  completely in  derogation  of relevant  rules  as 

same  has  been  conducted  after  3 three  months  of the  occurrence  and  prior 

to  it  petitioner  was  shown  to  the  complainant  and  other  witnesses;  that 

neither  the  complainant  nor  his  brother  nor  his  father  or  any  family 

member  were present  at  the  time  of identification  parade  although  they 

were  the  eye  witnesses;  that  objection of  the  petitioner  at  the  time  of 

identification  parade  have  not  been  recorded; 

that  at 

the 

time  of 

identification  parade  no role has  been  ascribed  to the  petitioner;  that  name 

of  the  chowkidar  has  not  been  mentioned  in  the  FIR,  moreover,  his 

statement  u/s  161 Cr.P.C has  been  recorded  on 30.11.2019,  after  78 days 

of the  occurrence;  that  prosecution's  case  is  that  the  accused  entered  the 

farm house  of the  petitioner  through  the  boundary  wall, whereas,  two of the 

accused  are  stated  to  be  of 80  to  85  years  and  it  is  not  believable that 

persons  of this  age  can  jump  from the  boundary  wall.  Learned  counsel 

further  submitted  that  the  alleged recovery on the  pointation  of petitioner  is 

also a planted  one; that  the  recovery has  been  alleged to be made  through  a 

thickly  populated  area  but  no  witness  from locality has  been  associated 

during  recovery proceedings;  that  investigation  in  the  case  has  completed 

and  challan  has  also been  submitted  before the  Court  thus,  petitioner  is no 

more required  for investigation;  that  the  petitioner  has  been  arrested  on 

02.12.2019;  that  the  investigation  has  been  completed,  therefore,  there  is 

also no  possibility  of tempering  with the  record; that  there  is  no previous 

conviction and  there  is  no question  of abscondence  of the  petitioner;  that 

co-accused  namely  Qaiser  has  already  been  granted  bail  by the  Court  of 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  vide  order  dated 

11.01.2020,  therefore,  following the  rule  of consistency  petitioner  is  also 

entitled  for grant  of bail.  Learned  counsel  in  support  of his  contentions 

[3] 

ca, Misc.  No.  918-B/2020 

placed  reliance  on  the  case  law reported  as  Azhar  Mehmood and  others 

VSThe State (2017 SCMR 135), State through Advocate General, Sindh, 

Karachi  VS Farman Hussain  (PLD 1995 Supreme Court 1),  Javed Khan alias 

Bacha VSState 

(2017  SCMR  524), 

Mushtaq  Ahmad  alias 

Warraich VSState (2010 YLR 1060), Gul Muhammad VSState (2010 

PCrLJ 340), Abid  Mehmood VSState (2017  SCMR 728) and  prayed  for 

grant  of bail to the  petitioner. 

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  Complainant  and 

learned  State 

Counsel,  present  along  with  1.0 of the  case  opposed  the  present  petition 

and  submitted  that  petitioner  is  an  Afghan National  and  belongs  to  a 

notorious  Ghani  Gang  which  is  involved in  similar  kind  of  offences of 

robbery  and  dacoity; that  petitioner  after  commission  of offence went  to 

Afghanistan  and  has  been  arrested  when  entered  Pakistan  to  commit 

another  dacoity;  that  on  petitioner's  pointation  MP-5  short  gun,  gold 

bangle, one wrist  watch,  two diamond  rings,  one set  of gold tops,  one gold 

chaain  with  pendant,  one  ruby  gold bracelet  and  300  American  Dollars 

stolen  from the  complainant's  farm  house  have also  been  recovered; that 

since,  the  petitioner  is  an  Afghan National,  therefore,  there  are  ample 

chances  of his  abscondance,  if enlarged  on  bail;  that  role  of co-accused 

Muhammad  Qaisar  who has  been  granted  bail is  totally different from the 

present  accused, 

therefore,  rule  of  consistency 

is  not  applicable  in 

petitioner's  case;  that  challan  has  already  been  submitted  and  trial  is to be 

completed soon  which  has  been  delayed due  to  Covid-19 Pandemic;  that 

the  offence mentioned  in  the  FIR falls within  prohibitory  clause  of Section 

497  Cr.P.C; that  although  Petitioner  was  not  initially nominated  in the  FIR 

but  he  has  been  identified  during  identification  parade  with  specific role. 

While relying on  the  case  law  reported  as  Asif  Ayub  VSState  (2010 

SCMR  1735),  Muhammad  Arshad  VSThe  State  (2005  SCMR  756), 

Jehanzeb alias  Bhobi VSThe State (2002 SCMR 1380) and  Muhammad 

Ismail  VSMuhammad  Rafique  (1989  PLD 585)  prayed  for dismissal  of 

present  bail petition. 

6. 

I  have  heard  learned  Counsel  for parties  as  well as  learned  State 

Counsel and  have also perused  the record. 

[4] 

Crl. Misc.  No.  918-B/2020 

7. 

The perusal  of record  reveals  that  initially the  FIR was  registered 

against  five unknown  accused,  whereas,  present  petitioner  was  identified 

by Security  Guard  of the  Complainant  at  the  time of identification  parade 

conducted  on  13.12.2019.  It  is very strange  that  at  the  time of identification 

parade  neither  the  complainant  nor  his  brother  and  father  or  any  of the 

family members  were present  who in-fact  were the  sufferers  and  the  eye 

witnesses  of  the  happening.  Moreover, there  is  an  unexplained  delay  of 

eight  days  in  conducting  the  identification  parade  as  the  petitioner  was 

arrested  on  05.12.2019  and  in  such  a  situation,  possibility  of the  witness 

having  seen  the  appellant  prior  to the  identification  conducted  cannot  be 

ruled  out.  The  alleged  recovery on  the  petitioner's  pointation  has  been 

made  from his  residence  stated  to  be  a  rented  premises  but  neither  the 

statement  of Land Lord nor  any  rent  agreement  is  on record;  the  house  is 

situated  at  Khalid Bin Waleed Road, Pindorian  which  is a  thickly populated 

area  but  no  independent  witness  from the  vicinity has  been  involved as 

witness  of the  recovery proceedings.  As per  prosecution  story  the  accused 

entered  the  farm  house  by trespassing  the  boundary  wall, whereas,  from 

the  contents  of the  FIR it  is  apparent  that  age  of two of the  nominated 

accused  is stated  to be between 80 to 85 years  and  it is not  understandable 

that  how a  person  of 80  to 85 years  of age can  jump  from a  high  wall. At 

the  time of registration  of FIR name  of the  Security  Guard  present  at  the 

Farm  House was  also not  mentioned,  however, later  on during  investigation 

a person  namely Abdul Qudoos has  been introduced  as  the  Security  Guard, 

who has  identified  the  petitioner  as  accused;  further,  his  statement  u/ s 

161 has  been  recorded  after  78 days  of the  occurrence  is  also  contrary  to 

the  procedure  provided  under  the  law.  All the  above  said  facts  create 

doubts  in  the  prosecution  story  and  makes  case  of  the  petitioner  of 

further  inquiry.  It has  now a  settled  law that  even for purposes  of bail, law 

is not  to be stretched  in favour of the prosecution  and  if any doubt  arises,  it 

must  go to the  benefit  of the  accused.  The cases  relied upon  are  "Amir VS 

The State"  (PLD 1972  SC 277},  "Shabbi.ran Bibi  VS  The  State"  (2018  P 

Cr. L J  788} and  "Syed Hassan  Ali  Shah  VS  The State"  (2019  P Cr. L J 

Note  l 59}  then  it has  been  held  in case  reported  as  "Zaigham Ashraf  VS 

The  State"  (2016  SCMR 2018}  that  "for getting  the  relief of bail accused 

only had  to  show that  the  evidence/material  collected by the  prosecution 

[5] 

Crl. Misc.  No.  918-B/2020 

and/ or  the  defence plea  taken  by him  crated  reasonable  doubt/  suspicion 

in the  prosecution  case  then  he was entitled  to avail the  benefits  of it". 

8. 

In addition  to above admittedly,  Petitioner  is  previously  non-convict. 

He  is  behind  the  bars  since  05.12.2019.  Investigation  of  the  case  is 

complete and  the  Petitioner  is  no  more required  for further  investigation 

and  nobody can  be kept  in jail  for an  indefinite  period  provided his  further 

incarceration  in jail would not  serve any useful  purpose.  Furthermore,  mere 

heinousness  of offence is  no  ground  to  refuse  bail  to  the  accused,  who 

otherwise becomes entitle  for this  concession. 

9. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above, this  petition  is  accepted  and 

petitioner  is  admitted  to  post  arrest  bail,  subject  to  his  furnishing  bail 

bonds  in  the  sum  of Rs.  5,00,000 /-  (Rupees Five Lac) with  one  surety  in 

the like amount  to the  satisfaction  of learned  Trial Court. 

10.  All the  observations  made  hereinabove  are  tentative  in  nature  and 

shall have no bearing  on the  final determination  of guilt or innocence  by the 

trial Court. 

(LUBNA SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

