JUDGMENT SHEET. 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition No.3198/2013 

Muhammad Zubair, etc. 

VS

N.C.A. etc. 

Petitioners by: 

Respondent No.1 by: 

Respondent No.2 by: 

Mr. Abdur Rehman Siddiqui, 
Advocate. 

Barrister Waqas Aziz Qureshi, 
Advocate. 

Mustafa Shakir Hussain Manager 
(Legal) NESCOM. 

Date of hearing: 

28-10-2016. 

JUDGMENT 

          MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.  Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

petitioners have prayed for following relief: 

“Under the circumstances it is, therefore, respectfully prayed that this 
Honourable Court may very graciously be pleased to set aside the impugned 
order  dated  23.07.2013  and  direct  respondents  to  grant  promotion  to  the 
petitioners  to  SPS  11  and  SPS  12  respectively  w.e.f.  the  dates,  their  juniors 
were promoted as such with all consequential benefits. 

Any  other  relief  which  this  Honourable  Court  may  deem  just  and 

proper may also be awarded.” 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  the  petitioners  are  serving  as 

General Manager at National Development Complex (NDC) which is an integral part 

and  a  subsidiary  body  of  the  National  Engineering  &  Scientific  Commission 

(NESCOM)  duly  controlled  by  the  National  Command  Authority  (NCA)/respondent 

No.1 headed by the Prime Minister of Pakistan. The NCA was established under NCA 

Ordinance  2007  which  was  later  on  enacted  as  NCA  Act,  2010  having  control  and 

supervision over almost all the strategic organizations of the country.  As per petition, 

the  petitioners  claimed  that  after their  initial  appointments  they  are  performing  their 

duties  diligently,  to  the  best  of  their  abilities  and  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  their 

Competent  Authority  and  no  adverse  entry  or  remarks  have  ever  been  recorded 

against them.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P. No.3198/2013 

3. 

The  instant  petition  was  initially  dismissed  by  this  Court  on  the  ground  that  the 

rules  of  the  Organization  are  non  statutory  however,  the  latest  judgment  of  the  Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  has  declared  the  rules  having  a  statutory  force.  In  view  of  the  said 

judgment  of  the  Apex  Court  the  matter  has  been  remanded  to  this  Court  again  for  re-

hearing.  

4. 

The  petitioners  are  presently  serving  in  SPS-10  under  NCA  Employees  Service 

Regulations, 2011. All the petitioners have qualified for their educational academic factors 

and also completed their  minimum threshold of service required under the said scale and 

they  are  entitled  to  be  promoted  in  SPS-11  however,  under  the  promotion  policy 

introduced  by  the  NCA,  the  present  petitioners  have  been  deferred  and  at  present 

superseded for the reasons not extended to them although, the respondent authority admits 

that they qualify the minimum threshold but they have not been promoted on the ground of 

fitness-cum-seniority  principle.  The  petitioners  claim  that  they  are  entitled  to  be 

considered and granted promotion in SPS-11 w.e.f.  01.12.2006, 01.12.2007, & 01.12.2009 

and thereafter in SPS-12 after exhausting a period of 04 years service respectively, as they 

have  become  eligible  for  promotion  in  accordance  with  the  promotion  policy  but  their 

cases have neither been deferred nor they have been superseded but they have simply been 

ignored  without  assigning  any  reason.  The  petitioners  further  claim  that  number  of  their 

juniors  colleagues  have  been  promoted  in  SPS-11  and then  to  SPS-12  but the  petitioners 

have  been  ignored  without  any  lawful  excuse.  In  order  to  prove  their  contentions  the 

petitioners have placed on record the seniority list of G.M (technical)  whereby petitioners 

are mentioned at serial No.1 to 3 and 6 of the seniority list of the G.M. (technical) and are 

still waiting for promotion but the persons who have already promoted are at serial No.4, 

5, 7, 11, 15, 18, 21, 22, 23, 31, 34, 36, 41 to 44, 47 and 48 of the seniority list. Similarly 

who are shown at serial No.18 to 118 of the seniority  list of the officers of SPS-11 were 

junior  to the  petitioners  have  been  promoted  and  likewise  officers  shown  at  serial  No.24 

and 29 of the seniority list of the officers of SPS-12 were also juniors to the petitioners but 

they  have  not  only  been  promoted  to  SPS-11  but  presently  they  are  enjoying  SPS-12 

without  any  justification.  In  last  the  petitioners  have  referred  a  letter  dated  23.07.2013 

 
3 

W.P. No.3198/2013 

whereby one of the petitioner has been transferred to another organization of NCA and he 

has also assailed the said order. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioners  contends  that  the  petitioners  have  not  been 

considered  for the  promotion  without  assigning  any  reason  and  their  junior  officers  have 

already  been  promoted  in  SPS-11  and  SPS-12  and  they  have  been  deferred  without  any 

reason although they met the criteria. Even there is no adverse entry against them. 

6. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1/NCA  states  that  NCA  has  been 

established  under  NCA  Act,  2010  where  the  powers  and  functions  of  the  authority 

contained  in  section  7  of  the  Act  and  Strategic  Planning  Division  (SPD)  serves  as 

Secretariat to the Authority. Learned counsel further contends that National Development 

Complex (NDC) by virtue of section 2-D read with section 8 of the Act is for all intent and 

purposes  is  strategic  organization  working  under  complete  control  of  NCA  and  the 

employees  thereof  are  without  exception.  Employees  in  service  of  the  authority  and  the 

respondents  organization  is  bound  by  the  provisions  of  NCA  Act  which  shall  take 

precedence over any other law in force by virtue of section 21 of NCA Act therefore, the 

instant  writ  petition  is  not  competent.  He  further  contends  that  after  the  judgment  of  the 

Apex  Court  whereby  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  has  declared  the  rules  of  the  instant 

organization as statutotry have been further amended through NCA amendment ordinance, 

2016 formulated on 30 March 2016 whereby the rules of the Authority have been declared 

to  be  non  statutory  hence,  the  instant  relationship  between  the  petitioners  and  the 

respondents  is  that  of  the  master  and  the  servant  and  the  writ  petition  is  not  competent. 

Learned  counsel  further  contends  that  the  ordinance  has  further  been  extended  by  the 

parliament for the next tenure therefore the instant writ petition is devoid of merits and is 

not competent. Lastly, he argued that the principle of fitness cum seniority is applicable in 

the instant matter and the NCA categorically admits that the seniority/eligibility in the case 

of the petitioners meets out but their fitness has not been confirmed only on the touchstone 

of security clearance as the accumulating effect of non clearance of security has been taken 

into  consideration  and  due  to  said  factor  the  promotion  has  been  denied  to  the  present 

petitioners.  He  further  contends  that  in  order  to  discuss  the  issues  of  fitness  on  the 

touchstone of security clearance the proceedings require an in camera session as all those 

 
4 

W.P. No.3198/2013 

factors could not been shared at this level before the Court except in camera proceedings, 

therefore,  in  order  to  understand  the  entire  situation  the  question  of  fitness  specially  in 

terms  of  security  clearance  can  be  argued  in  camera  before  the  Court  whereby  the 

respondents authority has placed the details of certain documents before the Court.  

7. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

From  the  perusal  of  record  it  has  been  observed  that  the  petitioners  who  are 

working as General Managers at the NDC and duly qualify to be promoted but their cases 

have  not  been  taken  into  consideration  since  2006  and  from  the  perusal  of  record  it  has 

been  observed  that the  petitioners  are  entitled  to be  considered  and  granted  promotion  in 

SPS-11  w.e.f.  01.12.2006,  01.12.2007  &  01.12.2009  and  thereafter  in  SPS-12  but  after 

exhausting a period of 04  years service they  have become eligible  for promotion  as such 

they  securely  fall  within  the  promotion  criteria  but  their  cases  have  not  been  considered 

and their  junior officers  have  been given promotion  in SPS-11 and  subsequently  in SPS-

12. From the perusal of the seniority  list available on record which has been admitted by 

the other side  it has been observed that the  junior colleagues of the petitioners have been 

promoted  in  SPS-11  and  then  SPS-12  without  lawful  excuse  the  petitioners’  names  are 

mentioned at serial No.1 to 3 and 6 of the seniority  list of the G.M. (Technical) and they 

are  still  waiting  for  promotion  but  the  officers  whom  names  have  been  placed  at  serial 

No.4, 5, 6, 11, 15, 18, 21, 22, 23, 31, 34, 36, 41 to 44, 47 & 48  in the seniority  list have 

been  promoted.  Similarly,  those officers  who  have  been  shown  at  serial  No.18 to  118 of 

the seniority list of the officers of SPS-11 (Annex-G) are junior to the petitioners and they 

have  been  promoted  likewise  the other officers  shown  at  serial  No.24 to  29  in  the  list of 

the officers of SPS-12 (Annex-H) were also junior to the petitioners but they were not only 

promoted to  SPS-11  prior to the  petitioners  but  they  are  presently  enjoying  the  status of 

SPS-12.  In  view  of  the  above  referred  factors  this  Court  has  also  considered  other  in 

camera proceedings whereby the respondent authority claims that the question of fitness is 

taken up on the ground of the security clearance and it has been conceded before this Court 

that there is no doctrine of security available on record nor even there is any rule  through 

which  the  respondents  can  demonstrate/challenge  the  parameters  of  security  clearance, 

considered  or  observed  with  certain  criteria  hence,  there  is  no  hard  &  fast  principle  for 

 
5 

W.P. No.3198/2013 

clearance  of  security  however,  it  has  been  discussed  by  the  respondents  that  the  reports 

from  internal  security  agencies  and  different  strategic  organizations  are  obtained  by  the 

departmental  promotion  authority  before  considering  the  cases  of  promotion.  The 

respondent authority has also conceded that all the petitioners are qualified and fulfill the 

criteria  of  promotion  on  the  touchstone  of  their  qualification,  experience  and  working 

performance  duration  the  service  and  they  have  been  recommended  by  their  relevant 

senior authorities as fit for promotion but even then their cases could not be considered due 

to certain factors of security clearance. The respondents in order to answer the question of 

security clearance, have placed reliance upon section 7 (d, e, f & g) of National Command 

Authority  Act, 2010 whereby the powers and functions of authority have been defined  in 

which clause d, e, f & g are reproduced as under: 

“(d) 

to  prescribe  specific  terms  and  conditions  of  the  employees 
including  but  not  limited  to,  appointments,  removals,  promotions,  transfers, 
integrity and reliability assessment and other relates matters; 

(e) 

to  create  classification  amongst  employees  based  on  the 
sensitivity of the functions, nature of assignment, security considerations and 
in the interest of security of Pakistan; 

(f) 

to  take  measures  regarding  employees  in  respect  of  their 
movement,  communication,  privacy,  assembly  or  association,  in  the  public 
interest  or  in  the  interest  of  integrity,  security  or  defence  of  Pakistan  or 
friendly relations with foreign states and public order; 

(g) 

to  place  such  restriction  and  limitation  on  the  employees  that 
are  necessary  in  the  interest  of  the  confidentiality  of  the  functions, 
assignments, jobs etc., being performed by the said employees or the class of 
employees.” 

From  the  perusal  of  National  Command  Authority  Act  it  has  been  observed  that  under 

section 9 the status of employees of the Authority has been defined which is reproduced as 

under: 

“9.  Employees  of  Authority.-  (2)  The Authority  shall  regulate  all  the 
matters relating to terms and conditions of the service of the employees in the 
service of the Authority, including their appointment and removal, promotion, 
transfer, integrity assessment, reliability, security clearance, and other related 
matter:  

Provided  that  the  employees  working  in  the  service  of  the  Authority 
who are subject to the Pakistan Army Act, 1952 (XXXIX of 1952), Pakistan Air 
Force Act, 1953 (VI of 1953)  and Pakistan Navy Ordinance 1963 (XXXV of 
1963), shall also be governed by this Act and rules made thereunder: 

Provided  that  the  Pakistan  Army  Act,  1952  (XXXIX  of  1952)  shall  be 
made applicable in respect of employees in the service of the Authority to who 
section  2  of the  said  Act  applies  or  employees  in the  service  of the Authority 
for who a notification under section 8 of the aforesaid Act is issued.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

W.P. No.3198/2013 

In view of above provision of section 9 (2) the Authority can regulate the matters relating 

to the terms & conditions of services of employees wherein a specific reference has been 

given with regard to “security clearance” and the learned counsel for the respondents time 

and again put his emphasis upon the term  “security clearance” but  the respondents could 

not  demonstrate  from  record that  what  are the  reasons  which  prevail  upon  the  Authority 

while  denying  the  right  of  promotion  to  the  petitioners  even  there  is  no  documentary 

evidence  on  record  placed  by  the  respondents  due  to  their  concept  of  security  clearance 

and due to strategic organization behavior nor even they can demonstrate as to what are the 

factors which give rise to their  non clearance of security even through  the petitioners are 

qualified and their  security  has  been cleared  for the purpose of SPS-10 but their security 

has not been cleared for the promotion of SPS-11 & 12, respectively. I am of the view that 

if a person is not qualified in terms of fitness which includes the security clearance for the 

SPS-11  then  he  is  also  not  qualified  to  hold  the  position  of  SPS-10  or  lower  ranks, 

therefore,  the  reasons  put  forward  by  the  respondents  authority  under  the  garb  of  term 

“security  clearance”  is  not  sustainable  in  the  eyes  of  law  nor  even  there  is  any  legal 

justification available on record to deny the rights of the petitioners for promotion. 

9. 

The  respondents  have  also  placed  the  promotion  rules/documents  on  record 

whereby  any  employee  possessing  such  minimum  qualification,  experience  and  other 

conditions as may be specified in the rules shall be eligible for promotion to post reserved 

for  Departmental  Promotion  in  the  higher  grade  although  respondents  are  not  contesting 

the case of the petitioners on the touch stone of other grounds of eligibility rather they are 

only  putting  their  emphasis  on  the  term  “security  clearance”.  It  is  apparent  from  record 

that junior officers of respondent organization have been promoted to SPS-11 and SPS-12 

respectively without considering the factors of promotion of present petitioners therefore, I 

am  of  the  view  that  petitioners  are  entitled  for  the  relief  of  promotion  since  their  junior 

colleagues  have  been  promoted  under  the  law  however,  the  relief  claimed  by  the 

petitioners whereby the letter dated 23rd July 2013 has been impugned has no legal force in 

it, therefore, the relief claimed to that extent has denied and all the petitioners are declared 

to  be  entitled  for  promotion  in  their  appropriate  grades  w.e.f.  the  date  their  juniors  have 

 
7 

W.P. No.3198/2013 

been promoted with all consequential benefits. Reliance is placed upon 2016 SCMR 1784. 

The instant writ petition is allowed to that extent only. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on _________________ 

Irfan Ali 

JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
