ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO.150 OF 2020 

Lt. Col. (R) SHAHID HAMID 
VS 
Mrs. SALEHA HAYAT AND OTHERS 

WRIT PETITION NO. 499 OF 2020 

Mrs. SALEHA HAYAT AND OTHERS 

VS 

Lt. Col. (R) SHAHID HAMID AND OTHERS  

Petitioner by 

: 

Respondents by 

: 

Syed Asghar Hussain Sabzwari, Advocate.  
(Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid) 

Mr. Imran Shafique, Advocate. 
Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Advocate. 
Barrister Omer Azad Malik, Advocate. 
(Mrs. Saleha Hayat and her children) 

Date of hearing     : 

02.11.2020 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ, J.   Through this judgment I intend to decide both 

the titled writ petitions as common questions of law and facts are involved.  

2. 

Through  their  respective  petitions,  both  the  petitioners  have  assailed 

judgment  and decree  dated  07.12.2019, passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge,  West-Islamabad,  and  judgment  and  decree  dated  27.04.2019,  passed  by 

learned Judge Family Court, West-Islamabad. 

3. 

Facts of the case are that Respondent No.1 /  Mrs. Saleha Hayat, ex-wife of 

the Petitioner, after dissolution of marriage, filed suit for recovery of maintenance 

allowance of two minor sons before learned Judge Family Court, West-Islamabad, 

who,  vide  his  judgment  and  decree  dated  27.04.2019,  fixed  the  maintenance 

allowance at the rate of Rs. 50,000/- per month per child from March, 2010, with 

annual increase of 10%, from March, 2011, till the age of majority. The judgment 

and decree was challenged through filing of appeals by both the parties before the 

Additional  District  Judge,  West-Islamabad,  who,  vide  consolidated  judgment and 

decree dated 07.12.2019, modified the monthly maintenance from Rs. 50,000/- per 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid v. Saleha Hayat, etc  2 

W.P. 150/2020 

child,  to  Rs.  100,000/-  with  the  entitlement  to  receive  their  past  maintenance 

allowance for a period of six years with annual increase from filing of suit and held 

that increase will become due after one year of filing of the suit. Both the parties, 

since not satisfied with the judgment and decree of the Courts below, have filed the 

instant petitions. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner/father  submitted  that  the  courts  below 

have committed material irregularities and illegalities while deciding the matter as 

the  respondents  is  claiming  maintenance  after  considerable  delay  without  any 

plausible  reason;  that  the  maintenance  claimed  is  unrealistic  and  extraordinary 

exorbitant as the wealth of petitioner/father cannot be made basis for maintenance; 

that  the  courts  below  have  ignored  the  guiding/determining  factors  for  fixing 

maintenance of the minors; that the trial court has illegally received and admitted 

inadmissible evidence without appreciating the fact that it did not pertain to period 

for which maintenance is claimed; that  the trial Court has also ignored the fact that 

Respondent  No.  1  has  fraudulently  transferred  the  amount  of  Rs.  35  million  in 

2010; that the petitioner’s source of income is pension only as the business of the 

petitioner  is  also  under  litigation  and  non-functional  since,  2010;  that  the  courts 

below  have  acted  beyond  jurisdiction  by  granting  10%  yearly  increase  with 

retrospective effect; that  the courts below have ignored the important factors that 

the children of army officers (retired and serving) are entitled for admission in APS 

School  on  a  special  fee  structure/concession  and  are  also  entitled  for  medical 

treatment in the armed forces hospitals and despite these facilities the Respondent 

No.  1  has  on  her  own  will  admitted  the  children  in  the  private  educational 

institutions  and  has  claimed  the  education  and  medical  expenses  of  the  private 

institutions/hospitals which is not only excessive but exaggerated.  

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents/mother  and  minors 

assailed  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  27.04.2019  &  07.12.2019,  passed  by  the 

learned  Judge,  Family  Court  and  learned  appellate  Court,  respectively.  He 

contended  that  the  courts  below  have  not  appreciated  the  fact  that  father  has  the 

responsibility to maintain his children, who is in a position to bear the educational 

and  other  expenses  of  his  minor  sons  according  to  their  social  status;  that  the 

break-up of monthly expenses of each children @ of Rs. 300,000/- per month was 

provided  during  trial  proceedings  but  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  ignored  the 

 
Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid v. Saleha Hayat, etc  3 

W.P. 150/2020 

expenses  incurred on the minors and unrealistically reduced the monthly expenses 

to  Rs.  50,000/-  per  month  and  the  learned  Appellate  Court  though  enhanced  the 

monthly expense to Rs. 100,000/- per month per child but without appreciating that 

the father is capable of maintaining the children according to their social status and 

living style; that the approach of the  father of the children (petitioner in W.P. No. 

150/2020),  is  vindictive  who  has  fraudulently  taken  refuge  behind  the  plea  of 

educating  the  children  in  APS  as  he  can  afford  educational  expenses  in  the  best 

available  institutions  in  the  world;  that  both  the  courts  below  have  categorically 

held  that  the  father  has  sufficient  resources  to  pay  the  reasonable  amount  of 

maintenance to the minors; that the learned Appellate Court has misconstrued and 

misapplied the provision of limitation act to confine the past maintenance upto six 

years in contravention of section 17A of the Family Court Act, 1964; that father of 

the minors is also maintaining son from his first marriage who is above the age of 

28 years; that the courts below have misread the evidence Ex-P/2 (divorced deed) 

which is the admission of his luxurious life style.  He, therefore, prayed that both 

the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  of  the  learned  Trial  as  well  as  Appellate 

Courts  may  be  modified  and  monthly  maintenance  may  be  enhanced  to  

Rs. 300,000/- per child as claimed in the suit.  

6. 

Arguments heard. Record perused. 

7. 

Perusal of the record revealed that marriage between petitioner,  Lt. Col. (R) 

Shahid  Hamid  (father)  and  respondent,  Mst.  Saleha  Hayat  (mother)  was 

solemnized on 22.02.1999, and from the wedlock two sons namely Bakhtayar and 

Shahmeer  were  born  on  12.07.2000  and  16.11.2001,  respectively.  The  mother, 

after  dissolution  of  marriage  between  the  parties  on  25.05.2010,  by  way  of 

exercising  her  right  of  divorce  filed  suit  for  maintenance  of  the  minors  before 

Senior Civil Judge/Family Court, Islamabad on 28.04.2017, whereby, she claimed 

past and future  monthly  maintenance of the minors @ of Rs. 300,000/-  per  child 

with  effect  from  25.05.2010  (aggregating  to  Rs.  50,400,000/-)  along  with  18% 

mark-up  till  the  realization  and  final  adjudication  of  suit  on  the  ground  that  the 

father  of  the  minors  is  a  man  of  means  and  in  support  produced  his  wealth 

statement filed with the FBR before trial Court and asserted that he can afford the 

amount claimed as maintenance for his sons. The suit was contested by the father 

of  the minors by taking plea that his only source of income is pension and some 

 
Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid v. Saleha Hayat, etc  4 

W.P. 150/2020 

profits on account of savings certificates. Four issues were framed by the learned 

Trial  Court  on  18.11.2017,  from  the  divergent  pleadings  of  the  parties,  however, 

emphasized  on  issue  No.2,  being    related  to  the  actual  and  basic  controversy 

between the parties i.e. quantum of maintenance of two minors.  

8. 

The  learned  Trial  Court  on  the  basis  of  evidence  produced  by  the  parties 

during trial held that the father of the minors had good source of income as he is 

running  a  company  and  not  solely  dependent  on  his  pension,  and  on  that  basis 

fixed the monthly maintenance @ of Rs. 50,000/- per child from March, 2010, till 

the age of attaining majority with the annual increase of 10%  from March, 2010, 

and also allowed adjustment of the amount paid as maintenance @ Rs.5,000/- from 

January,  2015  to  June,  2017,  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  27.04.2019,  which 

was  appealed  against  and  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  West-Islamabad, 

vide judgment and decree  dated 07.12.2019,  passed in appeal,  enhanced  monthly 

maintenance  to  Rs.  100,000/-  but  limited  the  post  maintenance  for  a  period  of 

preceding six years within annual increase of 10% after one year from the filing of 

the suit. 

9. 

The  controversy  between  the  parties  to  the  instant  petitions  is  the 

determination of quantum of the maintenance of the minor sons of the parties, who 

by  now  have  attained  the  age  of  majority.  The  mother  of  the  minors  claimed 

monthly  maintenance  @  Rs.  300,000/-  per  child,  break-up  of  which  is  that  

Rs. 70,000/- for educational expenses and Rs.230,000/- for medical, entertainment 

and  other  expenses,  asserting  sound  financial  status  of  the  father  of  the  minors, 

whereas, the father claim  of having meager financial resources and dependent on 

the pension and profits on saving certificates.  

10.  There is no second opinion about the principle that the father being a natural 

guardian  has  moral,  religious  and  legal  obligation  to  take  care  of  his  children  in 

every  respect  and  bear  maintenance  and  fulfill their  needs.  It  is  also  the  ultimate 

right of the children to be supported by the Father at least upto the age of majority 

i.e.  18  years.  Para  369  of  Muhammadan  Law  which  defines  ‘maintenance’  to 

include food, raiment and lodging, hence, definition is inclusive in nature, which as 

per  rules  of  interpretation  gives  wider  meaning  to  the  definition,  as  such,  it 

enlarges the scope of maintenance. In support reliance is placed on the judgment of 

 
Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid v. Saleha Hayat, etc  5 

W.P. 150/2020 

Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  reported  as  Humayun  Hassan  v.  Arslan  Humayun  (PLD 

2013 SC 557) wherein para 369 of Muhammadan Law by  D.F. Mullah has been 

explained in the following words:- 

“In  this  context,  according  to  section  369  of  the  Muhammadan  Law  by 
D.F. Mullah, maintenance means and includes food, raiment and lodging. 
However,  it  may  be  observed  that  from  the  very  language  of  the  above 
section,  such  definition  is  neither  conclusive  nor  exhaustive,  and  in  our 
view  it  undoubtedly  has  a  wider  connotation  and  should  be  given  an 
extended  meaning,  for  the  purposes  of  meeting  and  catering  for  the 
present days social, physical, mental growth, upbringing and wellbeing of 
the  minor,  keeping  in  mind  the  status  of  the  family,  the  norms  of  the 
society  and  his  educational  requirement,  which  has  now  attained  utmost 
importance[1]; but obviously corresponding to and commensurating with 
the means and the capacity of the father to pay..” 

11.  Para 370 of Muhammadan Law provides guidance regarding maintenance of 

children  and  grandchildren,  according  to  which  it  is  obligatory  on  the  father  to 

maintain  his  sons  till  they  attain  the  age  of  majority,  however,  a  disabled  son(s) 

due  to  any  disease  or  infirmity  is  the  responsibility  of  father  despite  attaining 

majority. The daughters’ as per Muhammadan Law are maintained by the father till 

they are married. Para 370 of the Muhammadan Law is also reproduced below:- 

"370. Maintenance of children and grandchildren.---(1) A father is bound 
to maintain his sons until they have attained the age of puberty. He is also 
bound  to  maintain  his  daughters  until  they  are  married.  But  he  is  not 
bound to maintain his adult sons unless they are disabled by infirmity or 
disease.  The  fact  that  the  children  are  in  the  custody  of  their  mother 
during  their  infancy  (section  352)  does  not  relieve  the  father  from  the 
obligation of maintaining them. But the father is not bound to maintain a 
child who is capable of being maintained out of his or her own property. 

(2) If the father is poor, and in capable of earning by his own labour, the 
mother, if she is in easy circumstances, is bound to maintain her children 
as the father would be.  

(3)  If  the  father  is  poor  and  infirm,  and  the  mother  also  is  poor,  the 
obligation to maintain the children lies on the grandfather, provided he is 
in easy circumstances.". 

12.  Perusal of the above provisions of Muhammadan Law reveals that though, it 

provides for the binding responsibility to support and maintain his minor children 

but  no  formula  for  fixing  the  amount  of  maintenance  has  been  prescribed  in  the 

law. Thus, it strengthen the view that maintenance of minors is fixed according to 

the capacity and financial status as well as  capacity of earning of the father and his 

other responsibilites of another marriage and children. Hence, no hard and fast rule 

has  been  laid  down  by  the  superior  courts  while  deciding  the  amount  of 

 
Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid v. Saleha Hayat, etc  6 

W.P. 150/2020 

maintenance  of  minors,  rather  the  quantum  of  maintenance  is  determined  on  the 

basis of the needs and requirement of the minor(s) considered necessary to lead a 

life, as held in Humayun Hasan’s case supra by holding that ‘meeting and catering 

for the present days social, physical, mental growth, upbringing and wellbeing of 

the minor, keeping in mind the status of the family, the norms of the society and his 

educational requirement, at the same time by also taking into account the financial 

condition  and  social  status  of  the  father  as  held  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 

supra according to the means and capacity of the father’.  

13. 

In the present case evidence revealed that the father of the minors is a well-

educated  person  having  professional  experience  in  the  field  of  aviation,  is  also 

running  a  business  in  the  name  and  style  of  ‘Pegasus  Legacy’,  though,  both  the 

parties have filed suit against each other with regard to the said business. Perusal of 

the  divorce  deed  (para  13,  14  &  15  of  Ex-P/2),  also  shows  the  admission  of  the 

father  that  he  has  given  a  lavish  luxurious  living  to  his  wife  and  son  during 

subsistence  of  marriage,  therefore,  the  contention  of  the  father  that  he  has  no 

financial  capacity  to  bear  maintenance  of  his  minor  sons  as  per  the  social  status 

they have  been brought up, is not  tenable.  The  evidence on record also discloses 

that the father of the minors is a man of means having business and properties in 

his  name,  which  is  one  of  the  important  factor  in  determining  the  quantum  of 

maintenance as held in judgment of the Superior Courts. However, when the claim 

of  maintenance  per  child  is  examined,  it  revealed  that  it  is  totally  based  on 

estimations, as she was claiming the amount of Rs. 300,000/- per child per month 

spent on the raising of her sons, whereas, she was under legal obligation to produce 

evidence of spending the amount on education, medical and entertainment etc., but 

only school fee receipts were produced during trial. Claim of maintenance on guess 

work  and  estimates  cannot  be  considered  rather  the  reasonable  of  cost  of  living 

should also be kept in mind and the same cannot be ignored.  I am, therefore, of the 

opinion  that  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  West-Islamabad,  has  rightly 

enhanced  the  monthly  maintenance  allowance  per  child  @  Rs.  100,000/-  with 

annual  increase  of  10%  from  the  filing  of  the  suit.  As  regards  the  question  of 

limitation  of  past  maintenance,  allowed  by  the  learned  ADJ,  for  a  period  of  six 

previous years, I am of the opinion that the issue has been decided in accordance 

with law and in support thereof the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court  re: Mst. 

 
Lt. Col. (R) Shahid Hamid v. Saleha Hayat, etc  7 

W.P. 150/2020 

Farah Naz v. Judge Family Court Sahiwal and others (PLD 2006 SC 457) can be 

referred wherein it has been held as under:-- 

"Claim  for  past  maintenance  would  be  governed  by  Art.120  of  the 
Limitation  Act,  1908,  which  prescribed  period  of  six  years  in  a  suit  for 
which  no  period  was  provided  elsewhere  in  the  Act,  from  the  date  when 
the right to sue had accrued. In computing period of limitation prescribed 
for any suit, by reason of Section 13 of Limitation Act, 1908, time during 
which  defendant  had  been  absent  from  Pakistan  and  from  the  territories 
beyond  Pakistan  under  administration  of  the  Central  Government  would 
be  excluded.  Even  if  period  of  limitation  for  such  suit  would  be  three 
years, in view of absence of husband from Pakistan, period of his absence 
from  Pakistan  would  be  excluded  for  reckoning  the  period  of  limitation. 
Suit filed by wife was not barred by limitation." 

14. 

In view of the above, the judgment and decree dated 07.12.2019, passed by 

the  learned  Appellate  Court,  is  upheld.  Consequently  both  the  titled  petitions, 

being devoid of any merit, are dismissed.  

Announced in the open Court _______________________.  

(LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

M. Junaid Usman                     

JUDGE 

 
      
 
