ORDER  SIIEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD.
ruDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

I.C.A No.05/2020.

FuzaMir  etc.

VS

Civil  Judge/Family  Judge,  East Islamabad and another

S. No. of
order/
proceedings

Date of
order/
Proceedings

Order with signature of Judge  and that of parties or counsel
where necessary.

01

16.01.2020

Mir. Aurangzeb,  Advocate for the appellants.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI.  J. Through  instant

I.C.A, the appellants  have assailed the judgment  dated

17.12.2019,  passed  by leamed Single Judge in Chambers,

whereby writ petition No.344212019  filed by the appellants  has

been dismissed.

2. 

Learned counsel  for the appellants  contends that  learned

Judge Family  Court  while  passing  order dated 09.03.2019  fixed

interim maintenance  at the rate of Rs.4,000/-  per month for each

minor/appellants  No.2 to 4; that interim maintenance  was not

paid on subsequent  dates and leamed  Judge  Family  Court passed

subsequent  orders, whereby it was held that right  of the defence

of the respondent  No.2/defendant  will be closed but no final

order has been passed till date; that  the said order was assailed

before  learned  Single Judge in Chambers in the writ petition,

which has been dismissed  through  impugned judgment  without

considering  the law that no substantial  remedy  is available  to the

appellants for protection of their rights.

3.  We have heard learned counsel for the appellants and

gone  through  the record.

4. 

Perusal  of the record  reveals that the matter  is in hand is

subjudice before  learned Family Court, however,  while

2

I.C.A No.05/2020.

considering  the said background,  learned  Single Judge in

Chambers  has passed direction to learned Trial Court/Judge

Family  Court to conclude the trial within a period of two (02)

months and  dismissed  the writ petition.  The scheme of law has

rightly  been  appreciated by learned  Single  Judge in Chambers in

terms of section 17(A)  of the Family Court Act, 1964 and  as

such it is settled by law that no writ is competent against  any

interlocutory  order  passed by Judge Family Court. The instant

I.C.A  bears  no merits,  therefore,  the same  stands dismissed in

limine. Any observation  passed  by this Bench  at this stage

would prejudice the case of either pfrty, however, it is expected

from learned  Judge  Family  Court to decide the matter in

accordance  with law within a period of two (02)  months as

directed by learned Single  Judge in Chambers  in the impugned

judgment. The appellants  can raise these grounds  before learned

Family  Court  while considering  the scheme  of law.

JUDGE

JUDGE

R.Anjam

