ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

(1)  Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019 
The State 
VS
Saeed Ullah 

(2)      Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 
Saeed Ullah 
VS
The State 

Mr. Awais Arshad Advocate, 

Appellant by: 
Complainant by:    Nemo, 
State   by:        
Date of Hearing: 

Mr. Zohaib Hassan, State Counsel, 
20.08.2020. 

FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM  JANDRAN,  J.-Through  this 

single  judgment,  we  intend  to  decide  above  captioned 

murder reference and the jail appeal, which have arisen out 

of single judgment dated 22.04.2019, passed by the learned 

Sessions Judge, Islamabad-West, whereby appellant Saeed 

Ullah  was  convicted  under  section  302  (b)  P.P.C,  and 

sentenced  to  death  with  a  fine  of  Rs.5,00,000/-  as 

compensation to the legal heirs of deceased and in default 

thereof,  the  appellant  had  to  undergo  six  months  simple 

imprisonment,  in  F.I.R.  No.  536,  dated  22.11.2018  under 

Section 302 P.P.C, Police Station Tarnol, Islamabad.  

2. 

Briefly,  the  facts  as  per  prosecution  are  that  on 

22.11.2018,  Riaz  Gondal  Inspector  (PW-12)  on  receipt  of 

information  regarding  the  present  occurrence  reached 

Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) at about 01:00 

pm,  where  the  dead  body  of  Mst.Tasleema  Bibi  was  lying 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-2- 

having  firearm  injuries  on  left  arm,  left leg, abdomen and 

left  side  of  chest.  Mst.  Sobia  (PW-11)  was  also  there  who 

told  to  PW-12  that  Saeed  Ullah  (appellant)  at about 11:00 

am had committed the murder of his real mother by causing 

firearm  injuries with pistol in her residential house situated 

in Dhoke Tammal.  

3.  On the basis of above complaint Ex.PE, F.I.R Ex.PE/1 

was  registered.  PW-12/Inspector  then  drafted  application 

for  postmortem  examination  Ex.PG,  inquest  report  Ex.PH 

besides  identification  memo  of  dead  body  Ex.PI.  After  the 

postmortem examination, he took into possession last worn 

clothes  of  the  deceased  i.e.  shirt  P1, shalwar P2, and  vest 

P3  vide  memo Ex.PJ and thereafter handed over the dead 

body to Zeeshan and Bilal sons of the deceased vide receipt 

Ex.PK.  

4. 

After undergoing the above proceedings, PW-12 then 

proceeded  to  the  place  of  occurrence  where  he  collected 

blood  with  cotton  and  took  the  same  into  possession  vide 

memo  Ex.PL.  In  addition,  the  witness  also  collected  seven 

empties  of  .30  caliber  pistol  through  sealed  parcel  Ex.PM. 

The  witness  then  drafted  rough  site  plan  Ex.PN  and  on 

return  to  the  police station handed over the case property 

to the Moharrir. The investigation was then handed over to 

Haider Ali Inspector PW-8.   

5. 

After  due  investigation,  report  under  Section  173 

Cr.P.C  was  submitted  against  the  appellant  where  he  was 

formally charge sheeted on 17.04.2019 and thereafter, the 

prosecution  produced  12  witnesses  in  all,  in  support  of its 

case.  

 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-3- 

PW-1 Munir Khan SI deposed to prove the delivery of 

blood  stained  cotton  on  07.01.2019,  30  caliber  cartridge-

cases on 04.12.2018 and 30 caliber pistol on 23.01.2019 in 

the office of Punjab Forensic Science Agency (PFSA).  

PW-2 Muhammad Asif handed over parcel containing 

blood  stains  cotton  to  Munir  Khan  SI  for  onward 

transmission to the office of PFSA Lahore. 

PW-3  Mubarak  Ali  Moharrir  kept  case  property  i.e. 

blood  stained  cotton,  last  worn  clothes  of  deceased  and 

cartridge-case in safe custody in malkhana and dispatched 

empty  and  the  parcel  of  pistol  to  PFSA  Lahore  through 

Munir  Khan  SI  PW-2  on  04.12.2018  and  23.01.2019 

respectively.  

PW-4 Ameer Hamza on 27.11.2018 produced call data 

record  (CDR)  of  mobile  of  appellant  before Abdul Ghafoor 

Inspector  who  took  the  same  in  possession  vide  memo 

Ex.PB.  The  witness  also  deposed  to  prove  the  recovery  of 

pistol  P1  along  with  a  live  bullet  P2  from  the  appellant  on 

09.01.2019  which  the  I.O.  had  taken  into  possession 

through recovery memo Ex.PA.  

PW-5  Arshad  Mehmood  received  postmortem  report 

from  the hospital on 15.01.2019 and handed over it to the 

Investigating officer.  

PW-7  Abdul  Ghafoor  Inspector  on  23.11.2018, 

recorded    statement  of  Inspector  Riaz,  Amir  Shahzad 

draftsman, Munir Khan SI and Mubarik Constable.  

PW-8 Haider Ali Inspector on 05.01.2019 arrested the 

appellant  and  on  09.01.2019,  recovered  .30 bore pistol P1 

with  one  live  bullet  P2  from  the  appellant  from  a  jungle 

lying under a stone and took the same into possession vide 

 
 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-4- 

memo Ex.PA. The witness also challenged the appellant on 

being found guilty.   

PW-9  Syed  Sadat  Ali  on  22.11.2018  drafted  formal 

F.I.R Ex.PE/1 on the basis of complaint Ex.PE.  

PW-10 Dr.Hina Medico Legal Officer, PIMS Islamabad 

stated,  on  22.11.2018  at  about  12:00  midnight  she 

conducted  postmortem  examination  of  Mst.Tasleema  

deceased  and  noted one entry wounds on left breast, one 

entry and exit wound on right forearm, one entry wound on 

right thigh, exit wound on right buttock, five entry wounds 

on abdomen and three wounds of exit on back, one of them 

on pelvis area. The cause of death, according to the witness 

was  the  result  of  firearm  injuries  and  excessive  bleeding 

internal.  She tendered postmortem report Ex.PF, sketch of 

injuries Ex.PF/1 and Ex.PF/2. She also signed application for 

postmortem  examination and inquest report Ex.PH and PG 

respectively.  

PW-11  Mst.  Sobia  Bibi  is  an  eyewitness  and  wife  of 

elder  brother  of  accused/appellant.  She  deposed  to prove 

the ocular account set forth in the complaint Ex.PE. 

PW-12 Muhammad Riaz Gondal Inspector deposed to 

prove  the  initial  investigation  conducted  by  him,  details 

whereof have been mentioned above.  

6.  On 22.04.2019, the learned SSP by tendering reports 

of PFSA Ex.PO and Ex.PP, closed the prosecution evidence.  

7. 

After  the  recording  of  the  prosecution  evidence, 

appellant was examined under Section 342 Cr. P.C, wherein 

he  denied  the  prosecution  evidence  and  has  taken  a plea 

that  “he was married with phophi-zad with whom he was living 

happily. Sobia complainant started instigating her and due to 

 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-5- 

said reason, family affairs were disturbed and ultimately on the 

asking of his ex-wife, he had divorced her. Since then, he had 

dispute with Sobia. He did not commit murder of his mother as 

there was no reason for him to do so. It was a blind murder.  

Sobia having a grudge with him opted to come forward as a 

false witness. He is innocent.”    However,  he  opted  not  to 

make  his  statement  on  oath  under Section 340(2) Cr. P.C. 

or to adduce any defence evidence. 

The learned Trial Court, after hearing both sides and 

going  through  the  evidence  on  record,  convicted  & 

sentenced the appellant as mentioned above.  

8. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  in  support  of 

this  appeal,  argued that there is a delay of about two and 

half  hours  in  lodging  the  F.I.R;  that  the  sole statement of 

PW-11  Mst.  Sobia  Bibi  in  presence  of  specific  plea  of  the 

appellant, is not worthy of credence; that the site plan did 

not indicate the place of the appellant, while the motive, as 

alleged  has  also  not  been  substantiated,  therefore, 

impugned conviction is not sustainable in the eye of law. 

9. 

Learned  State  Counsel,  on  the  other  hand,  repelled 

the above submissions by arguing that there is no delay in 

reporting the matter to the police; the sole eye witness had 

given  the  true  account  of  the  occurrence,  whereby  the 

appellant  committed  murder  of  his  real  mother;  that  the 

postmortem  report  and  the  recovery  of  crime  weapon 

coupled with the report of PFSA, fully establishes the guilt of 

the appellant, therefore, appeal is liable to be dismissed.  

10.  Heard  the  learned counsel for the appellant, learned 

State  Counsel  and  examined  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. 

 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-6- 

11. 

Judicial  scrutiny  of  the  record  shows  that  the 

conviction  in  the  instant  case  is  based  upon  the  (i) 

testimony  of  PW-11  Mst.  Sobia  Bibi,  who  is  eye-witness  of 

the  occurrence  and  (ii)  upon  the  report  of the PFSA. Said 

PW-11 (Mst.Sobia Bibi) deposed to prove the ocular account 

in the following terms:- 

“On  22.11.2018,  I  along  with  my  mother  in  law 
Mst.Tasleema Bibi were sitting in the courtyard of the 
house; accused is an addict; on that day at about 10:30 
am he came and asked money from deceased which she 
refused; appellant then made firing with pistol on mother 
who was seriously injured; with the help of other persons 
we had taken her to hospital on Suzuki carry; when doctor  
checked her and declared that she had died; police came 
in hospital and I narrated  these facts to him.” 

12. 

In  her  cross-examination,  in  a  question  that,  there 

was  a  dispute  between  her  and  accused,  she  straightly 

termed  it  as  incorrect,  similarly  regarding  a  question  of 

divorce  by  accused  to  his  ex-wife  on  her  instigation  she 

termed the same as incorrect as well.  

13. 

In  response  to  a  question,  she  stated  that deceased 

used  to  ask  the  accused/appellant  to  work  and  earn  for 

livelihood but accused always refused.  

14.  The  contention  that  Sobia/PW-11  had  any  dispute/ 

enmity with the appellant/accused cannot be adhered too, 

because  as  to  why  the  appellant  chose  to  murder his real 

mother instead of taking any action against said Sobia/PW-

11 seems to be against the logic.  

When  examined  it  reveals  that  the  distance  told  by 

said  PW-11  from  place  of  occurrence  to  hospital  of  30 

minutes  is  factually  correct.  The  stance  of  the  PW-11 

remained unshaken in cross examination. Her answer to the 

questions  put  to  her  appear  to  be  natural and confidence 

 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-7- 

inspiring. She got recorded a comprehensive examination in 

chief  without irrelevant details and upon the questions put 

to  her  in  cross  examination  she  remained  firm  and 

unshaken on her statement.   

15.  PW-11  has  not  been  cross  examined on the material 

point  of  her  examination-in-chief  wherein  she  stated  that 

accused/appellant  who  is  an  addicted  person,  came  and 

demanded amount from the deceased and on her refusal he 

opened  fire  upon  her,  wherein  she  got  seriously  injured,  

needless to be mentioned that any portion of the statement 

of  a  witness  which  remained  un-questioned  during  cross-

examination  then such portion of a statement is deemed to 

be admitted by the other side and is correct.   

16.  While  considering  the  facts  narrated above, it seems 

that Article 70 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984 (Order 

of  1984) 

is  relevant  and  for  convenience  same  is 

reproduced as under:- 

“70.  Proof  of  facts  by  oral  evidence.  All facts, except 
the  contents  of  documents,  may  be  proved  by  oral 
evidence.” 

17. 

It  appears  that  all  facts,  except  the  contents  of 

documents, may be proved by oral evidence.  

Similarly,  Article  71  is  also  relevant  and  for  convenience 

same is reproduced here under:- 

71.  Oral  evidence  must  be  direct.  Oral evidence must, 
in all cases whatever; be direct; that is to say----- 

If  it  refers  to  a  fact  which  could  be  seen,  it  must  be  the 
evidence  of a witness who says he saw it; 

18. 

It  reveals  that  said  Article  lays  down,  that  oral 

evidence  must,  in  all  cases  whatever  be  direct.  It  is 

mandatory that for proving a capital punishment charge in a 

 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-8- 

criminal  case,  the  best  evidence  should  be  available  on 

record.  The  witness,  who  had  seen  the  occurrence,  is 

required to be produced as a witness. The statement of PW-

11,  if  seen  on  the  touchstone  of  the  principles  on  the 

subject,  side  by  side  above  stated  articles  of  the  Order  of 

1984  guides  to  hold  that  the  same  qualifies  the  criteria  of 

direct evidence which is considered to be the best evidence. 

She,  being  the  natural  witness  had  given  the  truthful, 

natural  and  confidence  inspiring  account  of occurrence as 

herself  being  one  of  the  inmates  of  the abode, where the 

occurrence had taken place. This direct evidence rules out 

any  remote  possibility  to  exonerate  the  real  culprit  on any 

account.   

19.  The Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in a judgment 

reported as “Anwar Shamim and another v. The State” 

(2010 SCMR 1719) while expounding the principles on direct 

evidence that when direct evidence is credible, truthful and 

trustworthy  is  considered  to  be  sufficient  for  award  of 

capital  punishment  although  having  no  corroboration. 

Hon‟ble Apex Court held in paragraph-6 as under:- 

“The  witnesses  have  faced  lengthy  cross-
examination  but  their  veracity  cannot  be 
shaken by the defence counsel. Both the courts 
below have come to the conclusion that their 
statements  are  of  such a nature that their 
testimony must be given due weight and were 
believed. It is also settled law that if court is 
satisfied  about  the  truthfulness  of  direct 
evidence then the requirement of corroborative 
evidence  is  not  of  much  significance. 
Corroboration is not a rule of law but is that of 
prudence. As mentioned above, the statement 
of eye-witnesses was not only corroborative by 
medical evidence but also motive as set up in 
the  F.I.R.  had  been  proved  against  the 

 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-9- 

petitioners. In such a situation, prosecution had 
successfully established the guilt of accused.” 

20.  The  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  another 

judgment  reported  as  “Ghulam  Abbas  v.  The  State” 

(2008 SCMR 1352) wherein, petitioner/accused was charged 

in the offence of murder on the basis of direct eye-witness/ 

evidence  and  was  convicted  for  the  murder  of  his  step-

mother, held that:- 

“The eye-witnesses were most natural witnesses 
who  having  deposed in straightforward manner, 
corroborated each other on each material point and 
trial Court as well as the High Court, have found 
them truthful and confidence-inspiring.” 

21.  The  Hon‟ble  Apex  Court  of 

the  country  also 

expounded the law in a judgment reported as “Qaiser and 

another v.  The State” (2006 SCMR 1147) wherein direct 

evidence of the occurrence was available and Hon‟ble Apex 

Court held in the following manner:-  

“This is settled principle of law that in case of 
interested and inimical witnesses the Court should 
look for the independent corroboration but this rule 
is not an inflexible rule of criminal administration 
of justice rather the rule of corroboration is a rule 
of  abundant  caution  which  is to be necessarily 
followed to ensure the correctness of the allegation 
and if the direct evidence was confidence-inspiring 
there would be no need of corroboration. We may 
observe that mere relationship or enmity is not 
always enough to declare a witness partisan or 
interested or that he was not a truthful witness. 
The  Court  in  the  light  of  the  attending 
circumstances if feels satisfied that a witness was 
truthful and straightforward, his evidence would be 
believed  without  looking  for  any  other 
corroboration, therefore insistence for independent 
corroboration in each case would not be necessary. 
In the present case we having gone through the 
record have not been able to locate any infirmity in 
the statement of the eye-witnesses to doubt their 

 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-10- 

veracity  and  exclude  their  evidence  from 
consideration for want of corroboration.” [Emphasis added] 

22.  The  Hon‟ble  Apex  Court  in  case  law  reported  as 

“Muhammad  Riaz  v.  The  State”  (2004  SCMR  897) 

maintained  the  conviction  of  an  accused  and  held  in 

following terms:- 

“The  eye-witnesses  being  inmates  of the house 
narrated the occurrence in detail in each material 
point without any describable contradiction. The 
deceased was fired at by the accused twice when 
he was sitting in the company of witnesses in the 
courtyard of their house.” [Emphasis added] 

23.  The Hon‟ble Sindh High Court in a judgment reported 

as  “Yakoob  v.  The  State”  (2013  MLD  1778  Sindh), held 

that a single truthful witness is sufficient to warrant 

conviction that accused and deceased were closely 

related having blood relationship, living in one and 

same  house  and  they  were  natural  witnesses. 

Incident  being  a  broad  day  light  occurrence  resultantly 

death penalty was confirmed and jail appeal was dismissed.  

24.  When  dictum of the case laws (supra) are applied to 

the case at hand then it transpires that confidence inspiring 

evidence of direct eye-witness of the incident/occurrence is 

available  which  is  not  only  quite  natural  and  confidence 

inspiring but fully corresponds to the legal requirements. By 

any  stretch  of  imagination,  statement  of  the  eye-witness 

Sobia  Bibi  (PW-11)  could  not  be  described  as  untruthful. 

She is inmate of the house residing with the deceased who 

stated  the  occurrence which she had seen with her naked 

eye.  

 
 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-11- 

25.  Facts  of  the  case  in  hand have been examined from 

all  possible  angles,  that,  whether,  any  dent  could  be 

witnessed in the direct available evidence of PW-11 i.e. eye-

witness,  but  such  quality/compelling  evidence  is  available 

which leads to hold that if this evidence is not considered to 

be  the  best  evidence,  then  no  other  evidence  could  be 

declared  as  the best direct evidence regarding the case in 

hand. It means that available evidence by any canon of law 

could be termed as the best evidence to qualify the spirit of 

above referred Articles of Order of 1984, including principles 

of law expounded by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan 

in quoted case laws.  

26. 

 It  is a well-trodden legal path to base findings upon 

the evidence that the quality matters the most and not the 

quantity.  Undoubtedly, 

the  brevity  of 

statement 

circumventing  the  criteria  of  important,  necessary  and 

relevant  facts  is  of  paramount  importance as compared to 

the  voluminous  factual  details  which  lack  to figure out the 

required  material  to  base  findings  for  reaching  a  well-

reasoned  judgment.  Thus,  it unequivocally determines the 

much  celebrated  evidentiary  rule  that  „quantity  has  to 

give way to quality‟. 

27.  There  is  no  occasion  to  disregard  that  statement  of 

eye-witness in the instant case is not a quality evidence.  

28.  Now coming to the next important factor i.e. recovery 

of cartridge-cases from the scene and crime weapon.  

29.  The  appellant  fired  seven  fire  shots  out  of  which  six 

were fired on vital part of the body i.e. chest and abdomen. 

After first fire shot, he did not stop but pressed the trigger 

time  and  again  which  reflects  his  callousness  and 

 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-12- 

ruthlessness attitude towards his own mother. The pistol 30 

caliber  got  recovered  by  the  accused  tendered  as  Ex.PA, 

when  transmitted  to  the  PFSA  for  its  report  in  respect  of 

item  C1  to  C7  cartridge  cases,  already  transmitted  to  the 

said  PFSA,  has  been  examined  by  the  said  PFSA  and 

conclusion  vide  Ex.PP,  it  is  mentioned  that  said  C1  to  C7 

cartridge cases were fired from the said pistol. Instant piece 

of  evidence  how  could  not  be  weighted.  This  important 

piece  of  evidence,  adds  more  to  make  the  case  of  the 

prosecution on sound footings.  

30.  The  motive  is  also  surfaced  in  the  evidence  that 

appellant is an addict who demanded money from deceased 

and  on  refusal,  committed  instant ruthless act, although a 

question  had  been  put  to  PW-11  that  the appellant had a 

quarrel with her. Said question was expressly answered as 

incorrect and thereafter no material was brought on record 

to substantiate this mere alleged assertion.  

31.  The  witness  PW-11  Sobia  Bibi  further  elaborated  in 

cross-examination  that  the  deceased  used  to  ask  the 

appellant time and again to do some work for living, which 

seems quite natural as for the society structure that exists, 

where  mothers  for  welfare  and  better  future  of  their sons 

force them by such acts and words to do work for a living. 

However, unfortunately in a case at hand, things have gone 

otherwise and a son (appellant) has committed a grave act 

of murder of his own mother.  

32.  Facts of the case as per contents of F.I.R Ex.PE/1 and 

other  material  show  that  accused/appellant  is  a  single 

nominated accused in the case and no material is available 

on  record  which  could  demonstrate  that  any  substitution 

 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-13- 

was made. In a similar case, Hon‟ble Lahore High Court in a 

judgment  reported  as  “Ahmad  Ali  v.  The  State”  (2020 

PCr.LJ  Lahore  964),  wherein  an accused was charged 

with murder of his own minor son, being a single 

nominated accused, was awarded death penalty and 

his appeal was dismissed.  

33.  Admitted  position  on  the  record  is,  as  supported  by 

both  ocular  and  medical  evidence,  that  the  deceased was 

shot by firearm and died on account of the firearm injuries 

which  she  received  on  the  spot  at  about  11:00  am  on  a 

broad-day light of 22.11.2018.  

34. 

It is also borne out from record that the appellant has 

three  brothers  and  a  sister but none from them has come 

forward  to  support  the  defence  plea  of  the  appellant 

regarding his innocence.  

35.  The 

importance  of  occurrence  becomes  more 

significant for the whole society that a son, who committed 

such brutal/ruthless act, should face exemplary punishment 

for all times to come, that an individual of guilty mind could 

not think of offence of “murder of a mother”. 

36.  Status of the mother is of such major significance that 

it is stated in the Holy book “Al-Quran” at many places and 

as  a  reference  only  translation  of  two  directions  by  Allah 

Almighty are narrated here:- 

  ا اا۔ ر ئے ر

 ٹھاا یں 

پیٹ سےا نے  اں کی سا کہ

 امجھای یں   راپ ے   اپ  اں ے  سا و  ن

نساا نے ہم روا'

 کا  اپ  اں پنےا روا امیر ناں حق کہ یہ ا

ہیں تےجا رگز لسا ود تک ٹنےچھو ھدود  یو یکھید یروکمز  ا بعد ے 

۲۳ا 

  نمبر یتآ  نلقما ۃرسو

۱۲)  

 نمبر ہرپا(

اہے ناآ کر ٹلو ہی فطر یمیر

  تیر گرا اہور چھےا تھسا ے   اپ  اں روا

 وکر نہ تدعبا کی کسی اسو ے  سا کہ ہے اد حکم نے بر  تیر روا

 و جھڑ و  نا ہی نہ روا ولا نہ تک فا پر ناپز لئے ے  نا تو ئیںجا پہنچ و  پےھابڑ  نوود ا  ا سے یں   نا منےسا

۱۲ا 

 نمبر یتآ ئیلاسرا بنی ۃرسو

۲۴ )  

 نمبر ارپا(

 ا 

ہو تعز یں  جس وکر رختیاا لہجہ یساا یں  گفتگو لئے ے  نا روا

 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-14- 

37.  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (

ﷺ

  لنبیینا  تمخا

)  on  many 

occasions  emphasized  the  status  and  importance  of  the 

mother.  Just  for  reference  two  Ahadith  are  quoted  as 

under:-  

 چھےا  میر

 ﷺ  

للہا لسور ا کہ

 کیا ضعر روا

 ا 

ہو ضرحا یں  متخد کی

 ﷺ 

للہا لسور
، 

میدآ

  ا"

 یرتمہا کہ ااںفر

 ؟ہے نو  بعد ے  سا چھاپو اہے  اں یرتمہا کہ ااںفر ؟ہے نو  راحقد ہداز سے سب کا کسلو

 سا چھاپونے

ا اس 

ہے  اں یرتمہا کہ ااںفر

 یمکر

 نبی ؟نو  بعد ے  سا چھاپوپھر

 نے س

ا اہے  اں

 نے بیوا بن ٰیحی روا مہشبر بنا اہے  اپ

 ااںفر نے سلمو علیہ للہا صلی یمکر نبی

  ؟ہے نو  بعد ے 

 ﷺنے 
ت
ر اھم
ا 

 پھر کہ

 ) 

۴۷۹۲

 یربخا صحیح

 (

 اکیا نبیا بقمطا ے  سیا نے عہرز بوا سے ہم کہا ،کیا نبیا

 ینےد نہ یںچیز کی تروضر معا نیز

 ئیاںفرہے 

 پر تم ماحر 

نیاںفرنا کی

 واں  نے لیتعا للہا

 کہ

 یمکر نبیﷺ نے ااںفر

 روا تکثر کی نےکر لاسو

، 

گفتگو ربیکا لیے  رتمہا نے سا اہے ااںفر منع سے نےکر رگورد

 ہندز و 

  کیولڑ روا

 ) 

۴۷۹۴

 یربخا صحیح(

ہے کیا پسند نا و  نےکر ئعضا لاں

38. 

Indeed  this  is  a  heart  breaking  incident,  where  a 

mother  has been killed by most unfortunate son for whom 

she  had  become  a  blessful  source  for  coming  into  this 

world. 

39. 

In  backdrop  of  above,  this  Court  has  come  to  the 

irresistible and definite  conclusion that in presence of direct 

eye-witness of the occurrence i.e. Mst.Sobia Bibi (PW-11) in 

whose presence accused/appellant fired upon the deceased, 

remained consistent in her testimony in all material aspects, 

happened  to  be  a  truthful  witness,  was  the  inmate  of the 

same 

house 

being 

sister-in-law 

بھیبھا)

) 

of 

the 

accused/appellant, her presence cannot be doubted on any 

pretext  whatsoever  and  by  seeking  further  guidance  from 

the judgments of Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, on the 

same  principles  reported  as  (2006 SCMR 1786 titled 

Sikandar v. The State, 2007 SCMR 455 titled Ranjha 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Murder Reference No. 22 of 2019, 

& 

Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019. 

-15- 

v. The State, 2007 SCMR 1296 titled Umar Hayat v. 

The State and 2017 SCMR 713 titled Muhammad 

Ismail v. The State),  this  is  sufficient  for  conviction, 

because  same  is  supported  by  the  recovery  of  the  crime 

weapon  duly  matched  with  the  cartridge  cases  collected 

from  the  spot,  besides  the  medical  evidence,  provides 

ample  support  to  the  same  and  appellant  was  a  single 

nominated accused, prosecution has proved its case beyond 

any shadow of doubt.  

40. 

In 

these  circumstances,  while  maintaining 

the 

conviction and sentence of appellant under Section 302(b), 

P.P.C. the appeal filed by him (Jail Appeal No. 345 of 2019) 

is hereby dismissed.  

41.  Resultantly, death sentence awarded to the appellant 

is confirmed and murder reference i.e. Confirmation of Case 

No. 22 of 2019 is answered in the positive. 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI)  (FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN)                   

JUDGE      

           JUDGE 

Imran 

Announced in open Court on 11.11.2020 

JUDGE       

JUDGE     

Approved for reporting. 

U ploaded By : E ngr. U mer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
