ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P No.394 of 2021 

Muhammad Zubair Paracha 
VS 
Learned Family Judge, Islamabad, etc. 

Petitioner by:  
Respondents by : 
 Date of Hearing:  

Mr. Shahid Mehmood, Advocate 
Malik Qamar Abbas Advocate 

   29.03.2021 

----------------------- 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J:    Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 

of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  with  the 

following prayer:- 

instant  petition 

“In  the    above  circumstances,  it  is  prayed 
the 
the 
that  by  accepting 
impugned  order  dated  25.01.2021  passed  by 
learned  Family  Judge,    Islamabad  may  kindly  be 
set  aside  and  proper  direction  may  kindly  be 
issued  to  the  respondent  No.1  for  fixing  the 
maintenance  according  the  financial  capacity  of 
the petitioner in the best interest of justice.  

Any  other  relief,  which  this  Hon’ble  Court 
deems just and proper may also be granted in the 
best interest of justice.” 

2. 

Briefly  stated,  facts  of  the  instant  petition  are  that  the 

respondents  No.  3  &  4  filed  a  suit  for  maintenance  through  their 

mother/respondent  No.2  against  the  petitioner.  On  notice,  the 

petitioner  appeared  and  contested  the  suit  by  filing  written 

statement.  That  on  25.01.2021,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court-

West, Islamabad without hearing the petitioner has fixed the interim 

maintenance at the rate of Rs.50,000/- per month for each minor as 

interim  maintenance,  which  is  too  harsh.  Feeling  aggrieved  from 

the  order  dated  25.01.2021,  the  petitioner  has  filed  instant  writ 

petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  contended  that  the 

impugned order for interim maintenance for the respondents No. 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P No.394 of 2021 

&  4  is  illegal,  unlawful  and  against  the  law  and  facts  of  the  case; 

that  while  fixing  interim  maintenance  of  respondents/minors, 

learned  Family  Court  without  hearing  the  petitioner  and  without 

recording  evidence,  passed  the  impugned  order,  therefore,  the 

impugned order is  result of misreading  and non-reading of record; 

that the fixation of Rs. 50,000/- per month for each minor is higher 

than  the  petitioner’s  total  monthly  income  and  is  against  the 

principles  of  natural  justice;  that  the learned Family  Judge  without 

keeping  in  view  the  petitioner’s  financial  capacity  has  passed  the 

impugned  order  ,  who  himself  is  a  heart  patient,  bearing  his 

medical  expenses  as  well  as  treatment  of  his  ailing  wife,    who  is 

suffering  from  cancer  .  Further  contended  that  the  learned  trial 

Court  only  on  the  pleadings  of  respondent  believed  that  the 

petitioner  is  earning  at  a  higher  rate  and  on  the  request  of 

respondents  has  fixed  the  monthly  maintenance,  which  is  highly 

exorbitant. Lastly, prayed for acceptance of writ petition.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  has  opposed 

the  contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  and  has 

contended  that  the  order  impugned  before  this  Court  is  of 

interlocutory nature, therefore, the petition in its present form is not 

maintainable;  that  it  is  the  duty  of  petitioner  being  father  of  the 

minors  to  maintain  them  and  to  provide  all  the  requisites  of  life 

including  education,  food,  clothing,  shelter  to  the  minors  and  the 

petitioner being father is not providing the necessities to them; that 

the petitioner has contracted second marriage and is not interested 

in the welfare of minors.  Lastly, urged for dismissal of petition.  

5. 

I have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the parties 

and have perused the material available on record.  

6. 

Perusal of the record reveals that the respondents No. 3 & 4 

filed  suit  for  maintenance  through  their  mother  i.e.  respondent 

No.2,  who  are  residing  with  custody  of  their  mother.  The  learned 

Trial Court has tentatively assessed an amount of Rs.50,000/- each 

per month as maintenance for the financial needs of the minors as 

interim maintenance allowance. 

7. 

The learned Judge Family Court passed the impugned order 

dated 25.01.2021 in terms of the provisions of Section 17-A of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

W.P No.394 of 2021 

West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  which  was  added  to  the 

Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964 vide Ordinance IV of 2002. Under 

Section  17-A  Ibid,  a  Family  Court  has  the  jurisdiction  to  pass  an 

interim order for maintenance at any stage of the proceedings in a 

suit  for  maintenance.    The  relevant  section  is  reproduced  as 

under:- 

“At  any  stage  of  proceedings  in  a  suit  for 
maintenance,  the Family Court  may  pass  an 
interim order for maintenance, whereunder the 
payment  shall  be  made  by  the  fourteenth  of 
each month, failing which the Court may strike 
off  the  defence  of  the  defendant  and  decree 
the suit.”  

8. 

The  law  has  vested  discretion  with  the  Family  Court  for 

fixation  of  interim  maintenance  which  will  be  merged  into  final 

decision  of  the  Trial.  The  purpose  behind  section  17-A  of  the 

enactment  is  to  ensure  that  during  the  pendency  of  suit,  financial 

needs  faced  by  the  minors  are  to  be  fulfilled.  There  is  no  specific 

provision  of  law  on  the  basis  of  which  the  Family  Court  is  to 

exercise its discretion with regard to fixing the interim maintenance 

of the minor. In case titled “Abrar Hussain v. Mehwish Rana” (PLD 

2012  Lahore  420)  as  well  as  “Mst.  Sitwat  Chughtai v.  Judge, 

Family  Court,  Lahore”  (PLD  2009  Lahore  18),  It  has  been 

observed  that  the  Family  Court  should  broadly  look  into  financial 

position of the father and his capacity to meet the day to day needs 

of  the  minors.  It  is  the  natural  duty  of  the  father  to  maintain  his 

minor children and if he is negligent to pay the same and the matter 

is  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  learned  Family  Court,  then  it  is  the 

duty  of  the  learned  Family  Judge  to  pass  appropriate  order  with 

regard  to  maintenance  of  the  minor  keeping  in  view  the  financial 

status of the father and the daily needs of the minor.  

9. 

The  impugned  order  is  an  interlocutory  in nature,  as it  does 

not  dispose  of  the  main  case.  Any  order  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court  under  Section  17-A  of  the  Act  cannot  be 

challenged  being  an  interlocutory  order  through  the  Constitutional 

petition unless the Court, passing the order lacks jurisdiction or the 

order  otherwise  is  illegal.  In  the  case  reported  as  “Ali  Adnan  Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

W.P No.394 of 2021 

through  Attorney  VS  Judge  Family  Court  and  others”  (PLD  2016 

Lahore 73), it has been held as under:-  

“It  is clear from  the  preamble  of  the West  Pakistan 
Family  Courts  Act,  1964  that  the  same  has  been 
established  for  protection  and  convenience  of  the 
weaker and vulnerable segments of the society, i.e. 
women  and  children.  Therefore,  interpretation  of 
any  and  every  provision  of  West  Pakistan  Family 
Courts  Act,  1964  should  be  construed  to  advance 
the  above  stated  purpose  of 
the 
convenience  and  protection  of  the  women  and 
children, so it would be convenient and facilitative to 
the  safe  administration  of  justice  in  the  family 
matters  to  add  and  delineate  further  guidelines  in 
addition to the above stated, which are as follows:-- 

law 

i.e. 

allowance 

Maintenance 

I. 
is 
indispensable  right  of  the  mother  and 
for  grant  of 
the  order 
children,  so 
maintenance  allowance  must  be  passed 
at 
the 
a 
proceedings. 

"convenient 

stage"  of 

in 

of 

of 

of 
at 

II.  Although  Section  17-A  of  the  ibid  Act 
empowers Family Court to pass an order 
interim  maintenance 
grant 
for 
the 
any 
allowance 
stage 
proceedings, 
the 
the  normality  of 
circumstances,  it  must  be  passed  after 
hearing  "both  of  the,  parties"  unless  the 
attitude 
the 
conduct 
and 
defendant/father is evasive. 
interim 
III.  The  order 
maintenance  is  made  on  the  basis  of 
tentative  assessment  of 
the  material 
available  on  file  and  keeping  in  view  the 
social  status  of  the  parties.  Further,  both 
the  above,  material  available  and  social 
status,  should  be  mentioned  in  the  order 
for  the  grata  of  interim  maintenance. 
interim 
quantum 
Further 
maintenance  should  be  "bare  minimum" 
to  meet  the  day  to  day  needs  of  the 
recipient in the narrow context. 

for  grant  of 

the 

of 

IV.  Although  the  family  laws  have  been 
enacted to promote, protect and advance 
the  rights  of  women  and  children  yet  at 
the  interim  stage,  the  version  of  the 
respondent/defendant 
a 
sympathetic  or  somewhat  preferable 
consideration  because,  non-payment  of 
interim  maintenance  allowance  will  cut 
throat  of  his  invaluable  right  i.e.  "right  to 
defence"  and  in  consequential  effects, 
children/women  would  be  the  losing  and 

given 

be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
5 

W.P No.394 of 2021 

deprived parties. 

the  High  Court 

V.  Further,  if  the  case  is  not  decided 
within  the  statutory  period  as  given  in 
Section 12-A of the West Pakistan Family 
Courts  Act,  1964  either  party  may  apply 
to 
for  appropriate 
direction.  However,  the  order  for  grant  of 
interim  maintenance  shall  hold  the  field 
unless  reviewed  by  High  Court  under 
section  12-A  or  Family  Court 
itself 
reviews  it  at  any  stage  as  observed 
below.  

VI. Family Court, according to section 12-
A of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 
1964,  is  under  legislative  direction  to 
decide 
the  case  within  six  months. 
Although  this  provision  is  directive  as  no 
penalty/consequences  are  mentioned  for 
regard 
non-compliance  and 
reference is made to (2001 SCMR 1001). 
But  in  case  the  matter  is  not  decided 
within six months and the delay is due to 
the plaintiff party, then Family Court either 
on its own motion or on the application of 
the  defendant/father  review  its  earlier 
order  for  grant  of  interim  maintenance 
allowance. 

this 

in 

The  impugned  order  does  not  suffer  from  any  illegality  or 

irregularity. At the time of final disposal of the case, the impugned 

order  shall  be  merged  into  the  final  decision  by  the  learned  Trial 

Court  which  shall  be  passed  after  recording  evidence  of  both  the 

parties and keeping in view the financial status of the petitioner as 

well as the daily needs of the minors.   

10.  Learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  assures  that  the 

respondents will produce all the witnesses before the learned Trial 

Court and there will be no delay on their part. 

11. 

In view of the above, the instant writ petition being devoid of 

force  is  dismissed  with  a  direction  to  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court  to  proceed  with  the  case  expeditiously  and  conclude  the 

same  within  the  period  of  two  months  strictly  in  accordance  with 

law.  

S.Akhtar 

(Ghulam Azam Qambrani) 

       Judge 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
