ORDER SHEET 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

Muhammad Hayat 
VS
The State and another. 

S.No. of 
order/ 
proceeding 
(03) 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties 
or counsel where necessary. 

Date of 
order/ 
proceeding 
20.01.2021  Qazi  Rehan  Shabbir,  Advocate 

for 

the 

petitioner/accused. 
Mr.  Zaheer  Virk  and  Sardar  Muhammad  Khizar, 
Advocates for the complainant. 
Mr. Faryad Ali, State Counsel.  
Abdul Jabbar, Inspector. 
Wali Khan, A.S.I. 

Through  the  instant  petition,  the  petitioner 

seeks bail after arrest in case F.I.R. No. 480/2020, 

dated  15.08.2020,  offences  under  section  302, 

337-F(vi),  337-F(i),  337-F(v),  337-A(ii),  337-A(i), 

324,  148,  149, Cross Version,  registered  at police 

station Golra Sharif, Islamabad. 

02.  Brief  facts  of  the  prosecution  case  in  hand 

are that one Khushal s/o Muhammad / complainant 

reported  to  police  that  on  12.08.2020  at  about 

05:15  p.m.  he  alongwith  his  relatives  Muhammad 

Imran  s/o  Aslam,  Muhammad  Khushal  s/o 

Muhammad  Ali,  Hassan  Bilal  s/o  Muhammad 

Khushal,  Sarang  s/o  Muhammad  Ali,  Amjad  s/o 

Muhammad  Ali,  Nazar  s/o  Ahmed  Ali,  Zaman  s/o 

Muhammad  Aslam,  Amjad  s/o  Muhammad  Riaz, 

Aslam s/o Muhammad were present in their houses 

which  are  situated  in  the  same  street,  upon  hue 

and cry they all came out and saw that Muhammad 

Azam  s/o  Mumtaz,  Muhammad  Mumtaz  s/o  Ahmed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

Ali,  Muhammad  Hayat  s/o  Ahmed  Ali,  Muhammad 

Yaseen  s/o  Hayat,  Muhammad  Sohail  s/o 

Muhammad  Nawaz  alongwith  5 

/  6  unknown 

persons  armed  with  danddas,  sottas,  iron  rods, 

knives  and  hockey  sticks  etc.  were  beating  the 

members  of  complainant  party.  Whereas,  Azam 

and  Hayat  raised 

lalkara  and  said  to  their 

companions that surround and kill all of them, then 

the accused party started beating the complainant 

and his companions with iron rods, knives, bricks, 

hockey  sticks,  danddas  and  sottas,  whereas 

Muhammad Azam s/o Mumtaz  inflicted injury with 

iron rod on the head of Aslam s/o Muhammad, the 

petitioner  Muhammad  Hayat  inflicted  churri  blow 

on  the  arm  of  Aslam  and  caused  him  injury  and 

Muhammad  Sohail  s/o  Nawaz  hit  a  brick  on  the 

head  of  Aslam  and  caused  him  injury.  All  the 

members  of  accused  party  started  beating  the 

complainant  party.  The  members  of 

the 

complainant  party  got  seriously  injured  and  they 

were taken to the hospital, whereas accused party 

fled away from the scene and the  occurrence has 

been witnessed by the people of locality. Members 

of injured party went to the PIMS hospital, wherein 

they got medical treatment. It is further mentioned 

that  Aslam  s/o  Muhammad  was  seriously  injured, 

unconscious and upon the  said complaint, the FIR 

was  registered  and  after  the  registration  of  FIR 

Muhammad  Aslam  s/o  Muhammad  died  on 

17.08.2020. 

03.  On the other hand, vide report No. 43 dated 

3 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

15.08.2020, on the complaint of Muhammad Hayat 

s/o  Ahmed  Khan,  present  petitioner  cross  version 

was lodged with the contention that on 12.08.2020 

at  05:30  p.m.  accused  of  cross  version  namely 

Bilal  s/o  Khushal,  Khushal  s/o  Muhammad  Ali, 

Amjad  s/o  Muhammad  and  Nazar  s/o  Ahmed,  in 

furtherance  of  their  common  object  /  intention 

constituted  unlawful  assembly  while  armed  with 

their  respective  weapons  and  attacked  upon  the 

accused  party  of  FIR  and  caused  injuries  to 

Mumtaz Ahmed, Muhammad Hayat, Sohail Ahmed, 

Yasin,  Azam,  whereupon  the  cross  version  was 

recorded against the complainant party of the FIR. 

04. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner  contends 

that  the  occurrence  took  place  due  to  attack 

launched  by  complainant  party,  while 

the 

petitioner  /  accused  has  no  concern  with  the 

occurrence  and  nothing  has  been  recovered 

during  the  investigation  according  to  law.  He 

further  states  that  the  petitioner  is  an  old  man, 

aged  about  55  years,  the  allegations 

leveled 

against  the  petitioner  /  accused  are  false  and 

fabricated.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  / 

accused  has 

further  contended 

that 

the 

complainant  party  was  aggressor,  petitioner  and 

his  other  companions  were  seriously  injured  and 

the  complainant  party 

falsely 

implicated 

the 

petitioner / accused and the accused belongs to a 

noble family and has not committed any offence. 

05.  Conversely, 

learned  counsel 

for 

the 

complainant contends that the petitioner / accused 

4 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

has  committed  a  heinous  crime  and  as  a  result  of 

his  Churri  blow  on  the  arm  of  Muhammad  Aslam 

s/o  Muhammad,  the  later  died  and  the  petitioner  / 

accused also raised lalkara and took active part in 

the commission of crime and is not entitled for the 

grant of bail after arrest. 

06.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

07. 

It  is  admitted  fact  that  it  is  a  case  of  cross 

version,  both  the  parties  are  relatives  with  each 

other.  There  is  no  previous  enmity  between  the 

parties.  On  the  said  date  the  instant  occurrence 

was  an  outcome  of  sudden  flare  up.  According  to 

the allegation leveled in the FIR, Muhammad Azam 

s/o Mumtaz inflicted injury on the head of Aslam s/o 

Muhammad  with  the  iron  rod,  Muhammad  Hayat 

s/o  Ahmed  Ali  present  petitioner  inflicted  injury 

with  churri  on  the  arm  of  Aslam  and  Muhammad 

Sohail  s/o  Muhammad  Nawaz  inflicted  injury  with 

brick  upon  the  head  of  Aslam,  and  as  a  result  of 

these injuries, Aslam s/o Muhammad got seriously 

injured,  who  subsequently  died  on  17.08.2020.  In 

MLC  of  Aslam  /  deceased  only  two  injuries  are 

mentioned, 

one 

is  lacerated  wound  on 

frontoparietal region  and  the  other  is  lacerated 

skin  deep  wound  on  occipital  region  and  the 

weapon used is mentioned as blunt. In the inquest 

report, I.O has also mentioned injuries on the head 

only. 

08. 

There  are  5  accused  nominated  in  the  FIR, 

all  of  them  were  injured  and  iron  rods,  hockey 

sticks, bricks and knife have been recovered from 

5 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

the  accused,  and  out  of  5  accused  nominated  in 

the FIR, 2 have been released on bail after arrest. 

The  present  petitioner  /  accused  also  got  serious 

injuries and as per medical report, injury No. (i) is 

lacerated wound skin to bone deep on vertex, 

parietal  region,  injury  No.  (ii)  abrasion  right 

forearm,  and  the  kind  of  weapon  used  was  blunt. 

Whereas, 07 persons from complainant party were 

injured,  danddas  and 

iron  rods  have  been 

recovered 

from 

the  accused  belonging 

to 

complainant party and 05 accused of complainant 

party have been released on bail after arrest. 

09. 

That  the  cause  of  death  mentioned  in  the 

postmortem  report  is  severe  head  injury  due  to 

assault  which  caused  severe  damage  to  vital 

organ (brain) of the body but there is no allegation 

that  the  present  petitioner  has  caused  any  head 

injury, 

fatal 

injury 

is  not  attributed 

to 

the 

petitioner/accused.  

10.  Question  of  aggression  has  still  to  be 

determined.  Churri  recovered  at  the  instance  of 

petitioner / accused  from the kitchen of  his house 

was  not  blood  stained.  In  the  reported  case  titled 

as “Sohaib Mehmood Butt V. Iftikhar-ul-Haq (1996 

SCMR 1845)”,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  while 

providing guidelines for the exercise of jurisdiction 

in bail matter in the cases of two counter versions 

arising from the same incident held as under;  

 “Now what would constitute as sufficient 

grounds for further inquiry would depend on 

the peculiar facts of each case and no hard 

6 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

and fast rule can be laid down for that 

purpose. Every hypothetical question which 

can be imagined would not make it a case of 

further inquiry simply for the reason that it 

can  be  answered  by  the  trial  Court 

subsequently after evaluation of evidence. 

Broadly speaking, the condition laid down in 

clause (2) of section 497, Cr.P.C. is that 

there  are  sufficient  grounds  for  further 

inquiry into his guilt which means that the 

question would be such which has nexus 

with the result of the case and may show or 

tend to show that accused is not guilt of the 

offence with which he charged. For example, 

if  accused  is  charged  for  offence  under 

section 302, P.P.C. but there are grounds for 

further enquiry which may show that he may 

not be convicted of the charge under section 

302,  P.P.C.  but  may  be  acquitted  or 

convicted for a lesser offence.” 

 “In the counter-versions arising from the 

same incident, one given by complainant in 

F.I.R and the other given by the opposite 

party case-law is almost settled that such 

cases are covered for grant of bail on the 

ground of further enquiry as contemplated 

under section 497(2), Cr.P.C. In such cases 

normally, bail is granted on the ground of 

further  enquiry  for  the  reason  that  the 

question as to which version is correct is to 

be  decided  by  the  trial  Court  which  is 

7 

Criminal Misc. No. 10-B of 2021 

supposed  to  record  evidence  and  also 

appraise the same in order to come to a final 

conclusion  in  this  regard.  In  cases  of 

counter-versions, normally, plea of private 

defence is taken giving rise to question as to 

which party is aggressor and which party is 

aggressed”.  

Further  reliance in this regard can  also  be placed 

on  the  case  titled  as  “Mehmood  Akhtar  and 

another V. Haji Nazir Ahmad and 4 others (1995 

SCMR 310)”.  

11. 

In  view  of  hereinabove,  I  am  of  the  opinion 

that  the  petitioner/accused  has  made  out  a  case 

for grant of bail at this stage as the matter requires 

further 

inquiry.  Accordingly, 

the  petitioner 

/ 

accused  is  admitted  to  bail  subject  to  furnishing 

bail bonds in the sum of Rs. 200,000/- (Rupees Two 

Hundred Thousand only) with one surety in the like 

amount  to  the  satisfaction  of  learned  trial  Court. 

12.  Needless  to  observe  that  the  observations 

made  hereinabove  are  tentative  in  nature  and  the 

learned  trial  Court  shall  not  be  prejudiced  by  any 

such  observation  and  shall  decide  the  case  on 

merits in view of the evidence available on record. 

Bilal 

                      (TARIQ MEHMOOD JAHANGIRI)   
                      JUDGE     

Approved for reporting. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
