ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  151.AMABAD  HIGH  CQURT.  ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Wrtt Petition No. 3244 of 2012 

Syed Sibt-e-Hassan 
'Z'~ 
Additional Sessions Judge, Islamabad, and another. 

Petitioner By: 

Respondent No.2 By: 

Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, 
Advocate. 
Syed lshtiaq Hussain Advocate 
alongwith respondent in  person. 

Date of Hearing: 

10.07.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambranl,  J:-  This writ  petition has been 

filed with the following prayer.- 

"lt  is,  therefore,  respectfully  prayed  that  the 
instant  writ  petition  may  kindly  be  accepted  and  the 
order  dated  10.09.2012 passed  by  respondent  No.1 
may  kindly  declared  to  have  been  passed  without 
lawful authority having no legal effect. 

Any  other  relief  which  this  Hon'ble  Court 

deems fit and appropriate may also be granted." 

2. 

This  writ  petition  has  been  directed  against  order,  dated 

10.09.2012  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad,  in  a  Private  Complaint  under  Sections  3  & 4  of  Illegal 

Dispossession  Act,  2005,  filed  by  the  petitioner  whereby,  the 

accused/  respondent  was  acquitted  under  Section  265-K  Cr.P.C., 

without  any  proceeding  and  recording  of  the  statement  of  the 

witnesses. 

3. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  petitioner/complainant 

filed  a complaint  under Sections 3  &  4 of the  Illegal Dispossession 

Act,  2005,  against the  respondent/accused alleging therein that  he 

is  owner  in  possession  of  land  comprising  Khasra  No.  1585/2  & 

1586,  measuring  66-Kanals,  19-Marlas, situated  in  Mauza  Jhangi 

I 

Syedan, Tehsil & District Islamabad, whiqh is his ancestral property 

and  was  gifted  to  him  by  his  father  vid~  mutation  No.654,  dated 

! 

2 

WP No.  3244  of 2012 

16.04.1969, Since then, he is  owner in  possession of the said land. 

On  04.11.2009,  after  his  visit  to  the  said  land,  it  came  to  his 

knowledge  that  respondent  No.2/  accused  alongwith  other  un  

known accomplices had forcibly and illegally occupied 05-Kanals of 

land  without  any  justification  and  started  construction  over  it  and 

said  land was  still  in  his illegal possession and  he refused to  hand 

over the same to the petitioner. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  submitted  that 

application  under  Section  265-K  Cr.P.C.,  can  only  be  entertained 

by the  learned trial Court, if in  its opinion, in  case all the allegations 

levelled  in  the  complaint  and  the  evidence  adduced  by  the 

complainant  are taken  to  be true,  even then  there  is  no possibility 

of the accused being convicted of any offence;  that as per report of 

Tehsildar,  land  measuring  05-Kanals  has  been  shown  to  be 

encroached  upon  by respondent No.2; that  the  respondent himself 

stated  that  he  had  no  interest  or  at  least  possession  in  Khasra 

Nos.1585 &  1586, therefore, the learned trial Court has passed the 

impugned  order  against  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case. 

He  has  further  submitted  that  the  impugned  order  is  based  upon 

mis-interpretation  of  the  provisions  of  Section  3  of  the  Illegal 

Dispossession Act; that in the instant case, the petitioner is not only 

in  occupation  of the  land as "Hissadar", but he is also owner of the 

said  land.  He  further  submitted  that  under  Section  3  of  the  Act, 

even  an  owner  can  be convicted  for  committing,  the  offence  if  he 

illegally dispossesses  and occupies the  land without  due course of 

law which is under the possession of his tenant.  He also contended 

that the petitioner was in  possession of the land as "Hissadar" since 

long  and  before  him  his father  and  earlier  his grandmother  was  in 

possession of the said land. 

5. 

On the other  hand, learned counsel for  respondent  No.2 has 

opposed  the  contentions  stating .  that  ,  Section  9  of  the  Illegal 

Dispossession Act, 2005 provides that the provisions of Cr.P.C. are 

I 

applicable to the  proceedings under the Act.  He further  stated that 

the petitioner and respondent No.2 belongs to same family and are 

3 

WP No. 3244of2012 

co-sharers.  Property  in  dispute  is  'Shamlat  Deh'  and  respondent 

No.2 is  in  possession  of the  property since  his forefather.  He next 

stated  that  the  petitioner  visited  the  land  on  04.11.2019,  whereas 

he  filed  the  complaint  on  14.11.2019  and  did  not  disclose  the 

reasons  of  delay  for  10  days  in  filing  the  complaint.  He  further 

submitted that  he raised construction over the  property  in  the  year 

2004  and  also  got  installed  electricity  connection  in  the  house. 

Lastly, he prayed for dismissal of the writ petition. 

6. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of the  learned  counsels for  the 

parties and perused the record with their able assistance. 

7. 

Perusal of the record reveals that as per Register Haqdaran  

e-Zameen  for  the  year  1956-57, land  situated  in  Khasra  No.1585 

measuring  71-Kanals  19-Marlas  and  Khasra  No.1586  measuring 

05-Kanals  17-Marlas  was  in  'Hissadari'  possession  of  Mst.Noor 

Khatoon  and  Ghulam  Fatima  in  equal  share  and  after  the  death, 

possessory rights of the said land devolved upon Najam-ul-Hassan, 

which  is  depicted  from  Register  Haqdaran-e-Zameen  for  the  year 

1962-1963.  The  said  Najam-ul-Hassan,  father  of  the  petitioner, 

gifted the possessory title of the said land in favour of the petitioner, 

which 

is  evident 

through  Mutation  No.  654,  sanctioned  on 

16.04.1969,  where  petitioner  is  also  shown  in  possession  of  the 

said  land  in  Register  Haqdaran-e-Zameen for  the  year  1970-1971 

and  also  for  the  years  1990-1991 and  2002-2003;  further  that  the 

Khasra  Girdavari  also  shows the  possession of the  petitioner over 

Khasra Nos.  1585 &  1586, as such, it is  established on record that 

the  petitioner  was  in  possession of  the  land  as  'owner'  since  long 

and  before  him,  his  father  and  earlier  his  grandmother  was  in 

possession  of the  said  piece of  land.  It  is  nowhere  mentioned that 

respondent  No.2 was  co-sharer,  it  is  astonishing  to  note that from 

where the  learned trial Court has assumed that  respondent No.2 is 

a  co-sharer.  If  there  is  any  such  fact,  it  has  to  be  proved  by 

i 

respondent  No.2  through  oral  and  documentary  evidence  before 

the learned trial Court. Record further shpws that after demarcation 

of  the  land,  Tehsildar  has  submitted  a  report  dated  19.12.2009, 

4 

WP No.  3244 of 2012 

wherein,  it  is stated that  respondent  No.2 has occupied  upon  land 

measuring  05-Kanals,  out of  Khasra  No.1585. Further,  respondent 

No.2 stated  before the  SHO,  Police Station Tamai,  Islamabad that 

he has  not occupied  land in  Khasra Nos.1585 &  1586, but he is  in 

'Hissadari'  possession of Khasra Nos.1558, 1559, 1560 & 1562; he 

has further  stated that  if he is found  in  possession of disputed land 

under  Khasra  Nos.1585  &  1586,  he  would  vacate  the  said  land. 

The  S.H.O  submitted  his  report  on  21.12.2009  wherein,  it  is 

mentioned  that  respondent  No.2  is  in  illegal  possession  of  land 

measuring  04-Kanals,  which  belongs  to  the  petitioner.  Whereas, 

stance  of  respondent  No.2 is  that  he and the  petitioner  belongs to 

the same family and are co-owners and that the property in  dispute 

is  'Sham lat Deh'. All these facts  and circumstances  lead this Court 

to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  factual  controversy  between  the 

parties which can only be determined after recording of evidence of 

both  the  parties  by  the  learned  trial  Court.  However,  the  learned 

trail  Court  has  not considered these facts  and circumstances  in  its 

true perspective, while passing impugned order, dated  10.09.2012. 

8. 

To  establish  title  of  the  property  is the  function  of  only  Civil 

Court and the  Criminal  Court is  not competent to  give any findings 

qua  it.  The  Criminal  Court  is  simply  required  to  examine  the 

material available  before it to form  an opinion as to whether,  prima 

facie,  a  case  is  made  out  for  holding  that  the  person  who  has 

complained  about  his  dispossession  was  in  lawful  possession  or 

owner  because the words  used in  section  3  of the Act  are "owner" 

and "occupier" of the property. The word occupier has been defined 

in  section 2(c) of the Act viz. "occupier" means the person who is  in 

lawful  possession  of  a  property;  the  word  owner  is  defined  in 

section 2(d) of the Act viz. "owner"  means the  person who actually 

owns the  property at the time of  his dispossession,  otherwise than 

through  a  process of  law; and the word  property has  been defined 

in  section 2(e) of the Act, as "property" nieans immovable property. 

Thus for the  purpose of attracting the prlvisions  of section 3  of the 

Act,  the  Court  is  required  to  examine al to  whether  the  property 

5 

WP No.  3244 of 2012 

was  immovable  property;  secondly  that  the  person  was  owner  of 

the  property  or  in  its  lawful  possession;  thirdly,  that  the  accused 

has entered  into or upon the property unlawfully; fourthly, that such 

entry  is  with  intention to  dispossess i.e.  ouster, eviction  or deriving 

from possession against the will of the person in  actual possession, 

or to  grab  i.e.  capture, seize suddenly, take  greedily  or  unfairly, or 

to  control  i.e.  to  exercise  power  or  influence  over,  regulate  or 

govern  or  relates  to  authority  over  what  is  not  in  one's  physical 

possession  or  to  occupy  i.e.  holding  possession,  reside  in  or 

something.  The  definitions  of  above  words  have  been  drawn from 

Black's  Law  Dictionary and  Concise  Oxford  Dictionary. Though  all 

the  four  words  carry  somewhat  similar  meaning  in  general,  but 

individually  applicable  to  different  situations,  times,  places  and 

circumstances,  therefore,  they  cannot  be  given  one  and  same 

meaning  as  by  doing  that  one  or  more words  become  redundant, 

which cannot be attributed to the Legislature. 

9. 

So  far  as  the  question  of  Shamlat-e-Deh  is  concerned, 

Khasra  Nos.1585  &  1586  are  altogether  different  and  separate 

Khasra 

numbers 

solely 

registered 

in 

the 

name 

of 

petitioner/complainant  in  the Record of Rights, Nowhere in  the said 

Khasra  numbers, the  name of  respondent  is  mentioned and  in  the 

said Mutations, 'Hissadari' of respondent has also not been shown, 

anywhere.  At  this  stage,  it  cannot  be  said  with  certainty  that  the 

respondent  is  a 

land  grabber  or  he  has  forcibly,  illegally  has 

dispossessed  the  petitioner  which  fact  also  needs  to  be  proved 

through evidence. On the other hand, if the  respondent has shares 

in  the said land, then  it  can also be  proved through evidence. Mere 

pleadings  of  the  parties  cannot  be  taken  into  consideration  as 

evidence on the basis whereof the learned trial Court has accepted 

the  application  under  Section 265-K  Cr.P.C. The  record transpires 

that the  respondent  himself has clearly 1  mentioned in  his statement 

that  he  is  not  in  possession  of  the,  above  mentioned  Khasra 

I 

numbers  (land  in  dispute).  However, he  claims  himself co-sharer, 

which fact  requires evidence that  in  which  Khasra numbers he has 

6 

WP No.  3244of2012 

rights and in  which piece of land, he  is  a  co-sharer. For the purpose 

of  examining  the  question  of  title  in  respect  of  the  property,  as 

already  pointed out, the  Court  has to  simply form  an opinion  as to 

whether,  prima  facie,  any  party  is  coming  within  the  ambit  of 

definition  mentioned  in  Section 3  of the Act  and  if the  Court forms 

such opinion from the  material placed before it,  then the Court can 

proceed with  the  matter  or  otherwise,  as  the  case  may  be.  In  the 

instant  case,  Tehsildar  and  the  S.H.O.  Police  Station  Tarnol, 

Islamabad  have  reported  that  respondent  No.2  was  in 

illegal 

possession of land situated in  Khasra Nos.1585 &  1586, therefore, 

this  fact  was  sufficient  to,  prima  facie,  form  an  opinion  that  a  full 

trial was  required, so that a just  conclusion qua the alleged offence 

could  be  drawn,  based  on  the  evidence  brought  on  record  by the 

parties. 

10. 

The  Honourable  Supreme  Court,  in  the  dictum,  reported  as 

"Mumtaz  Hussain  VS  Dr.  Nasir  Khan  and  others"  (2010  SCMR 

1254),  has  provided  guidelines  for 

the  Courts  to  examine, 

attracting  Provision  of  Section  3  of  the  Illegal  Dispossession  Act, 

2005, while  holding that Court is  required to examine as to whether 

property was an immovable property; secondly that the person was 

owner  or  the  property  was  in  his  lawful  possession;  thirdly  the 

accused  entered  into  or  upon the  property unlawfully; fourthly  that 

such  entry  was  with  intention  to  dispossess  i.e  ouster,  evict  or 

deriving  out  of  possession  against  the  will  of  person  in  actual 

possession or to grab  i.e.  capture, seize suddenly, take greedily or 

unfairly,  or  to  control  i.e  to  exercise  power  or  influence  over 

regulate or  govern  or  relates to  authority  over what  is  not in  one's 

physical possession or to occupy, i.e  holding possession ,  reside in 

or  something.  In  the  case  in  hand,  as  per  revenue  record,  the 

petitioner is  owner of land situated in  Khasras No.1585/2 and  1586, 

whereas  respondent  No.2 has failed to  bring on  record any cogent 

evidence in  black and white, in  support, of his version. Although the 

learned  Court  is  competent  to  acquit  the  accused  at  any  stage  of 

the trial under Section 249-A or 265-K, ~r.P.C.  as the case may be, 

7 

WP No.  3244 of 2012 

but in  the  instant case, there  is  some evidence available on record 

against  respondent  No.2,  on  the  basis  whereof,  this  Court  is 

constrained to set aside the impugned order passed by the learned 

trial Court. 

11. 

For the  reasons mentioned above, the impugned order is  not 

sustainable,  therefore,  this  petition  is  converted  into  appeal  and  is 

accepted.  The  impugned  order  dated  10.09.2012  passed  by  the 

learned  trial  Court  is  set  aside.  The  complaint  before  the  learned 

trial Court shall  be deemed to be pending. Case is  remanded back 

to  the  learned  trial  Court with  a  direction  to  decide  the  same  after 

recording  evidence  of  both  the  parties  in  accordance  with  law, 

expeditiously  preferably  within  a  period  of  three  months  from  the 

date of receiving certified copy of this order. 

Gftl1iiiri' AZ'&m Qa~ni) 

Judge 

Announced in  Open Court, on this 24th  day of July, 2020. 

dge 

