ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

      Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019  

Malik Tariq Ayub & another  
vs 
Raja Arshad Mehmood & another 

PETITIIONERS BY:      

Mr. Faisal Siddiqi, Advocate.   

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr.  Azam  Nazir  Tarar  and  Mr.  Abdul 
Wahid  Qureshi,  Advocates 
for 
respondent No.1. 
Mr.  Zohaib  Hassan  Gondal,  State 
Counsel  alongwith  Ghulam  Murtaza, 
Sub-Inspector, 
Station 
Shalimar, Islamabad. 

Police 

DATE OF DECISION: 

19.04.2022. 

======================================= 

BABAR SATTAR, J.- Through this judgment, this Court 

will  decide  Criminal  Miscellaneous  No.326-BC  of  2019  and  Writ 

Petition No.1721 of 2019, pursuant to  which  cancellation  of bail 

has  been  sought,  which  was  granted  to  respondent  No.1 

(“Respondent”)  by  the  learned  Anti-Terrorism  Court  (“ATC”) 

by order dated 30.04.2019. 

2. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted  that 

the  impugned  order  is  perverse  as  it  has  been  granted  on  the 

basis  of  statutory  ground  of  delay  available  to  an  accused  in  a 

third  proviso  under  Section  497(1)  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 

Procedure, 1898 (“Cr.PC”) read together Section 21-D(4)(c) of 

the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997  (“ATA”).  He  submitted  that  the 

third  proviso  itself  provided  that  an  accused  who  was  charged 

with the offence of terrorism could not be released on bail on the 

basis  of  a  statutory  ground  of  delay  and  consequently,  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    -2-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

impugned order was issued in breach of Section 497(1) of Cr.PC. 

He  then  contended  that  the  impugned  order  had  also  been 

issued  in  breach  of  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA  as  Section  

21-D(1)  of  the  ATA  excluded  the  application  of  Section  497  of 

Cr.PC in relation to grant of bail to an accused who was charged 

with  an  offence  under  the  ATA.  That  the  ATA  is  a  special  law, 

which  has  itself  provided  the  scheme  for  consideration  of  grant 

of  bail  under  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA,  which  would  even 

otherwise  exclude  the  application  of  general  law  in  relation  to 

grant  of  bail  (i.e.  Section  497  of  Cr.PC).  He  contended  that  for 

purposes  of  grant  of  bail,  it  was  imperative  for  the  learned  ATC 

to  have  first  concluded  that  there  was  no  reasonable  ground  to 

believe  that  the  accused  was  liable  for  the  offence  that  he  had 

been charged with and without such finding regarding the role of 

the accused in the case, no bail order could be issued. His third 

contention  was  that  Section  21-D(3)  of  the  ATA  specified  the 

circumstances in which the bail was not to be granted, including, 

inter  alia,  when  there  was  a  likelihood  that  the  accused  would 

abscond. He submitted that the accused in question had sought 

a  transitory  bail  from  the  Multan  Bench  of  the  learned  Lahore 

High  Court,  which  was  granted  up  until  the  date  of  30.08.2016 

by  order  dated  18.08.2016.  But  instead  of  surrendering  before 

the learned ATC in Islamabad, the Respondent tried to leave the 

territorial  jurisdiction  of  Pakistan  from  Pakistan-Afghanistan 

Border at Torkham on 27.08.2016, when he was arrested by the 

Federal  Investigation  Agency’s  staff  and  produced  before 

Assistant  Political  Agent,  Landikotal,  Khyber  Agency,  on 

28.08.2016,  after  which  the  Investigating  Officer  obtained  his 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -3-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

physical  custody  from  the  Assistant  Political  Agent,  Landikotal, 

Khyber  Agency,  on  01.09.2016  and  presented  him  before  the 

learned  ATC  on  02.09.2016.  In  view  this  background,  it  was 

evident  that  the  Respondent  was  a  flight  risk,  which  had  not 

been  considered  by  the  learned  ATC  rendering  the  impugned 

order perverse. In relation to Writ Petition No.1721 of 2019, the 

learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that  the petitioner 

was the mother of the deceased, Barrister Fahad Malik. That the 

impugned order was passed one day before the national holiday 

of  1st  May  and  was  timed  to  ensure  that  the  Respondent  be 

released  before  a  challenge  could  be  brought  against  the  bail 

order. That the petitioner filed an application in the office of the 

Chief  Justice  of  Islamabad  High  Court  on  30.04.2019  explaining 

the circumstances in which the impugned order had been passed 

and  requesting  the  Islamabad  High  Court  to  exercise  Suo  Moto 

revisional powers under  Cr.PC. That  the  Honorable  Chief Justice 

in  his  wisdom  converted  the  application  into  a  writ  petition, 

which was fixed  for hearing before a Divisional Bench, which by 

order dated 30.04.2019 restrained Superintendent Central Prison 

Adyala  from  releasing  the  accused  after  noting  that  the 

Respondent had remained a fugitive from law and had previously 

attempted to leave the country to avoid trial in the instant case. 

He submitted that the petitioner was an aggrieved person being 

mother of the deceased Barrister  Fahad Malik and that the High 

Court  had  expensive  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  to  take  cognizance  of  the  order  passed  by  the 

learned  ATC  to  meet  the  ends  of  justice,  even  though  the 

petitioner  had  sought  exercise  of  revisional  jurisdiction  under 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -4-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

Sections 435 and 439 of Cr.PC. He submitted that this Court had 

the  power  to  convert  proceedings  initiated  in  exercise  of 

revisional  jurisdiction  into  proceedings  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  and  vice  versa.  He  submitted  that  one  of  the 

objections  taken  up the Respondent was that no order could be 

passed in view of Section  497(5) of Cr.PC till such  time  that  an 

accused had been released from prison. But that such objection 

was  not  sustainable  in  view  of  the  law  as  enumerated  by  the 

superior courts in India as well as followed within our jurisdiction 

as  in  case  of  any  illegal  order,  there  was  nothing  requiring  the 

court to first allow the release of an accused and then order that 

his bail be cancelled and he be arrested again.  

3. 

The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that 

a  writ  of  certiorari  could  only  be  filed  by  an  aggrieved  person 

and  the  petitioner,  even  though  she  was  the  mother  of  the 

deceased Barrister Fahad Malik, was not an aggrieved person as 

she was neither the complainant in the case nor a witness to the 

incident  in  relation  to  which  the  FIR  had  been  registered.  He 

submitted  that  the  law  in  relation  to  locus  standi  had  been 

interpreted  liberally  only  in  relation  to  public  interest  litigation, 

which  precedents  were  not  applicable  to  criminal  matters.  His 

second contention was that while this Court had jurisdiction over 

an order passed by the learned ATC under Sections 435 and 439 

of  Cr.PC  to  revise  the  bail  granting  order,  once  a  criminal 

miscellaneous application had been filed by the complainant the 

writ  had  become  infructuous.  His  third  contention  was  that 

where  remedy  of  revision  or  any  other  statutory  remedy  was 

available  a  person  could  not  rely  on  Article  199  of  the 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -5-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

Constitution.  He  further  contended  that  where  concurrent 

remedies  were  available  under  various  provisions  of  law,  the 

petitioner  was  required  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court 

under  one  specific  provision  and  could  not  rely  on  multiple 

provisions simultaneously. That Section 497(5) of Cr.PC was not 

applicable  in  the  instant  case  as  it  required  that  the  accused, 

whose bail cancellation was sought, is released from prison, but 

in  the  instant  case  as  the  Respondent  had  not  been  released, 

resort  could  not  be  had  under  Section  497(5)  of  Cr.PC.  He 

submitted  that  in  view  of  Section  21-D(4)  of  the  ATA  delay  in 

conclusion of the trial was a ground for release of an accused on 

bail in relation to an offence under the ATA. He submitted that in 

the  instant  case  70%  of  the  delay  was  attributable  to  the 

prosecution and the learned ATC correctly took into account such 

delay  as  the  basis  for  grant  of  bail  to  the  respondent.  He 

submitted that the scheme of  the ATA contemplated day-to-day 

trial  leading  to  conclusion  of  such  trial  within  a  period  of  seven 

days,  which  was  why  the  conditions  for  grant  of  bail  under 

Section  21-D  of  the  ATA  were  restrictive.  However,  in  a  case 

such  as  the  instant  one,  where  the  Respondent  had  remained 

hauled up in prison pending trial for five years and the delay was 

attributable  to  the  prosecution,  the  learned  ATC  had  correctly 

issued  the  impugned  order,  which  suffered  from  no  infirmity  as 

at stake was the liberty of the accused guaranteed by Article 9 of 

the Constitution. 

4. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  in  rebuttal, 

submitted that the question of maintainability of the writ petition 

was  an  academic  question  as  the  criminal  miscellaneous 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -6-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

application  challenging  the  impugned  order  had  also  been  filed 

by  the  complainant.  But  that  even  after  filing  of  such  criminal 

miscellaneous  application 

the  petition  had  not  become 

infructuous  as  it  had  been  filed  by  different  person  (i.e.  the 

mother  of  the  deceased,  Barrister  Fahad  Malik)  while  the 

criminal  miscellaneous  had  been  filed  by  the  complainant.  He 

submitted  that  it  was  now  settled  that  the  High  Court  could 

exercise its revisional jurisdiction under Sections 435 and 439 of 

Cr.PC  to  take  cognizance  of  a  bail  order  passed  by  the  learned 

ATC. 

5. 

The  ATA  is  a  special  law.  It  is  a  settled  principle  that 

provisions of special law trump provisions of general law and the 

provisions  of  a  general  law  cannot  be  relied  upon  when  the 

subject-matter is specifically addressed by a special law. Section 

21-D  of  the  ATA  provides  an 

independent  scheme 

for 

consideration of bail of an accused under the ATA and in view of 

settled  principle  of  interpretation  of  special  law  VS general 

law, provisions of Section 497 of Cr.PC cannot be relied upon in 

the  presence  of  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA.  Notwithstanding  the 

settled  principle  of  interpretation,  even  otherwise  Section  21-

D(1)  of  the  ATA  starts  with  non-obstante  language,  which 

excludes provisions of Sections 496, 497 and 498 of Cr.PC while 

vesting  in  the  ATC,  the  High  Court  and  the  Supreme  Court,  the 

power and jurisdiction to grant or refuse bail to an accused in a 

case  triable  by  the  ATC.  Section  21-D(2)  of  the  ATA  is  in  pari 

materia to Section 497(1) of Cr.PC, whereby in order to release 

a  person  accused  of  a  non-bailable  offence  under  the  ATA,  the 

court must first form an opinion that there appear no reasonable 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -7-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

grounds  to  believe  that  the  accused  is  guilty  of  an  offence 

punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment  for  life  or  imprisonment 

for  not  less  than  ten  years.  Formation  of  such  opinion  is  a  pre-

requisite  for  grant  of  bail  without  which  no  accused,  triable  by 

the learned ATC, can be afforded the benefit of bail. Section 21-

D(3)  of  the  ATA  then  lists  additional  factors  that  constitute  a 

negative  list in the presence  of which  bail is  to be denied, even 

in  the  event  that  the  learned  ATC  comes  to  the  tentative 

conclusion  that  no  reasonable  grounds  exist  for  believing  that 

the  person  is  guilty  of  the  offence  charged  with  under  the  ATA. 

The ATC is to deny bail under Section 21-D(3) if it concludes that 

the  person,  if  released  on  bail,  would  (a)  fail  to  surrender  to 

custody,  (b)  commit  an  offence  while  he  on  bail,  (c)  interfere 

with  witnesses  or  obstruct  the  course  of  justice,  or  (d)  fail  to 

comply  with  conditions  of  release,  if  any.  If  the  learned  ATC 

comes to the conclusion that there are no reasonable grounds to 

believe that the person is guilty of the offence charged with, and 

further none of the negative considerations listed in Section 21-

D(3)  of  the  ATA  are  attracted,  Section  21-D(4)  of  the  ATA  then 

provides  the  list  of  considerations  to  be  taken  into  account  in 

guiding the discretion of the learned ATC to release a person on 

bail.  

6. 

Unlike  the  scheme  under  Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC,  the 

scheme  of  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA  is  much  more  restrictive, 

which  has  been 

incorporated  as 

the  raison  d'etre 

for 

promulgation  of  the  ATA  was  speedy  trial  of  heinous  offences 

listed  within  the  Schedule  of  the  ATA,  as  also  evident  from 

Section  19(7)  of  the  ATA  which  provides  that  the  learned  ATC 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -8-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

upon  taking  cognizance  of  the  case  is  to  proceed  with  trial  on 

day-to-day  basis  and  decide  the  case  within  a  period  of  seven 

days,  failing  which  the  matter  is  to  be  brought  to  the  notice  of 

the  Chief  Justice  of  the  High  Court  concerned  for  appropriate 

directions.  As  it  was  conceived  that  cases  being  tried  by  ATCs 

would be concluded within a period of seven days, very stringent 

conditions were set out to order  the release of a person  on bail 

under Section 21-D of the ATA pending trial. In relation to such 

offenses  the legislature in his wisdom  struck  a balance  between 

the  liberty  of  the  accused  and  public  interest  in  expeditious 

disposal of the cases involving terrorism and elected to fetter the 

right to liberty of the individual accused for the limited period of 

trial  in  public  interest.  But  merely  because  a  trial  involving  the 

offense of terrorism or a scheduled offense under the ATA is not 

concluded  within  7  days,  doesn’t  entitle  the  ATC  to  read  within 

Section 21-D of ATA any additional exceptions to  the conditions 

prescribed for grant of bail. 

7. 

In  view  of  the  above  scheme,  it  is  evident  that  the 

learned ATC in considering grant of bail to an accused being tried 

by it cannot rely on Section 497 of Cr.PC for purposes of grant of 

bail.  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA  prescribes  a  complete  scheme 

which  is  attracted  for  purposes  of  grant  of  bail  to  an  accused 

being  tried  for  the  offense  of  terrorism  or  another  scheduled 

offence  listed  in  the  third  Schedule  to  the  ATA.  Section  21-

D(4)(c) of the ATA identifies “the time which has the person has 

already spent a custody for the time that he is likely to spend in 

custody,  if  he  has  not  admitted  to  bail,”  as  one  of  the 

considerations  for  grant  of  bail.  However,  such  consideration 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -9-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

guiding  the  discretion  of  the  learned  ATC  comes  into  play  only 

after the ATC has formed an opinion that restrictions provided in 

Sections  21-D(2)  and  21-D(3)  are  not  applicable  to  the  case  of 

the accused. 

8. 

The  statutory  ground  for  bail  on  the  basis  of  delay  in 

conclusion of the trial is provided in the third proviso of Section 

497(1) of Cr.PC, which states the following: 

“Provided  further  that  the  Court  shall, 

except  where  it  is  of  the  opinion  that  the 

delay  in  the  trial  of  the  accused  has  been 

occasioned  by  an  act  or  omission  of  the 

accused  or  any  other  person  acting  on  his 

behalf,  direct  that  any  person  shall  be 

released on bail- 

(a) who, being accused of any offence not 

punishable  with  death,  has  been 

detained 

for  such  offence 

for  a 

continuous  period  exceeding  one  year 

or  in  case  of  a  woman  exceeding  six 

months  and  whose  trial  for  such 

offence has not concluded; or 

(b) who,  being  accused  of  an  offence 

punishable  with  death,  has  been 

detained 

for  such  offence 

for  a 

continuous period exceeding two years 

and in case of a woman exceeding one 

year  and  whose  trial  for  such  offence 

has not concluded: 

Provided further that the provisions of the 

foregoing  proviso  shall  not  apply  to  a 

previously  convicted  offender  for  an  offence 

punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment  for 

life or to a person who, in the opinion of the 

Court, 

is  a  hardened,  desperate  or 

dangerous criminal or is accused of an act of 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                    -10-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

terrorism 

punishable  with 

death 

or 

imprisonment for life.”  

9. 

The 

last  sentence  of  the  said  proviso  provides 

unequivocal  that  statutory  delay  as  a  ground  for  bail  is  not 

available  to  a  person  who  “is  accused  of  an  act  of  terrorism 

punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment  for  life”.  Thus,  even 

where the ATC were confused as to whether or not provisions of 

Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC  could  be  relied  upon  for  purposes  of 

grant  of  bail,  the  3rd  proviso  of  Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC  itself 

clarifies that the ground of statutory delay in conclusion of trial is 

not  available  to  an  accused  charged  with  an  act  of  terrorism 

punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  

10. 

Section 497(5) of Cr.PC provides the following:- 

Section  497(5)-  A  High  Court  or  Court  of 

Session and, in the case of a person released 

by  itself,  any  other  Court  may  cause  any 

person  who  has  been  released  under  this 

section  to  be  arrested  and  may  commit  him 

to custody. 

Under  Section  497(5)  of  CrPC,  the  power  vested  in  the  High 

Court or the Court of Sessions to cancel bail granted to a person 

is  limited  to  a  person  who  has  been  granted  bail  pursuant  to 

provisions of Section 497 of Cr.PC. Given that the bail in relation 

to  a  person  accused  of  an  offence  triable  by  the  ATC  is  to  be 

granted  under  provisions  of  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA  and  not 

under  Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC,  for  purposes  of  cancellation  of 

such bail granted under Section 21-D of the ATA, Section 497(5) 

of Cr.PC is not attracted.  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                    -11-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

11. 

The  question  of  whether  bail  to  an  accused  triable  by 

the  ATC  was  to  be  granted  under  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA  or 

Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC  came  before  the  learned  Sindh  High 

Court  in  Muhammad  Hashim  VS  The  State  (2001  MLD 

Karachi  921),  wherein 

it  was  held  that  the  right  to 

consideration  of  bail  on  the  basis  of  statutory  ground  of  delay 

was  not  bailable  to  an  accused  triable  by  the  ATC.  The  learned 

Balochistan  High  Court  in  Abdul  Salam  VS  The  State  (2015 

Pcr.LJ  Balochistan  808)  rendered  the  same  opinion  holding 

that  a  person  triable  by  the  ATC  was not  entitled  to  the  benefit 

of  statutory  ground  for  bail  provided  under  Section  497(1)  of 

Cr.PC. The question of exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court 

in relation to bail granting order passed by the ATC came before 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Faiz  Muhammad  VS  The  State 

(2006  SCMR  93),  wherein  the  bail  cancellation  order  by  the 

High  Court  was  upheld  by  the  apex  Court  on  the  basis  that 

discretion exercised by the High Court was not arbitrary. 

12. 

It  has  been  held  in  various  precedents  that  High  Court 

can  exercise  its  revisional  jurisdiction  under  Sections  435  and 

439  of  Cr.PC  despite  the  presence  of  alternative  remedy  under 

Section  497(5)  of  Cr.PC  (see  for  example  Nazir  Ahmad  VS 

Latif Hussain (PLD 1974 Lahore 476), Asghar Ali VS Abdul 

Shakoor  (PLD  1999  Lahore  516)  and  Muhammad  Zubair 

VS  The  State  (1996  MLD  Lahore  1451).  There  have  been 

some conflicting judgments on the question of whether the High 

Court could exercise its revisional jurisdiction under Sections 435 

and 439 of Cr.PC in relation to orders passed by the ATC under 

the  ATA.  A  Full  Bench  of  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -12-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

considered  the  issue  in  Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid  VS  Mian 

Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif  and  others  (PLD  2018  Lahore 

836)  and  while  relying  on  unreported  judgment  of  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Syed  Hussain  Abbass  VS  The 

State  (Criminal  Appeals  No.257  of  2000  and  others) 

(wherein it had been held that the High Court being an appellate 

forum  against  orders  of  the  ATC  under  provisions  of  the  ATA 

could exercise revisional powers under Sections 435 and  439 of 

Cr.PC in relation to orders of the ATC which are not appealable), 

held the following: 

“…  ATC  is  subordinate/inferior  court  to  the 

High  Court;  in  ATA  no  restriction  has  been 

imposed for filing of revision petition, hence, 

the  High  Court  has  the  visitorial  power  over 

ATC, therefore, can entertain petitions in the 

nature  of  those  covered  by  Sections  435, 

439  of  the  Code,  except  to  grant  bail  or 

release an accused in a case triable by ATC.”  

[ 

13. 

We  agree  with  the  opinion  rendered  by  the  learned 

Lahore High Court in Muhammad Jawad Hamid that this Court 

has  the  authority  to  exercise  revisional  jurisdiction  under 

Sections 435 and 439 of Cr.PC in relation to a bail granting order 

passed by the learned ATC. Various provisions of the ATA vest in 

High  Court  the  authority  to  exercise  superintendent  over  ATC, 

including,  inter  alia, Section 19(7) of the ATA that requires  that 

the report be placed before the Chief Justice of the High Court in 

the event that the trial is not concluded within a period of seven 

days,  Section  28  that  vests  with  the  High  Court  powers  to 

transfer  case  from  one  ATC  to  another,  and  Section  25  that 

creates a statutory right of appeal before the High Court against 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -13-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

the  final  judgment  of  the  ATC.  Even  in  the  event  that  such 

provisions were not provided within the ATA itself, Article 203 of 

the Constitution provides that the High Court shall supervise and 

control all courts subordinate to it. In view of Section 203 of the 

Constitution read together with provisions of  ATA and CrPC, the 

High  Court  is  vested  with  the  authority  to  exercise  revisional 

jurisdiction in relation to orders and proceedings of the ATC. The 

scope  of  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  under  Sections  435  and 

439  of  Cr.PC  has  been  enumerated  by  the  august  Supreme 

Court.  

14. 

The  scope  of  such  jurisdiction  came  before  the  august 

Supreme Court in Mushtaq Ahmed VS The State (PLD 1966 

SC 126), in which the following was held: 

“…Under  section  439  of 

the  Criminal 

Procedure  Code  the  High  Court  has  a  power 

to  interfere  upon  information  in  whatever 

way received, as the section clearly says that 

it may do so in any case in which it has itself 

called  for  the  record  or  which  has  been 

reported  for  orders  or  "which  otherwise 

comes to its knowledge". These are words of 

wide  import.  In  the  present  case  the  record 

of  the  case  was  placed  before  the  learned 

Judge  A  in  the  course  of  his  inspection  and 

the  facts  of  the  case  thus  came  to  his 

knowledge. Under this section the High Court 

has also the right to exercise its power on its 

own  initiative  and  there  can  be  no  warrant 

for  the  proposition  that  the  High  Court  is 

debarred  from  examining  the  record  suo 

moto.” 

 
 
 
 
  
 
                                    -14-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

In relying on such judgment and reiterating the law laid down in 

it,  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Dr.  Waqar  Hussain  VS  The 

State (2000 SCMR 735) held the following: 

“…So  far  as  the  power  of  the  High  Court 

under  section  439,  Cr.P.C.  are  concerned,  it 

may be stated that it is not a power only but 

a duty whenever facts for its jurisdiction are 

brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Court,  or 

otherwise  come  to  its  knowledge  because 

the  revisional  jurisdiction  is  in  the  nature  of 

corrective jurisdiction.” 

In  view  of  the  law  settled  by  the  august  Supreme  Court,  it  is 

therefore  not  just  within  the  power  of  the  High  Court  to  satisfy 

itself  as  to  the  correctness,  legality  or  propriety  of  any  findings 

or orders passed by the learned ATC, but has a duty to do so in 

order to ensure that justice has been served. 

15. 

In  view  of  the  above,  we  hold  that  the  High  Court  can 

consider the correctness, legality and propriety of a bail granting 

order  in  exercise  of  authority  under  Sections  435  and  439  of 

Cr.PC read together with Section 561(A) of Cr.PC. And as bail to 

an  accused  triable  by  the  learned  ATC  is  granted  under  Section 

21-D of the ATA,  Section 497(5) of Cr.PC has no application  for 

purposes  of  cancellation  of  bail  granted  to  an  accused  by  the 

learned ATC. 

16. 

Let us  now  consider  the impugned order that has been 

challenged  in  the  criminal  miscellaneous  application  in  which  a 

reference has been made Section 497(5) of Cr.PC read together 

with Sections 435 and 439 of Cr.PC. We have already held above 

that  Section  497(5)  of  Cr.PC  has  no  application  in  considering 

 
 
 
 
  
 
                                    -15-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

cancellation  of  bail  granted  by  the  ATC.  But  that  this  Court  has 

jurisdiction under Sections 435 and 439 of Cr.PC to consider the 

legality  of  such  order.  The  impugned  order  has  been  issued  by 

the learned ATC in exercise of powers under the third proviso of 

Section  497  of  Cr.PC  read  together  with  Section  21-D(4)(c)  of 

the ATA on the basis of delay  in conclusion of trial. The learned 

ATC  has  mis-appreciated  the  law  in  assuming  that  Section 

497(1) of Cr.PC is applicable for purposes of grant of bail to the 

Respondent  and  it  has  further  not  taken  into  consideration  the 

language  within  the  third  proviso  of  Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC, 

which  excludes  its  application  to  individuals  accused  of  the 

offence  of  terrorism  punishable  by  death  or  life  imprisonment. 

We  have  already  explained  above  that  Section  497(1)  of  Cr.PC 

has  no  application  for  purposes  of  consideration  of  bail  of  an 

accused triable by ATC for which purpose the sole considerations 

are  those  provided  under  Section  21-D  of  the  ATA.  The  learned 

ATC has further misperceived the scheme of the Section 21-D of 

the  ATA  in  relying  in  Section  21-D(4)(c)  of  the  ATA  to  consider 

the time the Respondent had spent into custody for purposes of 

admitting  him  to  bail,  in  complete  disregard  of  requirements  of 

Sections  21-D(2)  and  21-D(3)  of  the  ATA.  The  learned  ATC  in 

the impugned order did not form any opinion that there was no 

reasonable basis to believe that the Respondent was guilty of the 

offence  that  he  had  been  charged  with.  Forming  such  opinion 

was  a  necessary  pre-requisite  for  taking  into  consideration  the 

factors  listed  in  Section  21-D(4)  of  the  ATA  to  guide  the 

discretion  of  the  court  in  considering  the  Respondent’s  bail 

application.  The  learned  ATC  also  did  not  take  into  account  the 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -16-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

negative  considerations  prescribed  under  Section  21-D(3)(a)(d) 

of the ATA and simply did not take into account the fact that the 

Respondent had already made an attempt to cross the Pakistan-

Afghanistan  Border  in  breach  of  conditions  of  transitory  bail 

afforded  to  him  and  that  in  view  of  such  background  no 

reasonable  opinion  could  not  be  formed  that  the  Respondent 

would not fail to surrender  to custody if he were to be enlarged 

on  bail.  In  view  of  these  circumstances,  we  find  that  the 

impugned  order  is  perverse  and  suffers  from  material  illegality 

and is therefore not sustainable in the eyes of law. 

17. 

Given that  the impugned order is liable to be set-aside 

in exercise of jurisdiction vested in this Court under Sections 435 

and 439 of Cr.PC read together with Section 561(A) of Cr.PC, the 

question  of  whether  or  not  Writ  Petition  No.1721  of  2019  is 

maintainable  becomes  largely  irrelevant.  However,  as  fervent 

objections have been raised by the Respondent to the manner in 

which  the  petition  was  entertained  and  to  its  maintainability, 

which  prevented  the  Respondent’s  release  from  jail  pursuant  to 

the  impugned  order,  we  deem  it  necessary  to  address  the 

Respondent’s contentions. 

18. 

An argument was raised by the learned counsel for the 

Respondent  that  this  Court  has  no  Suo  Moto  jurisdiction  under 

Article 199 of the Constitution. There is nothing to gainsay such 

contention.  The  High  Court  has  no  Suo  Moto  jurisdiction  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  But  in  a  case  where  there  is  an 

aggrieved  party  who  brings  a  matter  to  the  High  Court  that 

satisfies  all  necessary  requirements  of  Article  199  of  the 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -17-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

Constitution,  merely  because  such  application  is  not  in  proper 

form  in  compliance  with  all  the  requirements  prescribed  under 

the High Court  Rules and Orders  does not make  the cognizance 

of such application exercise of suo motu jurisdiction by the High 

Court.  In  such  matters  all  that  the  High  Court  does  is  relax  the 

requirements in relation to filing of petitions and such relaxation 

of filing requirements does not transform the application filed by 

an  aggrieved  party  in  suo  motu  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  That  is  all  that  happened  in  the 

instant  case  as  well.  An  application  was  filed  by  an  aggrieved 

person challenging the legality of the impugned order passed by 

the learned ATC and the court while relaxing filing requirements 

treated  the  said  application  as  a  petition  and  directed  the  office 

that  it  be  placed  before  the  Court,  after  which  such  application 

was numbered as Writ Petition No.1721 of 2019 and fixed before 

a  Divisional  Bench  of  this  Court.  Consequently,  the  proceedings 

in Writ Petition 1721 of 2019 were not suo motu proceedings. 

19. 

Let  us  also  state  clearly  that  the  mother  or  another 

family  member  of  a  deceased  person,  whose  death  if  the 

subject-matter  of  a  criminal  trial,  is  an  aggrieved  person  for 

purposes  of  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  in  relation  to  a  trial 

court  order  that  is  not  in  accordance  with  law.  The  question 

came  before  the  learned  Sindh  High  Court  in  Dur  Muhammad 

VS  Bashir  (1983  Pcr.LJ  Karachi  2053)  wherein  it  was  held 

that  a  person  invested  in  the  prosecution’s  case  was  entitled  to 

move  an  application  for  cancellation  of  bail.  The  issue  came 

before the learned Balochistan High Court in Haji Behram Khan 

VS  Akhtar  Muhammad  (1993  Pcr.LJ  Balochistan  71), 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -18-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

wherein  it  was  held  that  any  private  person  interested  in 

prosecution of a case can’t be restrained from invoking the door 

for  justice  and  that  application  for  cancellation  of  bail  filed  by 

such  person  could  not  be  dismissed  on  such  basis.  Similar 

opinion  was  rendered  by  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court  in 

Khalid  Mahmood  VS  Abdul  Qadir  Shah  (1994  Pcr.LJ 

Lahore  1784),  wherein  it  was  held  that  the  relative  of  the 

deceased  person  may  file  an  application  for  cancellation  of  bail. 

The mother of Barrister Fahad Malik, whether or not she was the 

complainant or a witness in the trial of those accused of causing 

his death, is an aggrieved person in relation to an order that has 

been  passed  in  favour  of  those  accused  of  causing  her  son 

death. To hold otherwise would be a travesty. If the mother of a 

young  man  taken  in  the  prime  of  his  life  is  not  a  person 

aggrieved  by  the  actions  of  the  offenders,  who  else  would  be? 

Consequently,  the  objection  to  the  maintainability  on  the  basis 

that the petitioner is not an aggrieved person is without merit. 

20. 

It  is  also  settled  law  that  the  jurisdiction  vested  in  the 

High Court under the Constitution is not circumcised by statutory 

provisions  and  the  High  Court  can  assume  jurisdiction  in  the 

event  that  it  is  satisfied  that  there  is  no  efficacious  alternate 

remedy  available  to  an  aggrieved  person.  In  view  of  the  law 

regarding  the  scope  of  the  High  Court’s  jurisdiction  under 

Section 199 of the Constitution, High Courts have exercised such 

jurisdiction  to  cancel  bail  granting  orders  by  the  learned  ATC 

under Section 21-D of the ATA. In Muhammad Sharif VS The 

State  (2001  YLR  Karachi  900)  the  learned  Sindh  High  Court 

cancelled  the  bail  granting  order  issued  under  Section  21-D  of 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -19-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

the  ATA  in  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  provisions  of  Sections 

496, 497 and 498 of Cr.PC were excluded by Section 21-D of the 

ATA.  Likewise,  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Faiz  Muhammad 

upheld  the  decision  of  the  High  Court  in  which  bail  by  the 

learned  ATC  had  been  canceled.  Notwithstanding  the  scope  of 

High  Court’s  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution 

which  it  regulates  in  view  of  the  conditions  prescribed  therein 

and  the  guidance  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court,  we 

are of the view that this Court is vested with the jurisdiction and 

a duty to ensure the legality of orders passed by the learned ATC 

under  Sections  435  and  439  of  Cr.PC.  And  consequently  the 

preferred course of action would be for the Court to exercise its 

revisional  jurisdiction  under  the  said  provisions  of  Cr.PC  in 

considering  the  legality  and  correctness  of  a  bail  granting  order 

passed by the learned ATC under Section 21-D of the ATA. 

21. 

It  is  also  settled  law  that  the  High  Court  has  ample 

authority to convert a revision into a writ and vice versa in a fit 

case  as  law  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Muhammad  Ayub  VS  Obaidullah  (1999  SCMR  394).  The 

question  of  jurisdiction  is  a  foundational  question  determining 

the legality of any  judicial proceedings.  However, where  a court 

or  tribunal  has  the  requisite  jurisdiction  under  any  provision  of 

law,  merely  because  an  application  is  filed  by  referring  to  an 

incorrect  statutory  provision  is  inconsequential  and  does  not 

wrestle  away  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  or  the  legality  of 

proceedings  conducted  by  it.  The  High  Court  is  vested  with 

jurisdiction  to  supervise  the  ATC  and  exercise  authority  under 

 
 
 
 
  
                                    -20-          Criminal Misc. No.326-BC of 2019 

Articles  199  and  203  of  the  Constitution  as  well  as  under 

Sections 435 and 439 and 561(A) of Cr.PC and merely because a 

party  file  an  application  or  petition  refers  to  an  incorrect 

provision under which jurisdiction is not vested in the High Court 

does  not  place  any  cloud  over  the  legality  of  proceedings 

undertaken by the High Court. 

22. 

In  view  of  what  is  stated  above,  we  will  deem  Writ 

Petition  No.1721  of  2019  be  an  application  under  Sections  435 

and  439  of  Cr.PC  and  direct  the  office  to  number  the  same  as 

criminal  miscellaneous  application,  while  allowing  the  same  for 

the  reasons  stated  above  in  relation  to  criminal  miscellaneous 

application No.326-BC of 2019. 

23. 

In  view  of 

the  above,  both  of 

these  criminal 

miscellaneous applications are allowed and the impugned order 

dated 30.04.2019 passed by the learned ATC is set-aside.          

                         (ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR) 

            JUDGE 

     (BABAR SATTAR) 
             JUDGE 

  Approved for reporting. 

A. Rahman Abbasi.  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
