IUDGMENT  SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH

URT, ISLAMABAD,

IUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.3420/2018
Mansoor Umar Khan
VS
Khadija Abbasi  & 2 others.

Petitioner  by:

Sardar Muhamma  d Hafteez I(ran, Advocate.

Respondent  No.L:

Mr. Khizar  Hayat Khan,  Advocate.

Date of Hearing:

30.10.2019.

MOHSIN AKHTAR  KAYANI, I: Through  the instant writ petition,  the

petitioner has impugned the order  dated 37.07.2018  of the learned District Judge

(West), Islamabad,  whereby  appeal filed by the petitioner  against order dated

02.07.2078 of the learned  Guardian ]udge  (West), Islamabad  has been  dismissed.

2.  Brief facts referred  in the instant writ petition  are that Mansoor Umar

Khan/Petitioner and Khadija Abbasi/Respondent  No.l, were married  and

having one son namely  Sufyan Khan, born on 15.02.2012,  aged about 7lz years.

However,  due to strained relationship between  the spouses, the petitioner

pronounced  divorce to Respondent  No.L leaving  the custody  of said minor with

Respondent  No.1.  Later ory Respondent  No.L filed an application  under  Section  7

read with 17 of the Guardians  and Wards  Act, 1890 for guardianship of minor,

which  was decided ex-parte  against  the petitioner  vide judgment  dated

2'1,.12.20'1,6.  Feeling aggrieved  thereby, the petitioner filed an applicatiory  which

was accepted  vide order dated 21..07.2077  and earlier ex-parte judgment  of the

Family  Court  dated  21,.12.201,6  was set-aside.  Consequently,  the failure on the

part of Respondent  No.L in producing the minor before the Court  resulted  into

issuance  of warrant of arrest against  Respondent  No.1,  against which

Respondent  No.1 filed application seeking  cancellation  of the same/ which  was

allowed by the learned Judge Family Court,  Islamabad  vide order dated

W.P.  No.3420/2018

Page  | 2

02.07.2018.  The petitioner  with the agony  that the learned Judge  Family Court,

Islamabad has meted out Respondent  No.1 with needless leniency  assailed  the

said order in appeal,  which was dismissed  vide impugned order dated

31,.07.2018. Hence, the instant writ petition.

3. 

Learned counsel  for petitioner  contended that the learned first Appellate

Court erroneously  passed  the judgment whereby  the eligibility  to visit the minor

was denied despite  the fact that the learned Guardian Court passed successive

order on affidavit  given by special  attorney  for respondent No.1 to produce  the

minor, and as such, the conduct of respondent  No.1 before the learned Trial

Court attained  finality,  which could not be brushed aside without  producing the

minor in the Court;  that the reasons and findings  recorded  by the learned first

Appellate  Court are far extraneous  to the point of law applicable under  the given

circumstances,  therefore,  the impugned order may be set-aside and direction to

the learned Family Court/Guardian Court may be issued to proceed  against  the

respondents  and its surety strictly in accordance  with law.

4.  Conversely,learned  counsel for respondent No.L  opposed  the instant writ

petition and contended that the moment ex-parte judgment  remained no more in

the field, the liability  of surety also went away with it as no right of the petitioner

was infringed;  that the learned first Appellate  Court has rightly appreciated the

record  and passed the impugned order,  therefore, the instant  writ petition  may

be dismissed  having  no merits.

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record perused.

Perusal of record reveals that petitioner  and respondent No.1 tied the knot

vide Nikahnama  dated  01,.12.2010  and they were blessed  with minor  son namely

Sufyan  Khan on 15.02.2072,  aged about 7 r/z years,  but later on the petitioner

divorced  respondent  No.1 on 06.11,.2015.  The minor son remained  in custody  of

respondent  No.L, who before shifting to Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (I(SA),

t

W.P. No.3420l2018 

Page  | 3

applied  for guardianship  of minor in terms of Section 7 rcad with 17 of the

Guardians  & Wards Act, 1890 with intention to take the minor  abroad.  The said

application was  decided  ex-parte by the learned Judge Family Court/Guardian

Court (West),  Islamabad vide judgment  dated 2L.12.2076  and guardianship

certificate dated  18.01,.2017  was issued to respondent No.1 on the following

reasons:

"You  are lureby  appointed as Guardian  of the person  of tlu minor only,
for his welfare,  betterment and  education. You  are also authoized to talce
the minor along with you whereaer  and wheneoer  you want to moue."

7. 

The petitioner filed an application  for setting  aside the aforesaid  judgment

on the ground  that he was not duly served and the ex-parte  judgment was

obtained  without  giving him proper  opportunity  of hearing.  The said application

of petitioner  was allowed  by the ]udge  Family  Court/Guardian  Court (West),

Islamabad  vide order dated 21..07.2077, whereafter the petitioner has filed  an

application  seeking restitution in terms  of Section'1,M  of the CPC  and production

of the minor  before the Court  or in the altemative an order for visitation  rights

and schedule.  However,  during  proceedings of the said  application  the special

attorney of respondent  No.l. recorded  different  statements  before  the Court

through his counsel  that minor  would be produced  before the Court and in this

regard different opportunities  were sought,  though  the minor  had never  been

produced  as he was living with his mother i.e. respondent  No.1 in KSA, which

constrained  the learned Guardian  Court in issuing show  cause  notices to the

surety of respondent  No.l.  as well as a warrant of arrest  at later  stage, but all

these  proceedings  have not been carried out and finally an order dated

02.07.2078  was passed cancelling the warrant  of arrest issued  against  the surety

of respondent  No.L, in which a direction was issued to surety on his own

undertaking  that he will produce  the minor after obtaining necessary

instructions  from respondent No.1. on the next  date of hearing.

't

W.P.  No.3420/2018

Page  I 4

8. 

The petitioner feeling aggrieved thereof  that a lenient view has been taken

against respondent  No.1 and surety filed an appeal before the learned  District

]udge, which was dismissed  vide impugned order  dated 31,.07.2018,  whereby the

learned first Appellate Court  declared the entire  proceedings against the surety

as nullity  in the eyes of law.

9. 

The entire  background  of this case reveals  that petitioner has assailed the

order dated  02.07.2078 of the learned  Family Court/Guardian  Court,  which is

interlocutory  order and as suctu the main application filed in terms of Section 7

read with 77 of the Guardians  & Wards  Act, 1890 is still pending,  therefore, the

constitutional  jurisdiction  could not be invoked  as the matter has neither attained

finality  nor any final order has been passed. It is trite law that interim  order

could not be assailed  in constitutional  jurisdiction  as held n  2017 yLR 622

Islamabad  Ghahiila  Eazil os. Mst.

Tahir.  etc.l. 2077 yLR 870 lslamabad

(Minhaai  Saqib os. Naim-us-Saqib.  etc.t and PLD 2077 SC 787 flVaqar Ali, etc.

The State  throuqh Prosecutor  f,aocate General  Peshawar,  etc.l.

10.  On the other  hand, during  pendency of the instant writ petition,  the

parties  have amicably  came  up with a certain solution to resolve  the controversy

of visitation of minor  as the minor is residing with his mother  i.e. respondent
-

No.1 in KSA, who was settled in the said country after  seeking guardianship

order from the Guardian  Court at Islamabad,  which was a legal authority  to deal

with the affairs  of minor at that time,  although  the same  was assailed  by the

present  petitioner and as such the question is yet to be determined  by the

learned Guardian Court,  therefore, respondent  No.L has given her undertaking

through her special  attorney  before  this Court, which  is made part of the record

and reproduced  as under:

I, Khndiji  Abbasi dnughter of Abdul Latif Abbasi presently resident  of
Jeddah Kngdom  of Saudi  Arabia through  my special  attorney Abdul  Aziz

W.P. No.3420/2078

Page  | 5

Abbasi  resident of House No.409, Street  N0.56, Sector l-8/3, lslamabad,
do here by do undcrtal<e  as under:-
1.. That minor is residing  with me in Kngdom of Saudi Arabia and
studying  in Jeddah and thc fatlur  of minor (petitioner)  also is the
residcnt  of KSA, therefore, lu may ztisit the minor at any  reasonable
time duinghis  stay in KSA  at ettery  weel<end.

2. Thnt I am also ready to traoel  to Pakistan in the Summer  Vacation,
howeaer  the petitioner is man  of means  can sponsor the return ticleets,
Lunce if the petitioner  sponsors  the return  tickets to minor and me I
am ready to bing the minor in Pnkistan during  the aacation peiod,
howeoer this commitment  will be subject  to the ensurance of petitioner
regnrding  the saft return of minor to KSA.

3. That the petitioner,  through  his father, has also filed a petition  before
the HUMAN RIGIITS  COIINCIL  in KSA  and I haae  also put my
awearance before the Council and  gaae my consent  regarding  the
aisitation  of minor  but now the petitioner  is aaoiding  to appenr before
the Council.

KHADIII  ABBASI
through
Special  attorney Abdul Aziz Abbasi

1't.  The above said undertaking  was confronted to the petitioner side,

whereby the petitioner along with his counsel has taken the pleas that due to

certain medical conditions the petitioner is unable to travel to KSA and as such,

the minor has been  unlawfully removed  from the territorial jurisdiction of this

Court,  therefore, order  of visitation  has to be complied  with within the territorial

jurisdiction  of this Court. The above said position clearly  reveals  that parties are

not interested  to settle the matter  through reconciliation  hence, this Court

compels to decide the matter  on the basis of available  record and Iaw.

12.  The minor  was, though,  removed from  Islamabad  after obtaining  ex-parte

certificate of guardianship  from  the competent  court  in accordance  with law and

the said order was no more  in field as the guardian application is still pending

after setting  aside of the ex-parte order, therefore,  the only question left for

determination  of this Court is the role of surety, who is still contesting  the matter

on behalf of respondent  No.l/mother  and as such, the guardianship in terms of

Section 7 read with  17 of the Guardian & Wards  Act, 1890 is for the purpose of

the welfare of minor, which does not put any conditions  upon  the surety to

W.P. No.3420/2018

Page  | 6

produce  the minor in the Court  as the surety  has not undertook to produce  the

minor before the Court  through the said surety  bond, although  he has given

different  statements before  the learned  Trial Court  in the proceedings  that he will

produce the minor under the instructions  of respondent No.L and as such, he is

unable  to procure the attendance of minor.

13.  The role of the surety has to be seen in the light of order  passed by the

learned  Guardian  Court, whereby  respondent  No.1/mother  was appointed  as

guardian  of person for his welfare,  betterment  anil education, but not of his

property, and she was also granted  permission to take the minor abroad as

reflected  from  guardianship  certificate, therefore,  in case of anything contrary  on

the part of respondent  No.L  with reference to welfare, betterment and education,

the same  should  be considered as a factor for removal of guardianship  of

respondent  No.1. However,  the question  is yet to be adjudicated upon by the

court of law in pending proceedings.

14.  The role of surety  has not exclusively been defined in the Guardian  &

Wards  Act, 1890, however Section 26 as well as Section M of the said Act deals

with concept of removal of ward from jurisdiction and penalty for removal of

ward from the said jurisdiction for which guardian was appointed. As per the

said provision, a fine should  be imposed or a person has to be awarded with civil

imprisonment  for a term which may extend  to 06 months, if the ward  is removed

from jurisdiction of the Court  in contravention  of the provisions of Section 6 of

the Guardian  & Wards Act, 1.890.  Whereas,  the instant matter does not fall under

the said provisions as the surety is only liable if the welfare  of the minor has not

been catered by the guardian.  Section  45 of the Guardian  & Wards Act, 1890 also

deals with situation  where minor  has not been produced in compliance  of the

direction of the Court, but the said order  has to be passed  in terms of Section 1.2

or 25 of the Guardian  & Wards Act, L890, whereas no such order has been passed

W.P.  No.342O/2078

Page  | 7

tiIl date,  therefore,  the ordinary concept  of surety  has to be seen in the light of

general  law i.e. Section  1,45 of the CPC (Enforcement  of Liability of Surety),

which provides  the concept  of surety in the following  manner:

(u)

(b)
(.)

for tlu performance  of any decree or any part tlureof,
for tlu restitution  of any property  taleen in exercise of a dccree,  or,
for tlu payment  of any money, or for tlu fulfillment  of any
condition  imposed on any person,  under an order  of the court  in
any suit or in any  proceedings  consequent  tlureupon.

The above said provision discloses  that surety is one who takes upon himself

guarantee or obligation  which rests entirely  upon another.  Ordinarily the liability

of surety is enforceable  by means  of suit, but Section  145 of the CPC provides

additional sunwurry remedy  and execution  proceedings  may be initiated  against

the surety,  although his name has not been mentioned  in the decree.  However,

all these concepts are attached  with execution of decree in Civil Procedure  Code.

The personal  liability of the surety can be executed by way of attachment  or sale

of property,  where the property charged  and personal  liability  is not undertaken.

A surety  is only liable to the extent  up to which he is bound, however  certain  acts

could not be done beyond the scope of surety bond, which  is beyond his

capacity,  especially in this case, where  surety is only liable to the extent of his

surety  amount as provided in the ex-parte  judgment  dated  27.12.2076,  whereby

guardianship  certificate  was given  to respondent No.1 subject to furnishing

surety to the tune of Rs.1  Million,  but the surety has to ensure that the guardian

of the person  (minor) shall take care of the minor and minor shall be properly

maintained, however no such evidence  has yet been recorded,  therefore,  the

surety bond submitted in compliance with the decree by respondent No.1 could

not be enforced at this stage  for the purpose of production  of minor,  which  is a

separate  concept  available in terms of Sections  12 and 25 of the Guardian  &

Wards Act,1890.

W.P.  No.3420/2078

8

15.  In view  of above,  the order passed by the learned  District  ]udge  (West),

Islamabad is in accordance  with law and no illegality has been  observed,

therefore, the instant writ petition is not maintainable and same is

herebv  DISMISSED.

(

JUDGE

Announced in open Court on:

/1 . tr.&f,1  .

Khdidz.

