JUDGMENT SHEET. 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.1711/2019. 

Mst. Alishba Bibi                 VS            The State etc.  

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Sheraz Ahmed Ranjha, Advocate.  

Respondents No.1 to 3 by: 

Ms. Saima Naqvi, State Counsel.  

Respondents No.4 to 8 by: 

Shabbir Tanoli, SHO, P.S Shalimar, 
Islamabad/respondent No.2 in person. 
Safdar Hussain, ASI.   

Ch. Muhammad Nawaz Gondal, 
Advocate.  

Ms. Khawar Mumtaz, Chairperson 
NCSW. 

Aamir Ali/respondent No.4 in person. 

Neha Pervaiz, minor in person.  

Date of Hearing: 

14.06.2019. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner has prayed for issuance of direction to respondents No.2 & 3 to produce 

the minor Neha Parvaiz (alleged abductee) before this Court and be handed over to 

the petitioner (mother). The petitioner has further prayed for issuance of direction to 

respondent  No.2/SHO 

for 

initiating 

strict  action  against 

the  accused 

persons/respondents No.4 to 8, who has allegedly abducted the minor. 

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner being mother 

of  minor  Neha  Parvaiz  aged  12  years  07  months  has  prayed  for  action  against 

respondents No.4 to 8, who abducted the minor on 06.04.2019; that FIR No.124/19, 

dated 9.04.2019, U/S 365-B/109 PPC was registered with P.S Shalimar, Islamabad 

but the minor has not yet been recovered; that the respondents have taken the stance 

that the minor has converted her religion from Christianity to Islam and entered into 

Nikah with respondent No.4, which is in violation of Article 36 of the Constitution 

of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 as well as Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

2 

3. 

Conversely,  respondents  No.4  to  8  put  appearance  before  this  Court 

alongwith  minor  Neha  Parvaiz  through  SHO  P.S  Shalimar/respondent  No.2, 

whereas  the  alleged  abductee  has  taken  specific  stance  that  she  was  not  abducted 

and has entered into Nikah with her own free will after conversion of his religion 

from Christianity to Islam. Learned counsel for respondents No.4 to 8 contend that 

the minor recorded her statement before the Court of Ms. Ambreen Iqbal Chaudhry, 

Civil Judge/Judicial Magistrate Section 30 (West), Islamabad, wherein it has been 

alleged that abductee is 19 years old. 

4. 

Keeping  in  view  above  background,  this  Court  passed  direction  to  the 

National Commission on the Status of Women to interview the alleged abductee in 

order  to  verify  the  stance  taken  by  the  alleged  abductee  as  to  whether  she  has 

converted her faith with her own free will and whether she entered into Nikah with 

her own choice and what is the legal position relating to age of the minor? 

5. 

The Chairperson National Commission on Status of Women put appearance 

and submitted her report, which has been placed on record, however, the same will 

be discussed in subsequent paras to avoid repetition. 

6. 

7. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner’s  husband  lodged  FIR 

No.124/19, dated 9.04.2019, U/S 365-B/109 PPC with P.S Shalimar, Islamabad for 

the  alleged  abduction  of  his  minor  daughter  Neha  Pervaiz,  who  was  allegedly 

abducted for the purpose of illicit intercourse. The complainant in the FIR has also 

alleged that Amir Ali respondent No.4 with his parents approached him for the hand 

of  Neha  Pervaiz  but  they  refused  as  complainant’s  family  is  Christian  by  faith, 

whereas Amir Ali/respondent No.4 and his family members have different religion.  

8. 

The  present  writ  petition  has  been  filed  by  the  mother  of  the  alleged 

abductee  for  the  production  of  her  daughter  (alleged  abductee),  who  on  the 

direction  of  this  Court  has  put  appearance  before  this  Court  and  stated  that  her 

statement U/S 164, Cr.P.C was recorded, stating therein that she was not abducted 

by any one and she has converted her faith from Christianity to Islam and entered 

into  Nikah  with  respondent  No.4/Amir  Ali  with  her  free  will  and  presently  she  is 

 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

3 

living  with  him.  The  statement  has  been  acknowledged  by  the  I.O  present  before 

the Court and certified copy of statement U/S 164, Cr.P.C has been made part of the 

record.  

9. 

When questioned about age of alleged abducttee, the I.O contends that the 

alleged  abductee  was  also  produced  before  the  doctor  and  as  per  report  dated 

08.05.2019  of  Department  of  Diagnostic  Imaging  of  PIMS,  the  estimated 

radiological bone age of Neha Pervaiz (new name Mariam) is 16 years +/- 1.96 SD, 

whereas the alleged abductee claims that she is 19 years old and she has written her 

date of birth in the Nikahnama as of 01.11.2000. On the other hand, the petitioner, 

mother  of  the  alleged  abductee  has  produced  Birth  Registration  Certificate  issued 

by Government of Punjab, wherein date of birth of alleged abductee is referred as 

08.09.2006 and as per said  document, she was 12  years and 07 months old  at  the 

time  of  her  alleged  abduction.  I  have  meticulously  perused  the  certificate,  which 

contains  the  date  of  entry  in  the  record  of  Government  of  Punjab  as  15.09.2006, 

which shows that the document has not been prepared later on rather the same was 

prepared in due course of time.  

10. 

Contrary to  the said  document, the alleged abductee has  also  produced the 

Marriage  Registration  Certificate  registered  with  Government  of  Punjab  Pakistan 

Municipal  Committee  Chanab  Nagar,  District  Chaniot,  wherein  the  date  of 

registration  of  marriage  has  been  referred  as  06.04.2019  and  the  certificate  was 

issued  on  27.05.2019,  wherein  the  age  referred  by  Neha  Pervaiz  is  19  years  with 

religion Islam.  

11. 

Keeping  in  view  above  background,  the  primary  question  which  requires 

determination  is  as  to  whether  the  statement  given  by  the  alleged  abductee 

regarding conversion of her faith as well as entering into Nikah is valid on the touch 

stone that at  the time of abduction she was not  minor and she converted her faith 

and could enter into Nikah with her free will. Therefore, the alleged abductee was 

directed to appear before the National Commission on Status of Women, whereby 

Chairperson  of  the  said  Commission  has  recorded  her  statement  and  submitted 

report.  

 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

4 

12. 

The  National  Commission  on  Status  of  Women  was  established  under 

National  Commission  on  Status  of  Women  Act,  2012  and  notified  in  the  Extra 

Ordinary Gazette dated 10.03.2012. The  Chairperson of the Commission has been 

appointed by the Federal Government  in  terms  of section 4 of Chapter-II. Section 

11 of Chapter-III  provides  functions and powers of the Commission,  whereby the 

Commission  is  autonomous  and  independent  regulator,  which  can  examine  any 

policy  and  programs  and  can  review  all  Federal  laws,  rules  and  regulations 

affecting the status and rights of women and can suggest repeal, amendment or new 

legislation in order to eliminate discrimination, safeguard and promote the interest 

of  women  and  achieve  gender  equality  before  the  law  in  accordance  with  the 

Constitution  and  to  fulfill  the  obligations  under  international  covenants  and 

commitments.  Even  otherwise,  the  Commission  can  receive  any  complaint  or 

initiate any inquiry where the rights of women have been in question, therefore, this 

Court directed Chairperson NCSW to record the statement of alleged abductee and 

submit their independent report as to whether the abductee has converted her faith 

with her own free will and also entered into Nikah without any fear and influence. 

The  report  submitted  by  the  Chairperson  of  the  Commission  before  this  Court 

attains qualified status to be believed as true. The concluding portion of the report 

submitted by the Chairperson before this Court is reproduced as under:- 

“On the basis of the interview NCSW has come to the conclusion 
that Neha Pervaiz who comes from an underprivileged Christian 
household was not forced into marriage and has done so of her 
own free will. The reason for her conversion to Islam seems to be 
in  order  to  marry  him.  Whether  she  had  the  capacity  to  enter 
marriage  and  to  convert  has  to  be  determined  by  the  Court  as 
Neha’s correct age is not yet established.” 

13. 

The  above  referred  paragraph  of  the  report  resolves  only  question  of 

conversion  of  faith.  The  other  question  relating  to  child  marriage  is  based  upon 

determination  of  age  and  as  per  report  of  the  Commission  correct  age  of  Neha 

Pervaiz has not yet been established as there were different sets of dates, firstly the 

age in birth registration certificate submitted by mother  is 08.09.2006, secondly the 

age  referred  in  marriage  certificate  is  as  of  19  years  and  thirdly  the  age  has  been 

given by the doctor as 16 years +/-1.96 SC, therefore, in such eventuality the matter 

 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

5 

requires evidence, which can only be settled by the Court of competent jurisdiction, 

where challan has been submitted in terms of sections 4, 5 & 6 of Child Marriage 

Restraint Act, 1929 as stated by the I.O.  

14. 

In order to reach at just conclusion, the relevant provisions of section 4, 5 & 

6 of Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 are reproduced as under:- 

“S. 4. Punishment for male adult above eighteen years of age 
marrying a child.---Whoever, being a male above eighteen years 
of age, contracts child marriage shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
S.  5.  Punishment  for  solemnizing  a  child  marriage.  Whoever 
performs,  conduct  or  directs  any  child  marriage  shall  be 
punishable  with  simple  imprisonment  which  may  extend  to  one 
month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both, unless he proves that he had reason to believe that the 
marriage was not a child marriage.  

S. 6. Punishment for parent or guardian concerned in a child 
marriage.---(1)  Where  a  minor  contracts  a  child  marriage,  any 
person  having  charge  of  the  minor,  whether  as  parent  or 
guardian or in any other capacity, lawful, or unlawful who does 
any act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnized, 
or negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnized, shall be 
punishable  with  simple  imprisonment  which  may  extend  to  one 
month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both: 

Provided 
imprisonment.  

that  no  woman  shall  be  punishable  with 

(2) 

For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  it  shall  be 
presumed, unless and until the contrary is proved, that where a 
minor has contracted a child marriage the person having charge 
of such minor has negligently failed to prevent the marriage from 
being solemnized.” 

15. 

The above referred provisions can be invoked by the Magistrate 1st Class in 

terms  of  section  8  of  the  Act,  therefore,  this  Court  is  of  the  view  that  where  the 

complaint  reflects  the  solemnization  of  marriage  of  minor,  the  police  officials  are 

bound  to  register  criminal  case  in  terms  of  the  said  Act  for  the  purposes  of 

prosecution as the terms “child” and “child marriage” defined in section 2 of the 

said  Act  means  a person,  who, if a male, is under  eighteen years  of  age, and if a 

female,  is  under  sixteen  years  of  age  and  a  marriage  to  which  either  of  the 

contracting parties is  child. Term minor has also  been defined in  section 2 of the 

Act, which means that a person of either sex who is under eighteen years of age.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

6 

16. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  provision  of  The  Muslim  Family  Laws 

Ordinance, 1961, where section 5 provides compulsory registration of the marriage 

by  the  Nikah  Registrar  and  the  Union  Council  shall  grant  licence  to  one  or  more 

persons,  to  be  called  Nikah  Registrar.  Similarly,  it  is  obligation  of  a  person,  who 

solemnizes such marriage to report the same to the Nikah Registrar for the purposes 

of registration and any person , who contravenes the same shall be punishable with 

simple  imprisonment  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  three  months  or  with  fine 

which  may  extend  to  one  thousand  rupees  or  with  both.  The  procedure  for 

appointment of Nikah Registrar has been provided in Rule 7 of The West Pakistan 

Rules under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 and in terms of sub-rules 2 

& 3 of Rule 7, any person who contravenes any of the conditions of such licence, 

the licence shall be revocable and he shall also be charged under the said provisions 

for the purpose of criminal prosecution.  

17. 

Keeping  in  view  above  background  and  the  stance  taken  by  the  alleged 

abductee  before  this  Court,  which  has  also  independently  been  recorded  by  the 

Magistrate U/S 164,Cr.P.C as well as report of National Commission on Status of 

Woman, the instant writ petition stands disposed of as the question of age of minor 

can  only  be  concluded  after  recording  evidence  by  the  competent  Court  and  the 

same cannot be adjudicated upon by this Court in Constitutional jurisdiction.  

18. 

The SHO/respondent No.2 has stated that four accused persons have already 

been  granted  post  arrest  bail  and  the  challan  will  be  submitted  before  the  Trial 

Court as and when prepared.  

19. 

It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  observations  made  hereinabove  are 

tentative  in  nature  and  these  shall  not  be  taken  into  consideration  during  trial  by 

learned Trial Court.  

20. 

Before  parting  with  the  instant  judgment,  this  Court  feels  it  necessary  to 

issue  following  directions  to  the  authorities  concerned  to  curb  the  evil  of  child 

marriages from the society as well as to ensure the protection of rights of minorities 

as guaranteed under the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 :- 

 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

7 

(i)  The  District  Administration/licence  issuing  authority  of 
Nikah Registrar shall enlighten the Nikah Registrars about 
the terms of Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 as well as 
punishment  for  violation  of  terms  of  Child  Marriage 
Restraint Act, 1929. 

(ii) 

(iii) 

If  any  complaint  is  filed  against  the  Nikah  Registrar  in 
terms  of  Child  Marriage  Restraint  Act,  1929,  who 
solemnizes  marriage  for  facilitating  and  registering  any 
marriage of any person against her or his wishes, the Chief 
Commissioner, 
Islamabad,  Deputy  Commissioner, 
Islamabad  and  the  Chairman  Union  Council  shall  revoke 
licence  of  the  Nikah  Registrar  and  submit  a  complaint 
before the competent Court for criminal prosecution of the 
Nikah  Registrar  and  any  other  person,  who  is  involved  in 
such kind of crime.  

Chief 

Islamabad,  Deputy 
Commissioner, 
 The 
Commissioner,  Islamabad  and 
the  Chairman  Union 
Council  are  also  under  legal  obligation  not  to  issue  any 
licence  to  any  such  individual  as  Nikah  Registrar,  who  is 
involved in such type of mal practice and till conclusion of 
the said complaint by the competent Court, his licence shall 
be  suspended  till  final  judgment  of  the  Trial  Court  and  if 
the  Nikah  Registrar  is  civil  servant,  departmental  action 
shall also be taken against him.  

(iv)  All  the  Nikah  Registrars  or  other  persons,  who  solemnize 
marriages  are  under  legal  obligation  to  scrutinize  the 
credentials at the time of Nikah as to whether the marriage 
is solemnized with the free will of the parties and no child 
is exposed to marriage. 

(v)  The  Family  Court  in  terms  of  The  West  Pakistan  Family 
Courts  Act,  1964  are  also  bound  to  give  their  findings  in 
such  type  of  cases  and  if  a  Family  Court  comes  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  marriage  has  been  registered  in 
violation of law, the Family Court shall refer the complaint 
to  the  concerned  Magistrate  to  proceed  in  terms  of  Child 
Marriage  Restraint  Act,  1929  against  the  persons,  who 
have solemnized and registered such marriage.  

(vi)  IG,  Islamabad  Police,  all  the  DPOs  and  the  SHOs  are 
under  obligation  to  protect  rights  of  the  minorities  by  all 
means  and  if  any  complaint  is  filed  by  any  of  the  family 
members or by parents of the minor that he or she has been 
forced to convert his or  her religion, such complaint shall 
be taken up on priority basis and statement of the effectee 
shall  be  recorded  by  the  Magistrate  at  first  instance  as 
such  kind  of  practice  will  bring  bad  name  to  the  state  of 
Pakistan.  

(vii)  Federal  Government 

shall 

fulfill 

its  constitutional 
obligation  to  protect  the  minors  as  well  as  children  in 
terms  of  international  covenants  and  commitments  and  to 
establish  Child  Protection  Bureau  and  Child  Protection 
Homes  to  provide  protection  to  such  kind  of  minors,  who 
are exposed to cruelty, inhuman behavior and infringement 
of  child  rights  by  family  members,  care  givers  or  their 
employers if any. 

 
W.P No.1711/2019. 

8 

(viii) The  NADRA  Authorities  as  well  as  the  Registration 
Authorities  of  the  Government  while  issuing  Marriage 
link  Birth 
Registration  Certificate  are  bound 
Registration  Certificate  to  their  system  in  order  to  avoid 
any  conflicting  age  contents  and 
legal 
complications. 

to  avoid 

to 

(ix)  Every birth entry as well as marriage certificate should be 
recorded in the NADRA registration record and in case of 
conflict  of  date  the  subsequent  document  shall  not  be 
registered unless valid order from the competent Court or 
the authority is not placed before the relevant officer.  

(x)  Mere  submission  of  oral  entries  for  the  purpose  of  age 
should  not  be  accepted  unless  valid  documentary  proof  of 
Union Council of birth certificate is produced.   

21. 

Copy  of  this  judgment  be  transmitted  to  Chief  Commissioner  Islamabad 

being head of District Administration Islamabad as well as IG, Islamabad Police for 

information and compliance.  

       (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
  JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 25th June, 2019. 

Approved for Reporting. 

R.Anjam 

  JUDGE 

  JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
