ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

R.F.A.No.619 of 2021 
Shehnaz Akhtar and another 

VS          

Mst. Zeenat Tariq and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Appellant by: 
Respondents by:  

23.06.2022  
Mr. Asif Naseem Abassi, Advocate  
Mr. Asad Hussain Ghalib, Advocate for 
respondents No.1 & 2. 
Mr.  M.  Muzammil  Hussain  Shah, 
Advocate  for  respondents  No.3  to  7, 
7a(i) to (iv) & 7(c), 
Mr.  Daniyal  Hassan,  Advocate 
respondent No.8.  

for 

______________________________________________________________________  

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

regular first appeal, the appellants, Mst. Shehnaz Akhtar (defendant 

No.1)  and  her  son  Junaid  Tariq  (defendant  No.2),  impugn  the 

judgment  and  preliminary  decree  dated  30.06.2021  passed  by  the 

Court of the learned Civil Judge, West-Islamabad, whereby the suit 

for declaration, partition, rendition of accounts, recovery of mesne 

profits,  and  permanent  injunction  instituted  by  respondents  No.1 

and 2 was partially decreed and a local commission was appointed 

with  the  direction  to  visit  House  No.887,  Sector  I-10/4,  Islamabad 

(“the suit house”) and determine whether the same is partitionable, 

and,  if  so,  what  would  be  the  mode  of  partition.  The  local 

commission  was  also  required  to  determine  the  current  market 

value of the suit house if the same was not partitionable. 

2. 

The  record  shows  that  the  suit  house  was  owned  by  Major 

(Retd.)  Raja  Tariq  Mehmood  Abbasi  (“Major  Abbasi”),  who  died  on 

05.08.1992.  Major  Abbasi  was  survived  by  his  mother,  Mst.  Maroof 

Sultana,  two  widows,  Mst.  Zeenat  Tariq  (plaintiff  No.1)  and  Mst. 

Shehnaz  Akhtar  (defendant  No.1),  two  sons,  Raja  Arsham  Tariq 

(plaintiff  No.2)  and  Junaid  Tariq  (defendant  No.2).  Plaintiff  No.2  is 

the  son  of  plaintiff  No.1  whereas  defendant  No.2  is  the  son  of 

defendant  No.1.  Major  Abbasi  had  pre-deceased  his  mother,  Mst. 

Maroof Sultana, who died on 26.04.2011. 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

3. 

Defendants  No.3  to  7  are  the  legal  heirs  of  Raja  Sajid 

Mehmood  Abbasi 

(late),  who  was  Major  Abbasi’s  brother. 

Defendants  No.7(a)  to  7(c)  are  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  children  i.e., 

the  siblings  of  Major  Abbasi  and  Raja  Sajid  Mehmood  Abbasi.  Mst. 

Maroof  Sultana’s  third  son,  namely  Mehmood  Abbasi  (defendant 

No.7(a)),  had  died  during  the  pendency  of  the  suit  after  which  his 

legal heirs were impleaded as respondents No.7(a)(i) to (v). 

4. 

On  27.08.2016,  the  plaintiffs  (Mst.  Zeenat  Tariq  and  Raja 

Arsham Tariq) instituted a suit for declaration, partition, rendition of 

accounts,  recovery  of  mesne  profits  and  permanent  injunction 

against  defendants  No.1  and  2  and  the  legal  heirs  of  Raja  Sajid 

Mehmood  Abbasi,  who  were  impleaded  as  defendants  No.3  to  7, 

before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad.  In  the  said 

suit, it was pleaded inter alia that possession of the suit house was 

with defendants No.1 and 2, who had rented out a portion of it to the 

legal heirs of Raja Sajid Mehmood Abbasi i.e., defendants No.3 to 7. 

The  plaintiffs  in  the  said  suit  had inter alia  sought  a  declaration  to 

the effect that the plaintiffs and defendants No.1 and 2, as the legal 

heirs  of  Major  Abbasi,  were  entitled  to  inherit  their  respective 

shares in the suit house. The plaintiffs had also sought rendition of 

accounts so that they could be paid their shares out of the rent paid 

by defendants No.3 to 7 to defendants No.1 and 2.  

5. 

The said suit was contested by the defendants by filing written 

statements. From the divergent pleadings of the contesting parties, 

the learned Trial Court framed the following issues:- 

“1.  Whether  the  plaintiffs  are  entitled  to  get  a  decree  for 
declaration, recovery of possession, mesne profit, partition 
of the suit property and permanent injunction as prayed for? 
OPP 

2.  Whether the suit of the plaintiffs is not maintainable in its 

present form? OPD 

3.  Whether the plaintiffs have not come to the court with clean 

hands? OPD 

4.  Whether the suit of the plaintiffs is time barred? OPD 
5.  Whether the suit of the plaintiffs is false, frivolous and 

vexatious hence, liable to be dismissed? OPD 

6.  Whether the suit of the plaintiffs is bad for mis-joinder and 

mon-joinder of parties? OPD 

7.  Relief.” 

6. 

The defendants, before the learned Trial Court, admitted that 

the plaintiffs were amongst the legal heirs of Major Abbasi but took 

 
 
 
 
3 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

the  position  that  the  plaintiffs  had  relinquished  their  shares  in  the 

suit  house  in  lieu  of  a  plot  in  the  Defence  Housing  Authority  which 

was  allotted  to  plaintiff  No.1  on  account  of  being  Major  Abbasi’s 

widow.  In  the  proceedings  before  the  learned  Trial  Court,  the 

defendants  had  not  been  able  to  substantiate  their  claim  as  to  the 

relinquishment  of  the  plaintiffs’  shares  in  the  suit  house.  In  the 

proceedings  before  this  Court,  the  appellants  abandoned  their 

claim as to such relinquishment.  

7. 

On  30.06.2021,  the  learned  Trial  Court  issued  a  preliminary 

decree to  the effect that the children of Mst. Maroof Sultana’s pre-

deceased sons in addition to her  third son and  two daughters who 

had  outlived  her,  to  be  her  legal  heirs  with  the  right  to  inherit  her 

1/6th share in the suit house. It was also declared that the legal heirs 

of  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana  are  entitled  to  be  given  possession  of  their 

respective  shares  in the  suit  house  through  partition.  The children 

of  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  predeceased  sons  had  been  granted  the 

right to inherit from her 1/6th share in the suit house in accordance 

with Section 4 of the Muslim Family Law Ordinance, 1961 (“MFLO”). 

8. 

The  learned  Trial  Court  also  appointed  a  local  commission 

with  the  direction  to  visit  the  suit  house  and  submit  a  report  on 

whether the suit house was partitionable and if so, what was to be 

the  mode  of  partition.  The  local  commission  was  also  directed  to 

determine  the  current  market  value  of  the  suit  house  if  the  same 

was  not  partitionable.  The  said  judgment  and  preliminary  decree 

has been assailed by the appellants in the instant appeal.  

9. 

Along  with  the 

instant  appeal,  the  appellants  filed  an 

application  for  the  suspension  of  the  preliminary  decree  dated 

30.06.2021. Vide interim order dated 21.10.2021, this Court did not 

interfere with the directions issued by the learned Trial Court to the 

local  commission,  but  restrained  the  learned  Trial  Court  from 

passing the final decree. 

10.  On  10.05.2022,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  and  2 

informed the Court that proceedings could not be conducted by the 

local  commission  since  the  record  of  this  case  had  been 

requisitioned  by  this  Court.  Since  this  Court  had  not  passed  any 

 
 
 
4 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

order requisitioning the record, the record was remitted back to the 

learned Trial Court vide order dated 10.05.2022.  

11.  Vide  order  dated  17.03.2022,  this  Court  proceeded  ex-parte 

against  respondents  No.3  to  7  since  Office  had  reported  that  the 

said  respondents  had  been  served  yet  they  did  not  tender 

appearance  either  personally  or  through  counsel.  As  regards 

respondent  No.7(a)(i)  to  (v),  7(b)  and  7(c),  this  Court  vide  order 

dated  17.03.2022  directed  notices  to  be  issued  to  them  through 

courier  as  well  as  registered  A.D.  Despite  the  issuance  of  such 

notices, no one appeared for the said respondents. Therefore, vide 

order dated 10.05.2022, this Court directed notices to be issued to 

the  said  respondents  through  publication  in  the  “Daily Jang.”  The 

publication appeared in the newspaper was made and its copy has 

been brought on the record. Since respondents No.7(a)(v) and 7(b) 

did  not  appear  after  the  said  publication,  they  are  proceeded 

against ex-parte.  

12.  Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants,  after  narrating  the  facts 

leading to the filing of the instant appeal, submitted that the learned 

trial Court has correctly given the benefit of Section 4 of the MFLO 

to the children of Mst. Maroof Sultana’s two pre-deceased sons but 

such  benefit  should  also  have  been  given  to  all  the  widows  of  the 

pre-deceased  sons;  that  the  two  widows  of  Major  Abbasi  (i.e., 

appellant  No.1  and  respondent  No.1)  as  well  as  the  widow  of  Raja 

Sajid  Mehmood  Abbasi  should  have  been  given  inheritance  rights 

out  of  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  1/6th  share  in  the  suit  house;  that 

appellant  No.1,  being  the  widow  of  Major  Abbasi,  was  seeking 

inheritance  rights  in  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  1/6th  share  in  the  suit 

house, which she inherited from Major Abbasi and not in any other 

property  of  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana;  that  Section  4  of  the  MFLO  ought 

not  to  be  literally  interpreted  so  as  to  confine  the  benefit  of 

inheritance to the sons and daughters of the pre-deceased child of 

the  propositus;  and  that  in  the  case  of  Mian  Mazhar  Ali  VS  Tahir 

Sarfraz  (PLD  2011  Lahore  23),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  had 

interpreted Section 4 of the MFLO so as to give inheritance rights to 

the  widower  of  the  predeceased  daughter  to  the  propositus. 

Learned counsel for the appellants prayed for the instant appeal to 

 
 
 
5 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

be  allowed  and  for  the  matter  to  be  remanded  to  the  learned  Trial 

Court  with  the  direction  to  decide  the  matter  after  framing  new 

issues.  

13.  On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents No.1 and 

2  submitted  that  the  said  respondents  filed  the  suit  since  the 

appellants had deprived them of their due shares in the suit house; 

that under Section 4 of the MFLO, only orphaned grandchildren had 

been  granted  the  right  to  inherit  from  their  grandparents;  that 

Section 4 of the MFLO does not extend such benefit to the widow of 

a  person  who  pre-deceases  his  /  her  parents;  that  respondents 

No.1  and  2  acknowledge  the  fact  that  Major  Abbasi’s  mother,  Mst. 

Maroof Sultana, inherited 1/6th share in the suit house and upon her 

demise,  the  children  of  her  pre-deceased  sons  would  inherit  her 

estate  along  with  her  other  legal  heirs;  that  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s 

two  sons,  namely  Major  Abbasi  and  Raja  Sajid  Mehmood  Abbasi, 

had  pre-deceased  her  and  upon  her  demise,  her  estate  would 

devolve  on  the  children  of  her  pre-deceased  sons  but  not  their 

widows;  that  respondent  No.1  /  plaintiff  No.1  (Mst.  Zeenat  Tariq) 

acknowledges  that  she  has  no  right  of  inheritance  in  the  estate  of 

her mother-in-law, Mst. Maroof Sultana; and that the instant appeal 

is vexatious and the same is liable to be dismissed with costs.  

14. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. The facts leading to the filing of the instant appeal have 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 9 above and need 

not be recapitulated. 

15.  Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  and  2  raised  an 

objection to the maintainability of the instant appeal on  the ground 

that  the  same  was  time  barred  by  fifteen  days.  The  impugned 

preliminary decree was passed on 30.06.2021. The certified copy of 

the  said  preliminary  decree  was  applied  for  by  the  appellants  and 

the same was prepared on the same day i.e., 11.10.2021. It was not 

until 15.10.2021 that the instant appeal was filed. The appellants, in 

their  application  for  condonation  of  delay,  have  taken  the  ground 

that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the appellants should be given 

 
 
 
6 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

benefit under Section 12 of the Limitation Act, 1908 ("the 1908 Act") 

and the delay in filing of the appeal ought to be condoned.  

16.  Due  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic  coupled  with  the  lockdown 

policy  of  the  Federal  Government,  this  Court,  vide  office  order 

No.181/IHC/2020 dated 24.03.2020, directed that owing to the then 

prevailing  emergency  situation  in  the  country,  the  period  of 

limitation prescribed by laws for filing appeals / petitions etc. in this 

Court as well as in the Civil and District Courts, Islamabad shall be 

deemed  to  be  condoned  and  the  Courts  shall  be  presumed  to  be 

closed  during  the  period  in  the  public  interest,  within  the  meaning 

of  Section  4  of  the  1908  Act.  Since  the  Federal  Government  lifted 

certain  restrictions  earlier  imposed  by  it,  this  Court  directed  that 

the  said  office  order  dated  24.03.2020  shall  cease  to  have  effect 

from 30.09.2021 and the period from 24.03.2020 to 30.09.2021 shall 

be excluded for the purpose of computing the limitation in terms of 

Section 12 of the 1908 Act for filing of any suit, petition and appeal. 

Since  the  period  between  24.03.2020  and  30.09.2021  is  to  be 

excluded  from  the  limitation  period  for filing  a  regular first appeal, 

and  since  the  office  order  dated  24.03.2020  was  recalled  vide 

notification dated 30.09.2021, the delay with which this appeal was 

filed 

is 

liable  to  be  condoned.  Hence,  the  application 

for 

condonation of delay  is  allowed.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  decide the 

appeal on merits.  

17.  Allotment letter dated 10.11.1976 (Exh.D1) shows that the suit 

house  had  been  allotted  to  Major  Abbasi  whereas  the  family 

registration  certificate  (Exh.P2)  shows  that  Major  Abbasi  was 

survived  by  his  mother,  two  widows  and  two  sons.  Since  Major 

Abbasi’s  mother,  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana,  had  1/6th  share  in  the 

inheritance  from  her  son,  she  became  owner  of  1/6th  share  in  the 

suit house.  

18.  Two of Mst.  Maroof Sultana’s sons, namely Major Abbasi and 

Raja  Sajid  Mehmood  Abbasi,  had  pre-deceased  her.  Major  Abbasi 

had  died  on  05.08.1992  and  his  brother  Raja  Sajid  Mehmood  had 

died  on  30.09.2010,  whereas  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana  died  on 

26.04.2011. 

 
 
 
7 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

19.  As  mentioned  above  vide  judgment  and  preliminary  decree 

dated  30.06.2021,  the  learned  Trial  Court  declared  inter alia  that 

the  children  of  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  two  pre-deceased  sons  in 

addition to Mst. Maroof Sultana’s third son namely, Babar Mehmood 

Abbasi / defendant No.7(a) and two daughters namely, Mst. Khalida 

Fiaz  /  defendant  No.7(b)  and  Mst.  Abida  Zaib  /  defendant  No.7(c) 

would  inherit  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  1/6th  share  in  the  suit  house. 

The  children  of  Mst.  Maroof  Sultana’s  two  pre-deceased  sons  had 

been given the benefit under Section 4 of the MFLO by the learned 

Trial Court. 

20. 

 The  appellants’  case  is  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  ought  to 

have given  the  two  widows  of  Major  Abbasi  and  the  widow  of  Raja 

Sajid  Mehmood  Abbasi  the  benefit  to  inherit  from  Mst.  Maroof 

Sultana’s 1/6th share in the suit house.   

21.  The  vital  question  that  needs  to  be  answered  is  whether  the 

widows  of  the  pre-deceased  children  of  the  propositus  could  be 

extended  benefit  under  Section  4  of  the  MFLO  by  granting  them 

rights  of  inheritance  from  the  estate  of  the  parents  of  their  pre-

deceased spouses.  

22.  Section 4 of the MFLO is reproduced herein below:- 

“4.  Succession.--- In the event of death of any son or daughter of 
the propositus before the opening of succession, the children of 
such son or daughter, if any, living at the time the succession 
opens, shall per stripes receive a share equivalent to the share 
which such son or daughter, as the case may be would have 
received, if alive.” 
(Emphasis added)  

23.  Although  the  Hon'ble  Federal  Shariat  Court  in  the  case  of 

Allah  Rakha  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2000  FSC  1)  had 

declared  Section 4  of  the  MFLO  to be  repugnant to the  injunctions 

of  Islam  and  a  direction  had  been  issued  to  the  President  of 

Pakistan  to  take  steps  to  amend  the  law  so  as  to  bring  the  said 

provision  in  conformity  with  the  injunctions  of  Islam,  the  said 

judgment is yet to take effect. This is because under the proviso to 

Article  203D(2)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  a  decision  of  a  Federal 

Shariat  Court  declaring  a  law  or  any  provision  thereof  to  be 

repugnant to the injunctions of Islam does not take effect before the 

disposal of an appeal preferred before the  Hon'ble  Supreme Court 

 
 
 
 
8 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

against the decision. For the purposes of clarity, Article 203D(2) of 

the Constitution is reproduced herein below:- 

“(2)  If the Court decides that any law or provision of law is 
repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam, it shall set out in its decision -
- 
(a)  the reason for its holding that opinion; and 
(b)  the extent to which such law or provision is so repugnant; 
and specify the day on which the decision shall take effect: 
Provided that no such decision shall be deemed to take effect 
before  the  expiration  of  the  period  within  which  an  appeal 
therefrom may be preferred to the Supreme Court or, where an 
appeal has been so preferred, before the disposal of such appeal.” 
(Emphasis added)  

24.  Learned counsel for the contesting parties were in unison on 

their  submission  that  the  appeal  preferred  against  the  decision  of 

the Federal Shariat Court in the case of Allah Rakah VS Federation 

of Pakistan (supra) has till date not been disposed of by the Hon'ble 

Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court. Hence, it would be 

safe  to  hold  that  in  the  present  circumstances  Section  4  of  the 

MFLO, which has till date not been amended by the legislature, is to 

be enforced.  

25.  Had the legislature intended for benefit under Section 4 of the 

MFLO  not  to  be  confined  to  the  children  /  offspring  of  the  pre-

deceased  children  of  the  propositus  but  also  to  the  widow  or  any 

other  legal  heir  of  such  pre-deceased  children,  the  legislature 

would  have  employed  the  words  “legal  heirs  of  such  son  or 

daughter”  instead  of “the children of such son or daughter”  in  the 

said Section. Since Section 4 of the MFLO creates an exception by 

altering  the  Islamic  laws  of  inheritance  applicable  to  orphaned 

grandchildren, the same is to be construed strictly. The meaning of 

the  word  “children”  cannot  be  stretched  to  include  “widows”  or 

“any other legal heir” of the pre-deceased child of the propositus no 

matter  which  canon  of  statutory 

interpretation 

is  adopted. 

Therefore,  I  find  the  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellants that under Section 4 of the MFLO, the children (i.e., sons 

and daughters only) in addition to the widows or any other legal heir 

of  a  predeceased  child  of  the  propositus  would  also  inherit,  to  be 

bereft  of  substance.  In  holding  so,  reliance  is  placed  on  the 

following case law:-  

 
 
 
 
 
9 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

(i) 

In the case of Saifur Rehman VS Sher Muhammad (2007 

SCMR  387),  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court,  after  making 

reference  to  Section  4  of  the  MFLO,  held  that  a 

daughter-in-law  was  not  entitled  to  any  share  from  the 

property  left  by  her  father-in-law  as  her  husband  had 

died before the death of her father-in-law.  

(ii) 

In the case of Maqbool Begum VS Taj Begum (PLD 1973 

Note 128), the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh held that the 

rule of inheritance of Muslim Personal Law as altered by 

Section 4 of the MFLO makes only the children of a pre-

deceased  son  or  daughter  of  the  propositus  entitled  to 

receive  per  stripes  a  share  equivalent  to  the  share 

which  such pre-deceased  son or  daughter,  as  the case 

may  be,  would  have  received  if  alive.  The  widow  or  the 

husband of a pre-deceased son or daughter, as the case 

may  be,  does  not  come  within  the  purview  of  Section  4 

of the MFLO.  

(iii) 

In  the case  of  Ghulam  Haider  VS  Nizam  Khatoon  (2002 

YLR  3245),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  held  as 

follows:- 

“6. The precise question which falls for determination 
in this civil revision is whether upon the text of section 
4, a widow of predeceased son could also inherit 
alongwith  children  of  the  pre-deceased  son.  This 
matter  was  first  considered  in  Kamal  Khan  alias 
Kamala v. Mst. Zainab (PLD 1983 Lah. 546), wherein it 
was  held  that  it  is  only  the  children  of  the 
pre-deceased,  son  or  predeceased  daughter  of 
propositus who would inherit in accordance with the 
Muslim Law sharer and that the widow of predeceased 
son  would  be  excluded  on  the  strength  of  the 
provisions of section 4 (ibid). The remaining share of 
pre-deceased son would be distributed amongst the 
residuaries. The judgment in the case of Kamal Khan 
(Supra) was challenged in the Supreme Court wherein, 
it was ruled in case titled Mst. Zainab v. Kamal Khan 
(PLD 1990 SC 1051) that the true interpretation of 
section 4 of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 
would be to entitle the children of the predeceased son 
or daughter to claim inheritance of the propositus and 
that the widow of the predeceased son is not so 
entitled…” 

(iv) 

In the case of Muhammad Hanif VS Muhammad Ibrahim 

(2005  MLD  1), 

the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court 

 
 
 
 
10 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

interpreted  Section  4  of  the  MFLO  in  the  following 

terms:- 

“This section relates to and deals with the right of 
inheritance of the issues of the predeceased son and 
daughter. It provides that if a person dies and leaves 
behind issues of such of his sons or daughters who 
were dead in his life time, the issues of the deceased 
sons and daughters will be entitled to inherit the 
shares that their father or the mother would have 
inherited had they been alive at the time of death of 
that  person.  The  object  and  rationale  behind  this 
provision  is  to  ameliorate  the  distress  of  those 
unfortunate children whose father and mother are 
snatched  away  by  death  in  the  life  time  of  their 
grandfather. Such orphan grandchildren are sought to 
be compensated in such a way by giving the share in 
inheritance to which their father or the mother would 
have been entitled. The express and unambiguous 
phraseology and language of the provisions of law 
leaves no obscurity or doubt that the “children of such 
son” are only entitled to inherit and receive share 
which expression does not possibly within its ambit 
include the widow “of such son”.”  

(v) 

In  the  case  of  Qutab-ud-Din  VS  Zubaida Khatoon  (2009 

CLC  1273),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  upheld  the 

preliminary  and  final  decrees  passed  by  the  learned 

Trial Court whereby benefit of inheritance under Section 

4  of  the  MFLO  was  given  to  the  children  of  the  pre-

deceased son of the propositus but  not to the widow  of 

the pre-deceased son. 

(vi) 

In the case of Shabi-ul-Hassan Khusro VS Asad Mustafa 

(2016  MLD  266),  the  Hon'ble  High  Court  of  Sindh 

explained  the  scope  of  Section  4  of  the  MFLO  in  the 

following terms:- 

“As far as provisions of Section 4 of Muslim Family 
Laws Ordinance, 1961 is concerned, it is quite clear 
that it relates to a specific category of class of legal 
heirs i.e. sons and daughters of deceased which is not 
the case here. Since the plaintiff claims to be son of 
predeceased  sister  of  deceased  and  quite  fairly 
learned Counsel submits that with all due diligence 
that he made the provisions of Section 4 of the Muslim 
Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 could not be applied. 
However considering another limb of the plaintiff’s 
case as to whether any analogy of such principle of 
Section 4 of Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 
could be applied, I am afraid that it is the wisdom of the 
legislature, who incorporated the predeceased sons 
and daughter. Had the words of legal heirs been 

 
 
 
 
11 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

incorporated such as “predeceased legal heirs” than 
the plaintiff’s case could be looked into, however the 
plaintiff’s case is confined to such that relates to the 
sons and daughters of predeceased words “sons and 
daughters” is used in section ibid and its horizon 
cannot be extended to predeceased sisters.” 

(vii) 

In  the  case  of  Hassan  Aziz  VS  Meraj-ud-Din  (2021  CLC 

1821),  this  Court,  after  referring  to  several  judicial 

precedents  including  the  case  of  Allah  Rakha  VS 

Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2000  FSC  1),  held  as 

follows:- 

“7.   The outcome of above discussion is that under the 
Islamic Law of Inheritance, there is no concept of 
grandchildren inheriting from grandfather and section 
4 ibid is an exception to the said principle. The bare 
reading of section 4 ibid shows that only the sons and 
daughters  (children  of  predeceased  sons  and 
daughters)  shall  inherit  from  grandfather  / 
grandmother as per stripes i.e. the share which their 
father or mother was entitled to inherit.” 

26.  Now,  as  mentioned  above,  after  the  preliminary  decree  was 

passed  by  the  learned  Trial  Court,  the  local  commission  could  not 

comply with the directions issued by the learned  Trial Court due to 

the  record  of  the  case  having  been  sent  to  this  Court.  I  have gone 

through the order sheet and have confirmed that no order had been 

passed  by  this  Court  for  requisitioning  the  record  of  the  learned 

Trial Court.  Where  the record is requisitioned by the High Court, it 

operates  as  a  stay  of  further  proceedings  before  the  learned  Trial 

Court and/or the learned Executing Court. In the case at hand, only 

a  preliminary  decree  was  passed.  This  implies  that  the  suit  is  still 

pending  and  the  commission 

is  supposed  to  discharge 

its 

obligations in accordance with the directions issued by the learned 

Trial  Court  in  the  preliminary  decree.  Due  to  the  requisitioning  of 

the  record,  the  commission  could  not  take  further  steps  in 

compliance  with  the  directions  issued  by  the  learned  Trial  Court. 

The  requisitioning  of  the  record  without  a  specific  order  by  this 

Court for doing so unnecessarily protracted the proceedings before 

the  learned  Trial  Court.  Therefore,  Office  is  directed  not  to 

requisition records of cases pending before the learned Trial Court 

where  no  orders  are  passed  by  the  Appellate  Court  for  such  a 

requisition.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

R.F.A.No.619/2021   

27. 

In the prayer-clause of the instant appeal, the appellants have 

sought the setting-aside of the impugned judgment and preliminary 

decree and for the matter to be remanded to the learned Trial Court 

with  the  direction  to  decide  the  matter  afresh  after  framing  new 

issues. The desire of the appellants for fresh issues to be framed by 

the learned Trial Court is indicative of their intention to protract the 

litigation  with  respondents  No.1  and  2  and  also  to  deprive  the 

respondents  of  possession  of  their  respective  shares  in  the  suit 

house. It is the obligation of the Court to impose exemplary costs on 

parties  who  deprive  persons  of  their  due  rights  of  inheritance  in 

property.  Inheritance,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  heir,  is  not  a 

matter of need but of right. It is an admitted position that ever since 

the demise  of  Major Abbasi,  respondent  No.1  and  2  have  not been 

given  possession  of  any  portion  in  the  suit  house.  This  deprivation 

caused  the  respondents  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  the  learned 

Civil Court, and have been embroiled in the agony of litigation over 

the  past  six  years.  Therefore,  this  appeal  is  dismissed  with  costs 

throughout  payable  to  respondent  No.2.  Additionally  costs  of 

Rs.1,00,000/-  is  imposed  on  each  of  the  appellants  in  terms  of 

Section  35(1)(iii) C.P.C.  as  amended  by  the Costs  of Litigation Act, 

2017.  The  said  costs  shall  be  deposited  by  the  appellants  in  the 

National  Treasury  and  the  deposit  receipt  submitted  to  the 

Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this Court within a period of thirty 

days.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON 26/07/2022 

Qamar Khan* 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

    (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
