ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Crl.  Appeal  No.123-2019 
Muhammad  Javed 
VS
The  State  and  others. 

Appellant  by: 

Raja Mazhar  Hussain  Bhatti,  Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

for 

Iqbal, 

Qasim 

Advocate 

Mr. 
respondents. 
Syed  Shahbaz  Shah,  State  Counsel. 
Nawaz,  S.I 
Accused  persons  namely  Nasir  Mehmood, 
Nasira  Masud,  Masud  Khan  and  Mst. 
Nazia  are  present. 

Date  of Decision: 

23.06.2022. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  This  appeal  has  been  filed  under 

Section  417  Cr.P.C  against 

the  order  dated  12.04.2019,  passed  by  learned 

Sessions  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby 

respondents  No.2  to  6  were 

acquitted 

in  terms  of  Section  265-K  Cr.P.C. 

in  case  F.I.R  No.255  dated 

16.05.2013,  under  Sections  302,  376,  380,  411,  201/34  PPC,  P.S  Margalla, 

Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred 

in  the  instant  appeal  are  that  the  appellant  has 

lodged  the  F.I.R with  the  allegation  that  he  was  residing  with  his  brother  in 

Mouza  Bangial, Islamabad,  however,  on  15.05.2013 at  about  09:00 pm,  he  was 

present 

in  his  house,  when  his  brother  Aurangzeb 

(deceased) 

received  a 

telephonic  call  and  then  left  the  house  by  saying  that  he  had  to  rent  out  the 

village  house,  so  he  was  going  out  for  that  purpose  on  vehicle  bearing 

registration  No.  MZ-603-XLI,  Corolla,  white  colour.  However,  when  he  did 

not  return  home  till  late  night  and  his  mobile  phone  was  also  switched  of 

and  could  not  be  contacted,  whereafter  he  got  registered 

the  complaint 

regarding  missing  of his  brother  in the  Police  Station,  Koral.  However,  on  the 

next  morning  at  about  04:00 a.m,  the  complainant  has  received  information 

Crl.  Appeal  No.123-2019 

Page  I  2 

from  the  Police Station,  Koral about  the  dead  body  of the  deceased  lying  in 

the  back  seat  of  the  vehicle  bearing  No.  MZ-603 and  the  said  vehicle  was 

parked 

in  front  of  PIMS  Hospital,  after  receiving 

this 

information, 

I 

complainant  alongwith  his  brother  Muhammad  Saghir  as  well  as  other 

relatives  reached  at  PIMS  Hospital,  near  Ibn-e-Sina  Road,  they  saw  dead 

body  of  the  deceased  brother  lying  in  the  back  seat  of  the  vehicle  bearing 

registration  No.MZ-603, white  colour Corolla, where  his brother  was done  to 

death  with  firearm,  whose  purse,  cash amount,  passport  and  driving  license 

etc. were  also  missing.  Apart  from  that,  his  mobile  phone,  license  of pistol 

9MM were  also  taken  away  by  the  accused  persons.  During  the  course  of 

initial  investigation,  the  complainant  has  nominated  Zaheer  Akhtar  as  co- 

accused through  supplementary  statement  on suspicion,  who fled away with 

family from  his  house  and  remained  fugitive  for  five and  half  years  till his 

arrest on 25.10.2018, who made  disclosure for his involvement  in the crime of 

murder  of Aurangzeb  (deceased)  and  got  recovered  the  weapon  of offence 

and  disclosed  the  involvement  of his  ex-wife Nazia  Bibi and  his  brother  in 

laws,  the  present  respondents,  who  have  been  challaned  by  the  police  in 

terms  of Section 173 Cr.P.C. The trial Court  has framed  the charge  and  even 

recorded  the evidence  of Nimra  Zaheer, PW-1, the real daughter  of principal 

offender  Zaheer  Akhtar,  but  later  on,  all  the  accused  were  acquitted  by  the 

trial Court  in terms of Section 265-K Cr.P.C., hence this appeal. 

3. 

Learned  counsel for the appellant  contends  that  the trial Court  has not 

recorded  the  complete  evidence  in  this  case, whereby  other  witnesses  have 

yet  to prove  the case in favour  of prosecution,  but  no such  opportunity  was 

extended;  that  the  trial  Court  has  not  followed  the  legal  spirit  of law  and 

decided  the case in haste,  despite  the availability  of overwhelming  evidence; 

that  the  impugned  order  is based  upon  misreading  and  non-reading  of the 

evidence, therefore,  same is liable to be set-aside. 

Crl. Appeal No.123-2019 

Page  I  3 

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondents informed the Court that 

the principal accused Zaheer  Akhtar had  died  during  the  pendency  of the 

appeal and as such the criminal proceedings to the extent of said respondent 

stand  abated,  which  factum  has  been verified by  the  Investigation Officer 

through  his report  submitted  before this Court  today  i.e. 23.06.2022 on the 

direction of this  Court  vide  order  dated  15.06.2022. Copy  of the  same has 

been placed on record. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  remaining  respondents  contends  that 

respondents present before this Court have been involved in the instant case 

to the extent of conspiracy and  no direct evidence is available on record to 

connect the respondents  with  the crime, which made basis of acquittal and 

no  probability  of  conviction  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  prosecution, 

therefore, the  trial Court  has  rightly acquitted  the respondents  in  terms of 

Section 265-K Cr.P.C. 

6. 

7. 

Arguments heard and record perused. 

Perusal of record  reveals that  the appellant/ complainant has lodged 

the criminal case F.I.R No.255 dated 16.05.2013, under Sections 302, 376, 380, 

411, 201/34 PPC, P.S Margalla, Islamabad with the allegation that his brother 

Aurangzeb has  left the  house  on  vehicle bearing  registration  No. MZ-603, 

Corolla white colour after receiving the call on his mobile at about 09:00pm, 

but  he  did  not  came  back,  due  to  which  the  complainant/ appellant  has 

lodged  the complaint in the Police Station Koral for missing of his brother, 

but  later  on,  informed  the  complainant  by  Police Station  Koral that  dead 

body of his brother was lying in the back seat of vehicle bearing registration 

No. MZ-603, Corolla in front of PIMS Hospital near lbn-e-Sina  Road. 

8. 

The  police  has  investigated  the  crime  after  post-mortem  of  the 

deceased, whereby case was registered against unknown  persons  and  later 

on Zaheer Akhtar was nominated by the complainant/ appellant  as accused 

Crl.  Appeal  No.123-2019 

Page  I  4 

in  this  case,  who  is Khala  Zaad  bhai/ cousin  of the  complainant,  though  the 

said  accused  Zaheer  Akhtar  was  present  at  PIMS  Hospital  and  also 

participated  in  the  funeral  ceremony  of the  Aurangzeb  (deceased),  but  later 

on, fled away  with family from his house, thereafter  he has been challaned  in 

terms  of 512 Cr.P.C. and  remained  fugitive  for five and  half years.  The said 

Zaheer  Akhtar  was  taken  into custody  on 25.10.2018 by Ghulam  Mustafa, S.I 

and  during  the  course  of  physical  remand,  he  made  a  disclosure  that  he 

committed  the murder  of Aurangzeb  (deceased) with  the help  of his ex-wife 

Nazia  Bibi and  Shahid  Pervez.  In the  police report,  1.0 has  referred  that  the 

alleged  murder  took  place  at  House  No.77, Street  No.OS  Ghouri  Town,  at 

first floor of rented  premises  and  all the present  respondents  are  involved  in 

the  conspiracy  of  murder  of  the  Aurangzeb 

(deceased),  who  after 

commission  of  murder  of  offence  by  principal  offender  Zaheer  Akhtar, 

transported  the dead  body  on his vehicle and  left the same  in front  of PIMS 

Hospital. 

9. 

During  the  course  of  investigation,  alleged  weapon  of  offence  i.e. 

pistol  .30  bore  alongwith  live  bullets  were  recovered  on  the  pointation  of 

accused  Zaheer  Akhtar  on 07.11.2018. The challan  has been submitted  in the 

Court  and  trial  Court  after  supplying  the  copies  to the  accused,  framed  the 

charge on 15.04.2019 only against  Zaheer Akhtar  in terms of Section 302 PPC, 

rest  of the  accused  persons  were  not  charged,  thereafter  evidence  of Nimra 

Zaheer, PW-1, daughter  of Zaheer Akhtar  (principal accused) was recorded. 

10.  While hearing  this case, both  the parties  have informed  the Court  that 

principal  offender  Zaheer  Akhtar  had  died  during  the  pendency  of the  trial 

on 19.09.2019, therefore,  1.0 was directed  to verify the credentials  of the said 

accused,  whereafter  1.0 has  submitted  .the report  today  in  the  Court  duly 

verified  from  relevant  quarters  alongwith  death  certificate of Union  Council 

Kirpa and  death  certificate duly  registered  by the Government  of Pakistan  on 

Crl. Appeal  No.123-2019 

Page  I  5 

12.11.2019, which confirms that  the deceased was murdered  on  19.09.2019, 

therefore, the proceedings against the said acquitted accused Zaheer Akhtar 

stand abated. 

11.  Now  adverting  towards  the  role  of  other  accused, which  has  been 

referred  in  the  challan  under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. to  the  extent  of  Salah 

Mashwara.  We have scanned the record as well as police report with the able 

assistance of learned counsel for the parties, it reveals that the Zaheer Akhtar 

(deceased) had  suspicion and  doubt  qua  the character of his ex-wife Nazia 

Bibi having  illicit relationship  with  the  Aurangzeb  (deceased) and  on  this 

score, he was done to death allegedly in the house of Zaheer Akhtar accused 

(deceased), situated  at  Ghouri Town, rented  out  premises, but  surprisingly 

this  portion  of  the  report  is  not  supported  with  any  of  the  statement  of 

witnesses qua  motive, who can narrate such factum in terms of Section 161 

Cr.P.C.  in  favour  of  prosecution,  hence  there  is  no  evidence  of  motive 

recorded by the I.O in the police challan. 

12. 

Similarly the main offender Zaheer Akhtar remained fugitive for five 

and half years,  who was arrested by the police on 25.10.2018, who allegedly 

made a disclosure that he committed the murder of Aurangzeb at last rented 

out premises, but the I.O has not recorded the statement of alleged owner of 

subject premises to justify this stance that  principal accused or his  ex-wife 

have  never  remained  tenant  in  the  subject  premises,  therefore,  such 

disclosure has no meaning in faovur of prosecution. 

13.  We  have  also  noticed  that  after  five  and  half  years,  nothing 

incriminating  was  recovered  to  connect  any  of  the  accused  with  the 

commission of offence of murder  as disclosed by the accused Zaheer Akhtar 

(deceased) before the police. On the other hand, I.O was unable to place on 

record the finger prints or DNA recovered from the vehicle from where dead 

body  of deceased was  recovered near  PIMS Hospital. The entire  record  is 

Crl. Appeal  No.123-2019 

Page  I  6 

silent qua any such report,  though fingerprints were taken from the vehicle 

alongwith  ladies  shaluiar,  but  same  was  not  verified,  even  no  CDR was 

collected  by  the  1.0  to  demonstrate  that  Aurangzeb  (deceased)  was  at 

particular place in connection with  the principal accused Zaheer Akhtar or 

Nazia  Bibi, though  one  pistol  and  a  license of Aurangzeb  (deceased) was 

recovered on  the pointation  of accused Zaheer Akhtar (deceased) from the 

native  village,  which  is  the  only  incriminating  evidence  to  connect  the 

principal  accused  with  the  hideous  crime  of  murder  of  Aurangzeb 

(deceased), but  it lost the legal value, when  no fire empty was available to 

match with the recovered gun. 

14.  Now  adverting  towards  the  statement  of Nimra  Zaheer,  PW-1, the 

real daughter  of Zaheer Akhtar accused under  Section 161  Cr.P.C recorded 

by the Investigation Officer, which disclosed the involvement of his father in 

the murder  of Aurangzeb, but surprisingly young lady while recording her 

testimony as PW-1, has denied the entire incident, rather became hostile and 

nothing  fruitful  has  been  achieved  on  record.  It  is  also  known  fact  that 

ex-wife of the accused Zaheer Akhtar was divorced by the said accused after 

the alleged occurrence. However, at this stage, when  the principal offender 

Zaheer  Akhtar  was  murdered  during  the  pendency  of  the  matter,  the 

principal charge against the said accused stand  abated due  to his death and 

only  case  left  to  the  extent  of  conspiracy  and  abatement  of  present 

respondents  in  helping  out  the  principal offender, though  there  is  neither 

direct evidence available on record nor 1.0 has collected any evidence, even 

the same has not been mentioned  in final report  under  Section 173  Cr.P.C. 

Similarly not a single allegation in the statement recorded under Section 161 

Cr.P.C  has  been  leveled  against  any  of  the  accused  person  regarding 

involvement in the instant case. 

Crl. Appeal  No.123-2019 

Page  I  7 

15. 

In  such  scenario,  learned  Trial  Court  has  rightly  issued  the  notice 

under Section 265-K Cr.P.C, which provision is meant to cater any situation, 

where the charge against the accused has been declared groundless or case of 

no  evidence  or  where  probability  of conviction is  not  visible  in  terms  of 

Section 265-K Cr.P.C. as  held  that  1998 SCMR 1840  (Zahoor-Ud-Din  VS 

Khushi  Muhammad  and  06  others),  PLD  2009 SC 102  (Ajmeel  Khan  VS 

Abdur  Rahim  and  others),  PLD  2004 SC 364 (Rasool  Khan  and  others  VS 

Haji Banaras Khan and others). 

16. 

In order to exercise the powers by the trial Court, there is no need to 

file  separate  application,  rather  the  Court  can  consider  the  special  and 

peculiar circumstances of the case that charge is groundless or no probability 

of  conviction  is  available.  Even  there  is  no  bar  upon  the  trial  Court  to 

exercise  such  powers  of  suo-moto  as  held  in  2017  PCrlTN  162  [Lahore 

(Multan  Bench)l  (Muhammad  Asif  Khan  VS  Aftab  Ahmed,  Regional 

Manager (Retd.) National Bank  of Pakistan  and another) as such trial Court 

has exercised its  powers  in  terms  of Section 265-K Cr.P.C after framing of 

charge  and  even  after  recording  of  statement  of  star  witness  i.e.  Nimra 

Zaheer,  PW-1,  the  real  daughter  of  principal  offender  Zaheer  Akhtar 

(deceased), who  has  initially  recorded  her  statement  under  Section 161 

Cr.P.C. being witness of the murder, but later on resiled from her statement, 

all these facts clearly conclude that  there  was no  probability of conviction 

and  trial  Court  has  rightly  acquitted  the  respondents  from  the  charge, 

though the order passed by the trial Court is not up to the standard  required 

in such type of cases. 

17. 

It is also settled law that privacy and secrecy of an agreement, might 

be  oral  or  written,  to  enter  into  a  criminal conspiracy was  the  essence to 

establish that  prior  to  the  commission of the  offence two  or  more  persons 

had  entered into a conspiracy for committing an unlawful wrong  as held in 

Crl.  Appeal  No.123-2019 

Page  I  8 

2021  YLR  Note  88  (Qari  Ahmed  Khan  and  others  VS  The  State).  It  is also 

settled law that  two  or more persons were members of the conspiracy and 

conspiracy consisted not merely in the intention of two or more persons to 

do an unlawful act as held in 2021  SCMR  873 (The State  through  P.G Sindh 

and others VS Ahmed  Omar Sheikh and others). 

18.  We have  perused  the entire record  and  have also gone through  the 

report and statement of witnesses with the able assistance of learned counsel 

for the parties, concur with  the findings of the trial Court, therefore, instant 

appeal is meritless and same is hereby DISMISSED. 

(SARDAR  EJAZ  ISHAQ  KHAN) 
JUDGE 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA Y,ANI) 

JUDGE 

RAMZAN 

