ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  QEPARTMENT 

Writ  Petition  No.3694/2019 

Muhammad Riazal 
VS 
The  Inspector General of Police, Islamabad, &  another. 

Petitioner By: 

State By: 

Mr.  Naveed Akhtar Rajput, Advocate. 

Mr.  Zohaib  Hassan  Gondal,  State 
Counsel  alongwith  Tipu  Sultan  Ranjha, 
Sub-Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

30.04.2020. 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANI.  J: The  petitioner through the instant 

petition  assailed  the  validity  of  order  dated  01.10.2019  (the  impugned 

order), passed by the  learned Addi. Sessions Judge-V,  Islamabad-East, in 

his  capacity  as  Ex-Officio Justice  Of the  Peace,  Islamabad, whereby  the 

petition  filed  under  Section  22-A,  22-B  Cr.P.C  filed  by  the  petitioner  for 

direction  of  inquiry and  recovery of CCTV footage  of  Police Station Bhara 

Kahu, Islamabad, was dismissed. 

2. 

Briefly  stated  facts  of the  case  as  narrated  in  the  petition  are that 

the  petitioner  and  his family was falsely  implicated  in  F.l.R  No.244, dated 

15.06.2019,  offence  under  Section  395/511/506-ii/447/148/149  P.P.C 

Police  Station  Bhara  Kahu,  Islamabad,  in  order  to  grab  the  land  of  the 

petitioner  and  his  brother  measuring  70  Kanai,  situated  at  mouza 

Phulgran,  Islamabad,  that  local  police  already  registered  fake  F.l.Rs 

against  the  petitioner  and  his  family  members;  that  allegedly  recovered 

article were  in  fact  presented by the petitioner himself before Investigation 

2 

W.P No.369413019 

Officer  who  also  acknowledged  the  same  through  received  application 

which  was  presented  by  the  petitioner  for  initiating  criminal  proceeding 

against  the  Anjum  Aqeel,  Saif  Ullah  etc;  that  the  local.  police  arrested 

petitioner  and  his  brother  and  sent  them  to  Adyala  Jail,  Rawalpindi  and 

later  on,  malafidely  local  police  showed  that  those  articles  were  got 

recovered  by  the  petitioner  and  his  brother.  The  petitioner  submitted  an 

application  on  31.07.2019,  before  respondent  No.1 

for  conducting  an 

inquiry  in  the  above  mentioned  case  so  that  the  real facts  may  bring  on 

record  but  respondent  refused  to  do  so.  That  respondent  No.1 

is  duty 

bond to inquire into the matter for bringing the truth on record and initiation 

of criminal proceeding against the culprits in  accordance with  law,  but the 

respondent  No.1  is  using delaying tactics  on one  pretext or the other and 

has  badly  failed  to  perform  his  statutory  duties,  therefore,  the  petitioner 

moved  an  application  before  respondent  No.2  for  direction  to  bring  on 

record  CCTV footage  of  Police Station  Shara  Kahu, in  this  regard, report 

was  sought  from  concerned  police,  wherein  it  has  been  mentioned  that 

since the  data  of  Safe City Camera  remains save only for  one  month, as 

such petition of the  petitioner was dismissed vide order dated 01.10.2019, 

hence, this petition. 

3. 

The  learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the impugned 

order passed by the  learned Ex-Office Justice of Peace, is  contrary to the 

facts  and  circumstances  of the  case; that  the  impugned  order  passed  by 

the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad,  is 

in  violation  of 

fundamental  rights of the petitioner. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  State  counsel  strongly  opposed  the 

contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  petitioner  and  supported  the 

3 

W.PNo.3694/2019 

impugned  order  by  contending that  the  record of  CCTV  Cameras can  be 

available only for one month. 

5. 

Heard  arguments  and  perused  the  available  record  with  able 

assistance of the learned counsel for the parties. 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  record  shows  that  the  petitioner  wants  recovery  of 

CCTV  footage  of  Police Station  Bhara  Kahu,  Islamabad, to  show that  he 

himself produced the case property before the  police. The  report of police 

submitted  by Muhammad Tariq-AS.I  Shift  lncharge,  Safe City  Islamabad, 

dated  21.10.2019  shows that  the  data  of  Safe  City  Cameras  is  saved for 

one  moth  only  and  thereafter,  it  automatically  removes  from  the  main 

"Server", therefore,  the  video  of  CCTV  footage  dated  15.06.2019 after  a 

long  period  cannot  be  provided, as  such, the  Ex-Officio Justice  of  Peace 

has passed a well reasoned order. 

7. 

For what  has been discussed hereinabove,  learned counsel for the 

petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  or  irregularity  in  the 

impugned  order  calling  for  interference  by  this  Court  in  its  constitutional 

jurisdiction.  Resultantly, the instant petition having no force  is dismissed . 

...(GHWdHrf HA1'91 QAMBRANI) 
JUDGE 

"Rana.M.I.W 

