ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 108/2016 

Muhammad  Mehmood 
VS
Asghar  Ali  & others 

Appellant by: 
Respondents 1 &  2 by: 

State by: 

Abdul Wahid Qureshi Advocate 
Qazi Rehan Shabbir Advocate 
alongwith respondents 1  & 2. 
Mr. Hammad Saeed Dar, State 
Counsel alongwith Daud Sabir SI. 

Date of Hearing: 

21.08.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J.:  This  appeal  has  been  filed 

against the impugned judgment dated 29.04.2016.2016,  passed by 

the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate,  Section  30,  Islamabad-  West,  in 

case 

F.l.R 

356 

dated 

20.09.2011, 

under 

Sections 

324,452,506, 148, 149  PPC  registered  at  Police  Station  Aabpara, 

Islamabad, whereby respondents No.  1  &  2 were acquitted. 

2. 

Briefly  stated 

facts  of 

the  case  as  narrated  by 

the 

complainant,  Muhammad  Mahmood  are  that  at  about  07:20  am 

morning time  he alongwith  his  brothers  Hammad and  Muhammad 

Ahmad  were  present in  House No.  652-E,  Luqman Hakeem Road, 

G-6/2, 

Islamabad  alongwith  family. 

In 

the  meanwhile,  15/20 

persons  after  pushing  the  main  door  entered  into  the  house.  His 

brother Muhammad Ahmad attempted to talk to them, nevertheless 

they  put  him  in  a  vehicle  and  shifted  to  an  unknown  place.  They 

then  headed towards  the  complainant,  however they  were  tried  to 

stop through  stick/danda  by the  complainant. Asghar  Ali A.S.I  and 

Estate  Officer  Nazar  Naswana  alongwith  other  officials  were 

present there.  They tried to vacate the  house  by force  which  was 

resisted  through  stick.  Asghar  A.S.I  took  out  his  pistol  and  made 

two  aerial fires,  upon which the complainant  requested them  to  be 

2 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 108/2016 

restrained as the complainant  has been given one week time.  The 

Estate Officer,  however directed the Asghar  A.S.I  to  done them  to 

death  and  take  the  possession of  the  house. At  that  time  another 

person namely Safdar who was  present there, was  also extending 

threats of life if the house is not vacated. On his insistence, Asghar 

A.S.I  opened two fires on the leg.  Another  person having specific 

features  was  standing with Asghar  SI who  either  made one fire  or 

two fire or both of them made 1 /1  fire single shot, out of which  one 

hit  his  leg  and  the  other  crossed only touching  his  body,  resulting 

into abrasion and clot. He fell on the ground and then was taken to 

the hospital. Hence, the above said F.l.R was lodged. 

3. 

After  registration  of  F.l.R,  the  investigation  was  completed 

and  report  under  Section  173 Cr.P.C  was  submitted.  During  this 

the  respondents  moved  an  application  under  Section  249-A, 

Cr.P.C.  for  thier  acquittal  on  the  ground  that  they  have  been 

involved in  a false and frivolous case. The  learned Trial Court vide 

order  dated  29.04.2016,  acquitted  the  accused/respondents  from 

the  instant  case  under  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C.  Hence,  the  instant 

appeal. 

4. 

The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the 

impugned  order  passed  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  is  not  in 

accordance  with  law;  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  not framed 

the charge against the accused/respondents;  that the learned Trial 

Court  has  violated  the  principal  of  law  while  accepting  the 

application under Section 249-A Cr.P.C and acquitting respondents 

No.1 &  2; that the order passed by the learned Trial Court is illegal, 

perverse  and  arbitrary.  Further  contended  that  the  findings  of 

learned  Trial  Court  are  contrary  to  record  and  the  learned  Trial 

Court  has also  ignored the  report submitted  by the  Estate  Officer. 

Lastly prayed for setting aside of order dated 29.04.2016. 

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  1  &  2  has 

opposed  the  contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  and 

contended 

that 

the  complainant/appellant 

is 

residing 

in  a 

3 

Criminal  Appeal  No.108/2016 

government  accommodation,  which  was  previously  allotted  to  his 

father.  Raid was  conduct  in  order to  implement the  orders  passed 

by the  Honb'le  Supreme Court of  Pakistan; that  the  Estate  Officer 

issued prior notice to the appellant/complainant before entering into 

house;  that  prior  to  entering  into  the  said  house,  a  rappat  was 

registered  at  the  concerned  police  station  for  initiation  of  the 

proceedings;  that the respondent No.1  is  serving at Police Station, 

Aabpara,  Islamabad. Further contended that the occurrence  is self 

made  and  concocted.  The  alleged  occurrence  took  place  on 

20.09.2011  while  challan  was  submitted  on  07.10.2013  with 

inordinate  delay  of  more  than  two  years  in  sheer  violation  of  the 

provision  of 

law  and  procedure.  Next  contended 

that 

the 

accused/respondents  are  innocent and  have  been falsely  involved 

in 

the  instant  case;  that  the  accused/respondents  have  not 

committed  any  offence  and  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  rightly 

acquitted the accused/ respondents. 

6. 

I  have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the parties 

and have perused the material available on record. 

7. 

Perusal of the record reveals that F.l.R was registered by the 

complainant  with 

the  allegation  that 

the  accused/respondent 

Asghar  A.S.I  and  Estate Officer  Nazar  Naswana, and  other  police 

officials  tried  to  vacate  the  house  from  the  appellant  which  was 

estate  property and was  illegally occupied  by the  complainant  and 

for  implementation  of  the  orders  of the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan  to  vacate  the  said  house,  the  officials  of  Estate  Office 

alongwith  police  officials  visited  the  above  said  house  for  its 

vacation. It was alleged that the A.S.I Asghar took out his pistol and 

made aerial fires and again opened two fires which touched his foot 

and crossed it.  It has also been alleged that one of their companion 

also  made  fire  shots  which  also  hit  at  his  foot  resulting  abrasion 

and clot. 

8. 

Minute  perusal  of  the  record  further  reveals  that  there  is 

allegation  of  making fire  shots  by two  different  persons  but  during 

I 

4 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 108/2016 

the  course  of  investigation,  four  empty  shells  of  30-bore  were 

recovered  from  the  alleged  crime  scene  while  an  official  9  MM 

Glock  pistol  was  also 

recovered 

from 

the  possession  of 

respondent/accused Asghar Ali A.S.I.  It  is  also  an admitted fact  of 

the  case that  the  recovered empty  shells  and the  recovered  pistol 

have  not  been  sent  to  the  Forensic  Science  Laboratory  for 

examination. 

9. 

On the other hand, it  is  also an admitted fact that the alleged 

recovered  empty  shells  were  of  30-bore  pistol,  which  even 

otherwise are not matching with the alleged recovered 9  MM Glock 

pistol, which does not corresponds to the empties of 30 bore pistol, 

allegedly  recovered  from  the  scene  of  the  occurrence.  Further 

more,  blood  stained  clothes  were  also  not  taken  into  possession. 

The  site  plan  having  been  prepared  on  the  date  of  occurrence, 

reflects totally  different scenario,  which does  not attracts that from 

that point any fire has been made as the point from where allegedly 

fire was made, is  opposite to the side from where the empties have 

been recovered, which fully negates the version of prosecution. 

10.  Provision  of  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C  is  meant  to  decide 

criminal  case  without  completion  of  trial  and  in  order  to  invoke 

powers  under  section  249-A  Cr.P.C  or  265-K  Cr.P.C  as  the  case 

may be,  the Court has to fulfill the following three conditions:- 

(i) 

The Court shall hear the prosecutor; 

(ii) 

The Court shall  hear the accused; and 

(iii)  The  Court  shall  take  into  consideration  overall 

facts and circumstances and the evidence. 

No other  embargo  exist  upon the  Court to  exercise  powers  under 

Section  249-A  Cr.P.C.  The  said  provision  is  meant  to  prevent 

rigours of  prolonged trial.  Moreover, the  use of  expression  at  "any 

stage  of  the  case"  is  indicative  enough  of  the  intention  of  the 

legislature that to  exercise powers under Section 249-A,  Cr.P.C or 

265-K  Cr.P.C,  an  application  in  each  and  every  case  is  not 

5 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 108/2016 

mandatory and any such stage could be the very initial stage, after 

taking  cognizance  or  it  would  be  a  middle  stage  after  recording 

some  proceedings,  .or  even,  it  could  be  latter  stage  as  well. 

Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon  the  case  reported  as 

Chairman Agricultural  Development Bank of Pakistan &  another VS 

Mumtaz  Khan" [PLO 2010  SC 665]  wherein  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court of Pakistan has held as under:- 

"  We  may  observe  that  prior  to  introduction  of  the 

Islamic  provisions  in  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860 

an  acquittal  of an accused  person could  be  recorded 

when the  prosecution failed to  prove  its case  against 

him beyond reasonable doubt or when faced with two 

possibilities,  one  favouring  the  prosecution  and  the 

other  favouring  the,  defence,  the  Court  decided  to 

extend the benefit of doubt to the accused person and 

an  acquittal  could  also  be  recorded  under  section 

249-A, Cr.  P.  C.  or section 265-K, Cr.  P.  C.  when the 

charge  against  the  accused  person  was  found  to  be 

groundless  or there  appeared to  be  no  probability  of 

his being convicted of any offence." 

11. 

The  interference  by  this  Court  would  be  warranted,  if  the 

reasoning of  the  trial  Court,  in  acquitting  the  accused  is  perverse, 

artificial  or  ridiculous.  It  is  only  in  an  exceptional  case  that  this 

Court will  interfere  by setting aside the  acquittal of  an  accused.  In 

the  instant  case,  the  learned trial  Court  has  properly  appreciated 

the  evidence  available  on  record  and  acquitted  the  accused/ 

respondent  No.1 through a well-reasoned judgment,  by giving  him 

benefit of doubt. The learned counsel for the appellant has also not 

been  able  to  show  that  there  has  been  any  misreading  or  non  

reading  of  evidence.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  cases  titled  as 

"Muhammad  Zaman  VS The  State  and  others"  [2014  SCMR 

749],  "Muhammad  Rafique  VS Muhabbat  Khan  and  others" 

[2008  SCMR  715],  "Jehanqir VSAmin  Ullah and  others" [201 O 

SCMR 491],  "Mst.  Askar  Jan and others  VSMuhammad Daud 

6 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 108/2016 

and  others"  [2010  SCMR  1604]  and  "Mst.  Sughra  Begum  and 

another VSQaiser Pervez and others" [2015 SCMR 1142]. 

12. 

In  the  case  reported  as  "Sanaullah  VS  The State  through 

Prosecutor  General"  (2015  P.Cr.L.J.  382  (Balochistan), 

it  has 

been held as under:- 

"It  is  well settled principle of administration of justice  and rule 
of  prudence  stipulates that  the  prosecution  has to  prove  its 
case  beyond  the  shadow  of  any  doubt.  It  is  a  well-settled 
rule  of  prudence  that  the  accused  has  not  to  prove  his 
innocence  until  and  unless  proven  guilty.  The  golden 
principle  of  administration  of  criminal  law  under  the  Islamic 
Jurisprudence 
that  benefit  of  slightest  doubt  shall 
necessary  be  extended  in  favour  of  the  accused  and  not 
otherwise." 

is 

13. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  facts  and  circumstances,  it 

transpires from the record that no  material was available on record 

against  respondents  1  & 2.  The  record further  reflects that  during 

the  investigation  Asghar  Ali  ASI  was  exonerated  whereas  no 

weapon  of  offence  was  recovered  from  respondent  No.2,  Rai 

Safdar  Kharral.  If a  full  dressed trial  would  have  been  held,  even 

then,  in  such  circumstances,  there  was  no  probability  of  the 

conviction  against  the  respondents,  therefore,  the  learned  trial 

Court,  after  proper  appraisal  of  material  available  on  record,  has 

rightly acquitted the respondents/accused. 

14. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  an  appeal  against  acquittal  has 

distinctive  features  and  the  approach  to  deal  with  the  appeal 

against  conviction  is  distinguishable from  appeal  against  acquittal, 

as presumption of double innocence is  attached,  in  the  latter case. 

Reliance in  this  regard is  placed upon the case of "lnavatullah  Butt 

v.  Muhammad Javed  and  2 others" [PLD 2003  SC  562].  Until and 

unless the judgment  of the trial Court is  perverse, completely illegal 

and on perusal of evidence, no other decision can be given except 

that the accused is  guilty or there has been complete misreading of 

evidence  leading  to  miscarriage  of  justice,  the  Court  will  not 

exercise jurisdiction  under section 417, Cr.P.C. 

7 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 108/2016 

15. 

The  learned counsel for  the  appellant  has failed  to  advance 

any  ground  to  justify  the  setting  aside  of  the  acquittal  judgment. 

There  is  no misreading or non-reading of evidence nor the findings 

of  the  learned  trial  Court  are  patently  illegal.  The  findings  of 

acquittal,  by  no  stretch  of  the  imagination,  can  be  declared  as 

perverse, shocking, alarming or suffering from  errors of jurisdiction 

and misreading or non-reading of evidence. 

16. 

For what  has been discussed above, there  is  no merit in  the 

instant appeal; therefore, the same is  hereby dismissed. 

1<1HU[AM AZAM  QAIJIBRANI) 

JUDGV 

Announced  in open Court on this 25th day of August, 2020. 

=6t:JOGE 

S.Akhtar 

