ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Appeal  No.22  of 2017 

Lt.  Col  (Retd)  Muhammad  Ashfaq  Hussain 
VS 
Sajid  Ali  Qureshi  & another 

PSLA  No.01 of 2017 

Lt. Col (Retd) Muhammad Ashfaq Hussain 
VS 
Sajid Ali Qureshi & another 

Date of Hearing: 
Appellant By: 
Respondent  By: 

20.07.2020 
Mr. Ansar Nawaz Mirza, Advocate 
Mr. Muhammad Izzat  Khan, Advocate 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J:  Both  these  Criminal  Appeals  have  been 

directed  against  the  Judgment  dated  30.10.20I5  passed  by  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge-II,  Islamabad-East,  whereby  complaint  under  section  3/7  of  the 

Illegal  Dispossession  Act,  2005 

filed  against  respondent  No.1/accused  was 

dismissed  by  giving  him  benefit  of doubt  and was  acquitted  of the  charge  levelled 

against him. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of the  case  are  that  the  complainant/appellant  filed  complaint 

Under Section 3  &  7  of the Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005 against respondent No. l 

with the  assertion that the appellant was owner in possession  of plot  measuring  14- 

marlas  comprising  khasra  no.  2010/1192,  khata  No.  182/328,  khewat  No.  199, 

khatooni No.  3 I5  situated  in Village  Shakrial,  Islamabad  vide registered  sale-deed 

No. 7931 dated 20.5.1978. The land was purchased by the appellant from one Ali Jan 

s/o  Nadir  and  possession  was  also  handed  over  to  the  appellant  from  khasra  No. 

2010/1192, khata No.  I82/328,  Khewat No.  199, Khatooni No. 3I5  with the specific 

boundaries  mentioned  in  the  registered  sale-deed.  In the  year  2003,  the  appellant 

moved an application before the Tehsildar for measurement and demarcation of plot, 

on which Halqa Patwari and Girdawar on the orders of the Tehsildar visited the spot, 

took measurement  and demarcated the plot as open plot of 13  marlas. That between 
the  midnight  of  19th  &  zo",  April,  2014,  the  respondent  No.I  alongwith  25/30 
persons  entered  the  plot  of appellant  and took  the  possession  and  dispossessed  the 

appellant from the said plot. The appellant alongwith his brother namely Muhammad 

Altaf  Hussain  and  Mst.  Robina  Shaheen  wife  of appellant  immediately  visited  the 

spot  where  the  respondent  No. I  alongwith  his  companions  were  present.  The 

respondent  No. I  and  his  companions  did  not  allow the  appellant  and his  family  to 

2 

Criminal  Appeal  No.22 of 2017 

enter  in  the  said  plot.  It  is  further  mentioned  that  the  accused/respondent  No. I 

belongs to a political party  and also belongs to a qabza group who on  gunpoint has 

illegally occupied the land of people and similarly he has dispossessed the appellant 

from  his  plot.  After  filing  the  private  complaint,  the  learned  Trial  Court  recorded 

cursory  statement  of the  appellant  and  also  summoned  the  report  from  concerned 

SHO,  which  was  duly  submitted 

in  the  Court  after  obtaining  report  from  the 

revenue  authorities  and  on  the  basis  of preliminary  evidence,  learned  Trial  Court 

summoned the respondent No.1  to face the trial. 

3. 

Charge was framed against the respondent No.l/accused  to which he pleaded 

not  guilty  and  claimed  trial.  On  denial  of the  charge,  complainant  was  directed  to 

produce evidence. 

4. 

For  proving  the  charge,  complainant  Muhammad  Ashfaq  Hussain  appeared 

as PW. I,  Muhammad Altaf Hussain appeared as PW.2  ,  Tariq Rauf  SI  appeared as 

Pw.3  who  produced  application  Ex.PB,  Inquiry  Report  Ex.PC  &  Interim  Report 

Ex.PD in his statement and Sohail Maqbool PW.4 Tehsildar Settlement, Rawalpindi 

has recorded his statement on oath and also produced report of Halqa Patwari Ex.PE 

and his report Ex.PF regarding the ownership of the parties. 

5. 

After  closure  of  the  prosecution  evidence,  respondent  No.I/accused  was 

examined  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C  wherein  he  has  categorically  denied  the 

prosecution allegation and took stance that he is owner in possession of his ancestral 

property  since his  forefather's  time and the appellant/complainant  has no right  over 

the  disputed  plot  regarding  which  civil  litigation  is  also  pending.  No  demarcation 

was  legally  conducted  by  the  Revenue  Officer  and  the  so  called  demarcation  was 

conducted  in  his  absence.  The  sale-deed  pertains  to  four  khasra  numbers  i.e 

2010/1192,  2195/1212,  2196/1212  &  1211. The  so  called  demarcation  was  made 

only for one khasra Number i.e 2010./1112 and that was also done in his absence. He 

is in possession of the disputed land and the appellant/complainant has no possession 

at  all  over  the  disputed  land  and  the  allegation  of  dispossession  of  the 

appellant/complainant  is totally false. He did not opt to  record statement on oath as 

envisaged Under  Section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. The learned Additional  Sessions Judge-11- 

East,  Islamabad  after  hearing  the  parties  passed  the  impugned  Judgment  dated 

30.10.2015,  whereby  acquitted  the  respondent  No.I/accused 

from  the  charges 

levelled against him by giving him benefit of doubt. 

6. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant/complainant  has  contended  that  since the 

year  , 1978 the appellant is in peaceful possession of the disputed land as owner and 

had  purchased  the  same  land  through  a  registered  sale-deed  from  one  Ali  Jan  s/o 

Nadir. Further submitted that in the year 2003, the land was demarcated by the Halqa 

3 

Criminal  Appeal  No.22 of 2017 

Patwari  ;  that  the  appellant  during  the  course  of  trial  produced  oral  as  well  as 

documentary  evidence  with  regard  to  possession  of the  appellant,  but  the  learned 

Trial  Court  failed  to  appreciate  the  evidence,  therefore,  the  impugned  order  is  not 

sustainable  in the  eyes of law; that the  learned Trial  Court did not  even discuss the 

prosecution evidence qua the occurrence of illegal dispossession regarding which the 

complaint was  filed, rather  decided the case on wrong assumptions  and question  of 

title  which  is not  in accordance with  law on the  basis  whereof the  impugned  order 

warrants  interference;  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  passed  the  impugned judgment 

against  the  facts  and  circumstances  in  arbitrary  manner  without  appreciation  of 

evidence thus mis-carriage of justice  has occurred. 

7. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.I/accused  has contended that 

the  respondent  is  owner  in  possession  of  the  disputed  land  as  the  respondent  is 

recorded owner in the record of rights and he being a co-sharer with the  above said 

Ali Jan  in the revenue  record; that as per complainant's  version  04 khasra  numbers 

have  been  purchased  by the  complainant through above  said  Ali  Jan,  but no  where 

the  handing  over  of possession  of  a  specific khasra  number  has  been  mentioned. 

Further contended that the complainant has purchased land from one Ali Jan,  as per 

record  of rights  he  was  not  sole owner of the  above  mentioned  04 khasra  numbers 

rather  in  the  above  said  khasra  numbers,  several  others  were  also  co-owners;  that 

admittedly the above said co-owner Ali Jan could sold his own shares and possession 

of specific  area  to  his  extent  could  hand  over  to  the  complainant,  but  that  too  in 

presence  of  remaining  co-sharers  duly  demarcated  by  the  revenue  authorities  in 

accordance with  law; that  the complainant never remained  in possession,  therefore, 

question  of illegal  dispossession  does  not  arise;  that  the  documents  mark  A,  mark 

DA, mark  DB, mark  DC, mark DD, mark DF, mark DH, mark DJ, mark  DK-1 and 

mark DK-2; that  appellant failed to produce any evidence for proving the allegation 

and  also  failed to  bring  on record  any  evidence  against  the  respondent  that  he  is  a 

member of land maphia/qabza group. He lastly urged for dismissal of appeal. 

8. 

I have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the parties and perused the 

material available on record. 

9. 

Perusal  of the  record  reveals  that  the  appellant  in  support  of  his  version 

himself appeared as PW.1 and he narrated the same facts which are mentioned in the 

contents  of complaint  filed  under section  3  of the  Illegal Dispossession  Act  and he 

has also produced the registry as Ex.PA. During cross-examination,  he has admitted 

that  04 khasra numbers  are mentioned in the registry and states that possession  was 

given  to  him  from  one  Khasra  number.  Further  admitted  that  this  fact  is  not 

mentioned in the said registry that possession was given to him in a particular khasra 

4 

Criminal  Aooeal  No.22 of2017 

number.  He has further  admitted that out of 04 khasra numbers,  03 khasra numbers 

were  not  demarcated  and  also  admits  that  at  the  time  of  demarcation  the 

accused/respondent No. I  was not accompanied them  at the time of demarcation. He 

has shown his ignorance whether or not the respondent No. I  has ancestral ownership 

in the  land  in dispute.  He further admits that  in the  complaint the  fact has not  been 

mentioned that he constructed a boundary wall from front side and foundation. PW.2 

Muhammad  Altaf,  who  is  the  real  brother  of  the  appellant/complainant.  He  has 

almost narrated the same story as stated by  PW. I,  but during cross-examination has 

stated that his statement was not recorded by the police. He also shown his ignorance 

that  how  many  khasra  numbers  were  mentioned  in  the  registry  purchased  by  the 

complainant.  PW.3  Tariq Rauaf  SI in his  deposition has  stated that  on the direction 

of SHO,  he visited the disputed plot alongwith complainant, at the  spot he inquired 

the  matter  from  some  persons  available  there  and  recorded  the  statements  of  five 

witnesses  namely  Anjam  Afshan,  Muhammad  Altaf,  Asad  Mehmood  s/o  Ali  Jan 

Qureshi,  Muhammad  Ibrar  and  Muhammad  Ishtiaq  Hussain  and  also  recorded  the 

statements  of  eight  witnesses  produced  by  the  respondent  No. I/accused.  He  filed 

application  Ex.PB  to  the  Revenue  officers  and  after  getting  the  report  from  the 

revenue officials,  he prepared and submitted report Ex.PC and Ex.PD. During cross  

examination,  he  has  admitted  that  the  persons  who  were  examined  on  the 

respondent's  side  proved  that  the  plot belongs  to  the  respondents  as their  ancestral 

property.  This  witness  has  clearly  stated  that  there  was  no  boundary  wall  on  the 

disputed  plot  and  has  further  stated  that  his  report  mainly  based  on  the  revenue 

reports  which  were  prepared  by  the  revenue  authorities  in the  year  2003  and  20I4 

and  has  further  admitted  that  he  did not  recorded  statement  of any  of the  revenue 

officials  and  has  further  stated  that  both  the  parties  are  claiming  ownership  and 

possession  of the  plot. PW.4 during cross-examination has admitted that he himself 

did  not  visit  the  plot  for  the  purpose  of  pointation  of  disputed  property.  He  has 

further admitted that the registered  sale-deed bearing number  793 I  dated  20. 5. I 978 

was  executed  in  respect  of khasra  number  2010/I I92,  2I95/I212,  2196/I2I2  and 

I211,  as per  registry  the  land measuring  I4-marlas  was  sold to  the  complainant  in 

these  above  mentioned  04  khasra  numbers.  This  witness  has  also  admitted  that 

officially  partition  in  respect  of  above  khasra  numbers  has  not  been  conducted. 

Perusal  of Ex.PA  a  sale-deed dated 20.05.I978  itself  clearly  shows that the  vendor 

Ali Jan himself was not the  sole owner of the above mentioned  04 khasra numbers, 

rather  in  khasra  number  2010/1192  he  had  a  share  of  1/6,  in  khasra  number 

2I95/12I2,  he  was  holding  share  43/258,  in  khasra  number  2196/I2I2  the  share 

becomes 43/258 and in khasra number I2I I  his share was 301/I806.  In such manner, 

the  vendor  as per  this  deed, was owner of  I-kanal,  I 9-marlas,  out  of which he  had 

sold only 0-14 marlas. The decisive question is that no where it has been mentioned 

5 

Criminal  Aopeal  No.22 of2017 

that  out of which khasra number to the  extent of his  own  share he entered into  sale 

agreement  and  handed  over the  possession to  the  appellant.  It  is  also  crystal  clear 

from  the  sale-deed  Ex.PA  that  the  vendor  Ali  Jan  had  some  shares  in  above 

mentioned  each  khasra  numbers  meaning  thereby  that  there  were  some  other  co  

sharers  also.  There  is  no  eye  witness  against  the  respondent  that  he  illegally 

dispossessed the appellant. Furthermore, some witnesses namely Asad Mehmood S/o 

Ali Jan, Muhammad  lbrar  and Muhammad Ishtiaq Hussain have not been examined 

by the prosecution. 

10. 

The  Illegal  Dispossession  Act,  2005  is  a  special  enactment  which  has 

empowered the Court to get conduct a special investigation within a stipulated period 

of fifteen days. The learned Trial Court in accordance with law directed the SHO for 

conduct of an investigation.  The police after investigation submitted report as Ex.PC 

& Ex.PD through PW.3 who during cross-examination stated that he cannot opine as 

to whether the disputed plot is the ancestral property of respondent No.1. Further has 

stated that both the parties are claiming the ownership and possession of the disputed 

plot,  therefore,  he  cannot  opine  about  the  ownership  of the  disputed  plot  and  also 

cannot  finally  opine  as  to  whether  the  respondent  was  guilty  of  any  offence.  The 

statement of this witness has rendered the reports not beneficial to the appellant and 

on the basis of such sort of incomplete evidence, conviction cannot be based. On the 

other hand, the respondent/accused has also placed on record certain certified copies 

of the  abstracts  of jamabandi  of  Mauza  Shakrial,  District  Rawalpindi.  Mark  DK-1 

showing  khewat  number  199,  khatooni  no.  315,  under  khasra  No.2010/1192 

admeasuring 04-kanals, 04-marlas situated at Mahal Shakrial, District Rawalpindi is 

registered  on  the  name  of  respondent.  PW-4,  Tehsildar,  has  also  admitted  that 

officially partition in respect of above khasra numbers has not been conducted. 

11. 

It is well settled proposition of law that every criminal case has to be decided 

on its own peculiar circumstances and facts. The Honourable  Supreme Court, in the 

dictum, reported as "Mumtaz Hussain VS Dr. Nasir Khan and others"  (2010  SCMR 

1254), has provided  guidelines for the  Courts to examine, attracting  of Provision of 

Section 3  of the Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005, while holding that Court is required 

to  examine  as  to  whether  property  was  an  immovable  property;  secondly  that  the 

person  was owner  or the property was  in his  lawful possession;  thirdly the  accused 

entered  into  or  upon  the  property  unlawfully;  fourthly  that  such  entry  was  with 

intention to dispossess  i.e ouster, evict or deriving out of possession  against the will 

of person in actual possession or to grab i.e. capture, seize suddenly, take greedily or 

unfairly,  or to  control  i.e to  exercise power  or influence  over regulate  or govern or 

relates  to  authority  over  what  is  not  in  one's  physical  possession  or  to  occupy,  i.e 

holding possession ,  reside in or something. 

6 

Criminal  Appeal  No.22 of2017 

12. 

Accordingly,  it  would  be proper  to  examine  the  case  in  hand  on  the  above 

touchstone. Evidently, the disputed land is un-divided among the remaining other co  

sharer.  It  is  legally  presumed  that  every  share  holder  of a joint  holding  would  be 

deemed to be in joint  possession. 

13. 

Reliance has been placed  on the case titled as "Zahoor Ahmad VS The  State 

& three others"  [PLD 2007 Lahore  231), wherein it has been stated that:- 

(i) 

(ii) 

The Illegal Dispossession Act,  2005  applies to dispossession from 
immovable  property  only  by  property  grabbers/Qabza  Groups/ 
Land  mafia.  A  complaint  under  the  Illegal  Dispossession  Act, 
2005  can  be  entertained  by  a  Court  of  Session  only  if some 
material  exists  showing  involvement  of  the persons  complained 
against 
illegal 
in  some  previous  activity  connected  with 
the  complaint 
dispossession  from 
demonstrates  an  organized  or  calculated  effort  by  some persons 
operating  individually  or  in  groups  to  grab  by force  or  deceit 
property  to  which  they  have  no  lawful,  ostensible  or justifiable 
claim.  In  the  case  of  an  individual  it  must  be  the  manner  of 
execution  of  his  design  which  may  expose  hint  as  a  property 
grabber. 

immovable  property  or 

The illegal Dispossession Act,  2005  does  not  apply  to  run  of the 
mill cases of alleged dispossession from  immovable properties  by 
ordinary persons  having  no  credentials  or  antecedents  of being 
property  grabbers/Qabza Groups/land mafia, i.e.  Case of disputes 
over possession  of  immovable properties  between  co-owners  or 
co-sharers  between  landlords  and  tenants,  between  persons 
claiming possession  on the basis of inheritance,  between persons 
vying for  possession  on  the  basis  of competing  title  documents, 
contractual  agreements  or  revenue  record  or  cases  with  a 
background  of  an  on-going  private  dispute  over  the  relevant 
property. 

(iii) 

A  complaint  under the Illegal Dispossession Act,  2005  cannot be 
entertained  where  the  matter  of  possession  of  the  relevant 
property  is being regulated by a civil or revenue Court. 

14. 

Perusal  of the  evidence  transpires  that  there  is  no  direct  evidence 

against  the  appellants  to  attract  the  provisions  of  Section  3  of  the  Illegal 

Dispossession Act, 2005.  So far as civil suit No. 912/2013 is concerned, the  learned 

Civil  Judge  passed  ex-parte  judgment  &  decree  against  the  appellants.  It  is  an 

admitted  fact that  still the  land in dispute has not been properly partitioned  through 

the revenue staff and still no revenue record has been maintained in this regard about 

the partition in between the parties. The possession of one co-sharer always deems to 

be  the  possession  of all  the  co-owners. No  one  can  deny 

the  possession  of co  

owner.  The  appellant/complainant  failed  to  produce  any  evidence  with  regard  to 

Qabza Groups/property grabbers and land mafia against the respondent/accused. The 

matter  between  the  parties  is of civil nature.  The exercise  in  such matter  would  be 

abuse of process of law which cannot be allowed. 

7 

Criminal  Appeal  No.22  of2017 

15. 

The  interference  of  this  Court  would  be  warranted,  if the  reasoning  of the 

trial Court in acquitting an accused is perverse, artificial or ridiculous. It is only in an 

exceptional  case  that  this  Court  will  interfere  by  setting  aside  the  acquittal  of an 

accused.  In  the  instant  case,  the  learned  trial  Court  has  properly  appreciated  the 

evidence  available  on record and acquitted the  accused/ respondent  through  a well  

reasoned order. The learned counsel for the appellant has also not been able to show 

that there has been any misreading or non-reading of evidence. Reliance is placed on 

the  cases  titled  as  "Muhammad  Zaman VS The  State  and  others"  [2014  SCMR 

749],  "Muhammad  Rafique VSMuhabbat Khan  and others"  [2008 SCMR 715], 

"Jehangir  VS Amin  Ullah  and  others"  [2010 SCMR  491],  "Mst.  Askar  Jan  and 

others  VS Muhammad  Daud  and others"  [2010 SCMR  1604] and "Mst.  Sughra 

Begum and another VSQaiser Pervez and others" [2015 SCMR 1142]. 

16. 

In the case of Ghulam Akbar and another  VS  The State (2008 SCMR 1064 ), 

it has been held as under:- 

"It  is  cardinal  principle  of  criminal  jurisprudence  that  the 
burden  of proving  the  case  beyond  doubt  against  the  accused 
securely lied upon the prosecution  and it did not shift. Similarly, 
the  presumption  and  probabilities,  however,  strong  may  be, 
could not take the shape of proof" 

In  the  case  reported  as  Sanaullah  VS  The  State  through  Prosecutor 

General  (2015 P.Cr.L.J. 382 (Balochistan), it has been held that as under:- 

"Rule  of prudence,  stipulated that prosecution  had to prove  its 
case beyond the shadow of doubt. Accused  had not to prove  his 
innocence,  until  and  unless proved  guilty.  Benefit  of slightest 
doubt  would  necessarily be  extended  in favour  of accused  and 
not otherwise. " 

17.  Keeping  in view the  above  facts and  circumstances,  it transpires  from 

the  record  that  no  material  was  available  on  record  against  the  accused/ 

respondent,  as  such,  the  learned  trial  Court  has  rightly  acquitted  the 

respondent/accused through the impugned order. 

18. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  an  appeal  against  acquittal  has  distinctive 

features  and  the  approach  to  deal  with  the  appeal  against  conviction  is 

distinguishable  from  appeal  against  acquittal,  as  presumption  of  double 

innocence  is  attached  in  the  latter  case.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  case  of 

"lnayatullah  Butt  v.  Muhammad Javed  and  2  others"  [PLD  2003  SC  562]. 

Until and unless the judgment  of the trial Court is perverse, completely illegal 

and  on  perusal  of evidence  no  other  decision  can  be  given  except  that  the 

accused is guilty or there has been complete misreading of evidence leading to 

8 

Criminal  Aooeal  No.22 of 2017 

miscarriage  of justice,  the  Court  will not  exercise jurisdiction  under  Section 

417,  Cr.P.C.  The  appellant feeling aggrieved  from the  impugned  order  dated 

30.10.2015,  had  filed  W.P  No.4164/2015  before  this  Court  wherein,  on 

26.01.2017 in C.M No.2156/ 2016, this Court passed the following order:- 

"Considering grounds  in the application,  it appears that 
the  petitioner  has  inadvertently  filed  Writ  Petition 
instead  of acquittal  appeal.  The  Writ Petition  was filed 
within limitation.  Therefore, while allowing  instant CM, 
the  Writ  Petition  is  converted  into  Criminal  Acquittal 
Appeal.  The petitioner  is directed to file petition for leave 
to appeal as envisaged by law. " 

19. 

The learned counsel for the appellant has not advanced any argument to 

justify  the  setting aside of the acquittal order. There is  no misreading  or non  

reading  of evidence  nor  the  findings  of  the  learned  trial  Court  are  patently 

illegal.  The  findings  of  acquittal,  by  no  stretch  of  the  imagination,  can  be 

declared  as  perverse,  shocking,  alarming  or  suffering  from  errors  of 

jurisdiction  and  misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence.  The  learned  trial 

Court,  after  proper  appraisal  of  evidence  available  on  record,  has  rightly 

acquitted the respondent from the charge.  • 

20. 

In  the  circumstances,  there  is  no  merit  in  these  acquittal  appeals, 

therefore, the same are hereby dismissed. 

Announced in Open Court, on this 28th day of July, 2020. 

-Ghi11am AZam Qam'bra,itl- 
Judge 

,. 

S.Akbtar 

Judge 

-- 

