ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P. No.2008 of 2016 
Javed Iqbal and another  

VS          

Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Planning and Development 
Division and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioners by: 

Respondents by: 

23.05.2017  
Mr. Muhammad Aslam Bhangoo,    
Advocate,  
Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, learned Additional 
Attorney-General, and Ms. Sitwat 
Jahangir, learned Assistant Attorney-
General.  

_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  In  the  instant  writ 

petition, the petitioners, Javed Iqbal and Muhammad Azam, who 

are  teachers  in  Basic  Education  Community  Schools  (“BECS”), 

have prayed for the following relief:- 

“It is, therefore, respectfully prayed that the instant writ 
petition  may  kindly  be  allowed  with  the  direction  to  the 
respondents to fix the monthly salary of petitioners as equal to 
the minimum wages fixed by the Federal Government in the 
policy i.e. Rs.13,000/- per month. 

It is further prayed that respondents also be directed to 
pay Rs.5000/-per month for providing the rent / utility bills etc to 
the petitioners, in the interest of justice.”  

2. 

Chaudhary Muhammad Aslam Bhangoo, Advocate, learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted  that  the  petitioners  have 

been imparting education and training to students at BECS since 

a  few  years;  that  the  petitioners  are  being  paid  only  Rs.5,000/- 

per month as salary and Rs.1,000/- per month for utility bills; that 

the petitioners’ salaries is far less than the minimum wage fixed 

by  the  legislature  under  the  Minimum  Wages  for  Unskilled 

Workers  Ordinance,  1969;  that  the  BECS  project  is  of  prime 

importance, and despite the decision of the Federal Government 

to discontinue the said project, it continued due to the directions 

given  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  “Fiaqat 

Hussain VS Federation of Pakistan” (PLD 2012 SC 224); that the 

respondents’  decision  not  to  pay  a  salary  which  is  equal  to  the 

minimum  wage  of  Rs.13,000/-  per  month  is  a  violation  of  the 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
                                           2                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

guidelines given  to the Executive  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme Court 

in  the  case  reported  as  PLD  2011  SC  37;  and  that  even  though 

the  petitioners  are  contractual  employees,  the  respondents  are 

not  absolved  from  paying  the  petitioners  at  least  the  minimum 

wage  fixed  by  the  legislature.  Learned  counsel  prayed  for  the 

writ petition to be allowed and for a direction to be issued to the 

respondents  to  pay  at  least  Rs.13,000/-  per  month  to  the 

petitioners.  

3. 

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents 

submitted that since the petitioners were contractual employees, 

and  had  expressly  agreed  to  be  paid  an  honorarium  (which  is 

below  the  minimum  wage),  they  cannot  seek  payment  of  more 

than  Rs.5,000/-  per  month  as  their  monthly  salary;  that  the 

judgments  of  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  relied  upon  by  the 

petitioners  are  distinguishable  and  not  applicable  to  this  case; 

that the BEC Schools are controlled  by the Federal Government 

through  the  BECS  Directorate;  and  that  the  BECS  management 

takes  decisions  regarding  the  shifting  of  BEC  Schools,  their 

opening  and  closing,  and  the  hiring  and  firing  of  teachers. 

Learned counsel for the respondents prayed for the writ petition 

to be dismissed. 

4. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  

5. 

The facts essential for the disposal of this petition are that 

a  project  by  the  name  of  “Establishment  of  10,000  Non-Formal 

Basic  Education  (NFBE)  Schools”  was  launched  by  the  Prime 

Minister’s Literacy Commission in order to educate the poor and 

disadvantaged  who  do  not  have  access  to  formal  basic 

education. In July 1998, this project was revised and renamed as 

“Establishment  of  82,000  Basic  Community  Schools.”  The 

revised project was initially for a period of five years i.e. 1998 to 

2003, and later extended up to June 2006. In 2006, the Ministry of 

Education  and  Professional  Training,  Government  of  Pakistan, 

started  a  new  project  called  “Establishment  and  Operation  of 

 
                                           3                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

Basic  Education  Community  Schools  in  the  Country”  (“BECS”). 

The duration of this project has been extended from time to time. 

BEC  Schools  are  opened  in  rural  areas  and  urban  slums  where 

formal primary  schooling  facility  does  not  exist.  All the  required 

inputs  like  text  books,  teaching  and  learning  material  etc.  are 

provided  free  of  cost  by  the  Government.  The  teachers  in  the 

BEC  Schools  are  employed  through  BECS  Directorate,  and  are 

contract  employees  of  the  BECS  project.  The  teachers  in  BEC 

Schools  are  employed  from  the  local  community  irrespective  of  

age  limit,  gender,  professional  qualification,  and  without  an 

advertisement.  Mostly  the  BEC  Schools  are  run  by  the  teachers 

in their own houses.  

6. 

After  the  enactment  of  the  Constitution  (Eighteenth 

Amendment)  Act,  2010,  the  BECS  project  was  to  be  taken  over 

by the Provincial Governments. The Council of Common Interests 

in  its  meeting  dated  01.06.2011  decided  that  the  BECS  project 

would  be  wound  up  and  only  its  component  concerned  with  the 

federally  administered  areas  would  be  retained.  The  proposed 

closure  of  the  BECS  project  was  subjected  to  a  constitutional 

challenge  before  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of 

“Fiaqat  Hussain  VS  Federation  of Pakistan”  (PLD 2012 SC  224). 

In  the  said  judgment,  it  was  held  inter-alia  that  the  proposed 

action  by  the  Government  to  close  down  the  establishment  and 

operation of BEC Schools was without lawful authority and of no 

legal  effect,  and  in  violation  of  Article  25-A  of  the  Constitution. 

After the said judgment, the Prime Minister of Pakistan approved 

the  continuation  of  the  BECS  project  to  meet  the  educational 

needs of the country. The BECS project is still continuing and its 

PC-1  has  been  approved  by  the  Executive  Committee  of  the 

National Economic Council (“ECNEC”)/ Planning Commission.  

7. 

Although  the  petitioners  in  the  writ  petition  have  pleaded 

that their services are liable to be regularized, but they have not 

sought  the  relief  of  regularization.  The  petitioners’  case  is  that 

they  should  be paid  at  least  the  minimum  monthly  wage notified 

by  the  Federal  Government  i.e.  Rs.13,000/-  per  month.  The 

 
                                           4                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

petitioners  also  seek  the  payment  of  an  additional  amount  to 

cater for their utility bills etc. 

8. 

Now  the  petitioners  have  been  appointed  on  contract 

basis.  The  BECS  project  falls  under  the  purview  and  the 

administrative  control  of  the  Ministry  of  Federal  Education  and 

Professional Training. The stance of respondent No.3 (Secretary, 

Ministry  of  Education)  has  been  that  since  the  petitioners  and 

other  teachers  at  BEC  Schools  are  contractual  employees  and 

have  agreed  to  be  paid  a  salary  less  than  the  minimum  wage, 

they  cannot  seek  payment  of  an  amount  higher  than  what  they 

have  already  agreed  to.    In  order  to  avoid  payment  of  salary 

equal to or more than the minimum wage fixed by the legislature, 

respondents No.3 and respondent No.4 (Director General BECS), 

in  their  para-wise  comments  have  pleaded  inter-alia  that  the 

teachers  at  BEC  Schools  are  paid  an  honorarium  on  quarterly 

basis and not a salary. In contradiction to the said position taken 

by respondents No.3 and 4, respondent No.5 (Human Resources 

Development  and  Former  Support  Council) 

in 

its  written 

comments  has  pleaded  that  the  petitioners  are  paid  Rs.5,000/- 

per  month  along  with  utility  charges  of  Rs.1,000/-.  Be  that  as  it 

may,  on  29.03.2017  Mr.  Khan  Zeb,  Assistant  Director  at  the 

BECS  Directorate,  appeared  on  behalf  of respondents  No.3 and 

4 and submitted that the petitioners’ salaries are paid out of the 

development  budget  (Public  Sector  Development  Program) 

which 

is  administered  by 

the  Establishment  Division, 

Government of Pakistan. He further submitted that earlier it had 

been  suggested  by  respondent  No.4  that  employees  working  in 

the BECS project should be paid the notified minimum wage. He 

submitted that the minimum wage would be paid to the teachers 

at the BEC Schools only after the approved PC-1 provides for the 

payment  of  the  minimum  wage  to  such  teachers.  After  the  said 

submissions  of  Mr.  Khan  Zeb,  the  memo  of  the  petition  was 

amended  and  the  Establishment  Division,  through  its  Secretary, 

was  impleaded  as  respondent  No.6  in  the  said  petition.  The 

learned  Additional  Attorney-General  was  present  in  the  Court 

 
                                           5                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

and waived  notice on behalf  of the newly impleaded respondent 

No.6. He sought a period of two weeks to liaise with respondent 

No.6  on  the  subject  matter  of  this  petition.  On  26.04.2017,  this 

Court  was  apprised  that 

in  the  draft  PC-1  submitted  by 

respondent  No.4,  it  was  suggested  that  the  salaries  of  the 

petitioners should be equal to the minimum wage. In this regard, 

a copy of the proposed PC-1 along with letters dated 05.05.2015 

and  22.04.2016  from  respondent  No.4  to  respondent  No.3  were 

placed  on  record.  Perusal  of  these  documents  show  that 

respondent  No.4  in  the  draft  revised  PC-1  for  the  BECS  project 

for the period 2015-18 had suggested the payment of honorarium 

at the rate of Rs.12,000/- per month for teachers of BEC Schools. 

It  appears  that  the  said  suggestion  of  respondent  No.4  fell  on 

deaf  ears  of  the  decision  makers.  In  the  interests  of  justice,  the 

matter  was  adjourned  to  23.05.2017  but  no  plausible  response 

came from respondent No.6.  

9. 

The pivotal question that needs to be answered in this case 

is  whether  the  petitioners  are  entitled  to  be  paid  the  minimum 

wage notified by the Federal Government under the provisions of 

the  West  Pakistan  Minimum  Wages  for  Unskilled  Workers 

Ordinance, 1969. This question needs to be answered in the light 

of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in 

the following cases:- 

(i) 

In Suo Moto Case No.12/2011 (Suo Moto action taken upon 

the 

application 

of  Memona 

Parveen 

regarding 

enhancement  of  salary/stipend  of 

Industrial  home 

Teachers,  which  is  Rs.500  per  month)  (2013  SCMR  728), 

the  Government  of  Punjab  was  releasing  Rs.500/-  to  each 

teacher 

imparting  vocational  training  to  students 

in 

Industrial  Homes.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  observed 

payment  of  such  a  low  salary  to  the  teachers  was  a  clear 

violation  of  Article  3  of  the  Constitution.  It  was  also 

observed  that  such  teachers  deserved  to  be  paid  more 

than  the  minimum  wage,  which  was  ordinarily  paid  to 

unskilled workers.   

 
                                           6                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

(ii) 

In Human Rights Cases No.16360/2009, 1859-S and 14292-

P/2010  (Applications  of  Lady  Health  Supervisors/Workers 

etc.) (PLD 2011 SC 37), applications had been filed before 

the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  seeking  remedies,  including 

the  payment  of  an  amount  equal  to  the  minimum  wage  as 

salary  to  the  Lady  Health  Workers  and  Lady  Health 

Supervisors.  In  the  said  report,  it  was  held  inter-alia  as 

follows:-  

no 

“6.  It is to be noted that under section 6 of the West 
Pakistan  Minimum  Wages  For  Unskilled  Workers 
Ordinance,  1969  (hereinafter  'referred  to  as  "the 
such 
Ordinance, 
1969") 
agreement/order/notification/law/award/contract 
of 
service violating the provisions of law with regard to the 
payment of minimum wages shall be adhered to. To earn 
livelihood is a fundamental right of every citizen, subject 
to law, rules, regulations and agreement. Although the 
Ordinance,  1969  is  not  applicable  on  the  persons 
engaged by the Government or any of its organizations 
but as a State it is bound to follow the same principle, 
which is applicable to private organizations. If above 
emoluments cannot be paid under any agreement then it 
would  be  in  violation  of  Articles  9  and  25  of  the 
Constitution. In the instant case, painful situation is that 
the  LHWs,  LHSs, Accounts  Supervisors  and drivers 
were  not  treated  at  par  with  employees  of  private 
organizations  who  are  presently  entitled  to  receive 
minimum wages @ Rs.7000 per month. …”  

“7.  It is contended by the learned Attorney-General 
that  LHWs/LHSs  being  the  employees  of  National 
Program for Family Planning and Health Care, remained 
on contract on year to year basis, therefore, they are 
entitled to receive whatever is agreed upon by them. We 
do not controvert his stand but at the same time cannot 
lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  notwithstanding  their 
relationship  either  as  permanent  or  contractual 
employee, whatsoever may be, following the law/policy 
prevailing in the country for fixing minimum wages, they 
are entitled for the same on the basis of policy, which is 
presently  prevailing  i.e.  Rs.7,000  p.m.  In  a  welfare 
States like ours, it is duty of the government to ensure 
that discriminatory policies are not applied as far as its 
employees are concerned, either enjoying permanent 
status or working on contractual basis. The contract 
though executed mutually, in pursuance whereof LHWs, 
LHSs, Accountants and Drivers have agreed to accept 
the, less amount of wages as compared to minimum one 
fixed  under  the  provision  of  law,  but  one  of  the 
contracting parties, i.e. government is not supposed to 
deprive them from their legitimate rights qua the nature 
of duties being performed by them. A deep study of the 

 
 
 
 
 
                                           7                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

conditions  of  their  contract,  already  reproduce 
hereinabove, speaks itself, about the volume of work 
which they have to perform, besides facilitating health 
care within their units and such workers or supervisors 
are also bound to remain available round the clock for 
the purpose of extending health care to the citizens. 
Therefore, any agreement, which is against the public 
policy is not enforceable, as it has been pointed out 
hereinabove i.e. it is the law of the country that no 
person/workman being unskilled shall be paid less than 
Rs.7,000 and this principle/policy may not only on the 
basis of the Ordinance, 1969 but also on the basis of 
propriety, shall be applicable to the categories of all the 
employees who have been engaged by the government 
departments for rendering special service like health 
care etc. Thus, keeping in view the above facts and in 
view of price hike situation prevailing in the country, by 
an  interim  arrangement  directions  were  issued  to 
provide Rs.7,000 p.m. to all categories of the employees 
of  health  department  i.e.  LHWs,  LHSs,  Accounts 
Supervisors and Drivers and also to ensure that their 
fundamental  rights  to  earn  livelihood  are  fully 
protracted  without  any  discrimination  in  terms  of 
Articles 9 and 25 of the Constitution. We are told that 
there are about 1,20,000 such like persons of the health 
department who are not getting their due salaries. We 
expect that enhancement of their emoluments to the 
extent of minimum wages of Rs.7,000 p.m. (which has 
been fixed in pursuance of interim order of this Court 
dated 7-9-2010) shall be reconsidered for the purpose 
of making  it  rational  and  also  to  create  distinction 
between the Supervisory Staff, Accounts Staff and the 
Field Staff depending upon the nature of their duties, as 
early as possible. In the meanwhile, all the categories of 
employees  stated  above  shall  continue  receiving 
amount of Rs.7,000 per month.” 

10.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  also  held  that  its  judgment 

reported  as  PLD  2011  SC  37 “shall be considered a guideline 

for all the executive departments in future while fixing the 

wages of the employees being engaged by the government 

organizations on contract basis or under any other programme 

funded by the government or any other agency.” 

11.  No one would willingly provide services for another for less 

than the minimum wage especially when he knows that under the 

law,  he  is  entitled  to  get  the  minimum  wage  from  his  employer. 

Therefore,  it  may  be  presumed  that  when  a  person  provides 

labour  or  service  to  another  against  remuneration  which  is  less 

than  the  minimum  wage,  he  is  acting  under  the  force  of  some 

 
 
                                           8                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

compulsion which drives him to work though he is paid less than 

what  he  is  entitled  under  the  law  to  receive.  A  person  would 

accept  a  salary  less  than  a  minimum  wage  when  he  is  in  no 

position  to  bargain  with  the  employer.  In  doing  so,  he  would  be 

acting  under  the  compulsion  of  economic  circumstances, 

poverty or destitution. 

12.  Every person who provides labour or service to another is 

entitled  at  least  to  the  minimum  wage,  and  if  anything  less  than 

the minimum wage is paid to him, he can complain of violation of 

his fundamental right under Article 9 of the Constitution, as well 

as transgression by the State of its obligation set out in Article 3 

of  the  Constitution,  and  ask  the  Court  to  direct  payment  of  the 

minimum wage to him so that the breach of Articles 3 and 9 of the 

Constitution may be abated. Article 3 of the Constitution provides 

that  the  State  shall  ensure  the  elimination  of  all  forms  of 

exploitation  and  the  gradual  fulfilment  of  the  fundamental 

principle, from each according to his ability to each according to 

his  work.  Article  9  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  no  person 

shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law. It 

is  well  settled  that  the  word  "life"  used  in  Article  9  of  the 

Constitution  has  not  been  used  in  a  limited  manner.  A  wide 

meaning should be given to it to enable a man not only to sustain 

life  but  to  enjoy  it.  It  has  also  been  held  that  “life”  includes  all 

such  amenities  and  facilities  which  a  person  born  in  a  free 

country 

is  entitled 

to  enjoy  with  dignity, 

legally  and 

constitutionally. Reference in this regard may be made to the law 

laid  down  in  the  cases  of  Shehla  Zia  VS  WAPDA  (PLD  1994  SC 

693), Arshad Mehmood VS Government of Punjab (PLD 2005 SC 

193). In the case of Adeel-ur-Rehman VS Federation of Pakistan 

etc (2005 SCMR 1), it has been held that it is the duty of the State 

to  see  that  life  of  a  person  is  protected  so  as  to  enable  him  to 

enjoy it within the prescribed limits of law.  

13.  When the State employs people for doing work or providing 

services  like home based imparting of training and education to 

students  in  villages,  it  must  find  adequate  funds  for  such 

 
                                           9                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

projects.  Paying  a  meager  amount  or  less  than  the  notified 

minimum wage to teachers of the BEC Schools, in fact, impedes 

and  retards  the  obligation  of  the State under  Article 25-A  of  the 

Constitution, which provides:- 

“The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all 
children of the age of five to sixteen years in such manner as 
may be determined by law.”  

14.  Article  25-A  was  inserted  in  the  Constitution  through  the 

Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010. Prior to this, the 

Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court,  in  the  case  of  Syeda  Shazia  Irshad 

Bokhari  VS  Government  of  Punjab  (PLD 2005  Lahore  428),  held 

that the right to education could also be treated as a right to life 

as  contemplated  by  Article  9  of  the  Constitution.    The  State  is 

under an obligation to make an endeavour to provide educational 

facilities at all levels to its citizens. The right to education is now 

a  fundamental  right  enshrined  under  Chapter  1  of  Part-II  of  the 

Constitution.  Opportunity  to  acquire  education  cannot  be 

confined  to  the  privileged  section  of  the  society.  Given  the 

inflation  at  this  day  and  age,  the  payment  of  a  paltry  amount  of 

Rs.5,000/-  per  month  to  teachers  of  BEC  Schools  would  induce 

them to quit teaching and seek other pursuits in life.   

15. 

In  view  of  the  above,  I  am  constrained  to  hold  that  the 

payment of salary (which is less than the minimum wage) to the 

petitioners is in violation of the guidelines given by the Hon'ble 

Supreme Court in  the case reported as PLD 2011 SC 37, and a 

transgression of Article 3 of the Constitution. 

16.  Consistent with the law laid down by the Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court  in  the  cases  referred  to  hereinabove  and  taking  into 

account  the  guidelines  given  to  the  Executive  in  the  case 

reported  as  PLD  2011  SC  37,  the  respondents  are  directed  to 

make  the  necessary  financial  and  administrative  arrangements 

so that  the  petitioners  are paid  at  least an  amount  equivalent  to 

the minimum wage fixed or notified from time to time. Presently, 

under  the  Minimum  Wages  for  Unskilled  Workers  (Amendment) 

Act, 2016, Rs.13,000/- per month has been fixed as the minimum 

wage.  The  respondents,  jointly  and  severally,  are  directed  to 

 
                                           10                                         W.P.No.2008/2016 

comply with the said directions within a period of not more than 

one  month  from  the  date  of  the  receipt  of  this  judgment.  This 

petition is allowed with no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

       JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2017 

Sultan* 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

(JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
