ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  
Muhammad Masroor-Ul-Haq 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through its Secretary, M/o Overseas 
Pakistan & HRD Islamabad and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by:  

25.11.2016  
M/s Muhammad Ramzan Khan, Advocate  
Mr. Muhammad Arbab Alam Abbasi,  
Advocate for respondent No.2, 
Ms. Sitwat Jahangir, learned Standing 
Counsel,  
Mr. Faisal Tariq, Deputy Director Workers 
Welfare Fund, Islamabad. 

__________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB, J:- Through the instant writ 

petition,  the  petitioner,  Muhammad  Masroor-ul-Haq,  impugns  the 

Office  Order  dated    20.06.2016,  issued  by  the  Workers  Welfare 

Fund,  Ministry  of  Overseas  Pakistanis  and  Human  Resource 

Development,  Government  of  Pakistan,  whereby  the  petitioner, 

along  with  other  officers,  who  were  posted  on  deputation  basis  in 

the  Workers  Welfare  Fund  (“WWF”)  against  posts  reserved  for 

promotion 

quota,  were 

repatriated 

to 

their 

parent 

departments/organizations.  In  October,  2015,  the  petitioner  had 

been  sent  on  deputation  from  the  Sindh  Workers  Welfare  Board 

(“S-WWB”) to WWF on deputation basis.  

2.  Mr.  Muhammad  Ramzan  Khan,  Advocate,  for  the  petitioner 

submitted  that  the  petitioner  has  been  serving  as  Assistant 

Director (BS-17) at the WWF, Islamabad, since 12.10.2015; that the 

WWF and the S-WWB are autonomous organizations working under 

the  control  of  the  Ministry  of  Overseas  Pakistanis  and  Human 

Resource  Development,  Government  of  Pakistan; 

that 

the 

petitioner is not a civil servant; that the S-WWB is a body corporate 

under  the  supervision  and  control  of  the  governing  body  of  the 

WWF;  that  the  S-WWB  has  been  created  in  pursuance  of  the 

provisions of the Workers Welfare Fund Ordinance, 1971, which is 

a  federal  statute;  that  the  petitioner  was  appointed  as  Assistant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

Director  (BPS-17)  in  the  S-WWB  in  2010;  that  subsequently,  the 

petitioner was transferred from the S-WWB to the WWF, Islamabad; 

that  the  petitioner  was  not  sent  to  the  WWF  on  deputation;  that  in 

view  of  the  order  dated  07.07.2009,  passed  by  the  Hon'ble  High 

Court  of  Sindh 

in  Constitution  Petition  No.D-767/2009,  the 

petitioner's  posting  to  the  WWF,  Islamabad,  is  to  be  treated  as  a 

transfer and not as a deputation; that on account of the petitioner's 

employment  at  the  S-WWB,  the  petitioner  also  became  an 

employee of the WWF; and that the petitioner's transfer to the WWF 

cannot  be  treated  as  a  deputation  regardless  of  the  fact  that  the 

letters  dated  28.09.2015,  07.10.2015,  20.10.2015  and  20.06.2016, 

show him as a deputationist.  

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the 

petitioner's  wife  was  a  permanent  employee  of  the  Statistics 

Division,  Government  of  Pakistan  and  was  posted  as  Statistical 

Assistant at Islamabad; that the petitioner had three young school 

going  children;  and  that  under  the  wedlock  policy,  the  petitioner 

could not be repatriated or sent back to the S-WWB. It was further 

submitted  that  the  petitioner  had  a  legitimate  right  and  an 

expectation to be absorbed in the WWF.   

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Arbab  Alam  Abbasi,  Advocate,  for 

respondent  No.2/WWF,  submitted  that  the  petitioner  was  well 

aware  that  he  was  posted  as  a  deputationist  at  the  WWF, 

Islamabad;  that  the  documents  on  the  record  including  letters 

dated  28.09.2015,  07.10.2015,  20.10.2015  and  20.06.2016  clearly 

show  that  the  petitioner  was  posted  at  WWF,  Islamabad,  on 

deputation  basis;  that  at  the  WWF,  the  petitioner  was  working 

against  the  post  reserved  for  promotion  quota;  that  through 

Constitution Petition No.D-1943/2016, filed before the Hon'ble High 

Court  of  Sindh  by  employees  of  the  WWF,  the  posting  of 

deputationists  on  posts  reserved  for  promotion  quota  were 

challenged;  that  the  petitioner  was  one  of  the  respondents  in  the 

said Constitution Petition; that the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh was 

informed about the repatriation of the petitioner and other officers 

posted  on  deputation  against  the  posts  reserved  for  promotion 

quota  and  consequently,  vide  order  dated  16.08.2016,  the  said 

 
3 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

petition  was  disposed  of;  that  the  petitioner  cannot  take  refuge 

behind  the  wedlock  policy  to  avoid  his  repatriation  to  his  parent 

department i.e. the S-WWB.  

5. 

It  was 

further  submitted 

that  after 

the  Constitution 

(Eighteenth  Amendment)  Act,  2010,  the  parent  department  of  the 

petitioner had been devolved; that the S-WWB was operating under 

the  provisions  of  the  Sindh  Workers  Welfare  Fund  Act,  2014;  and 

that FIRs had been registered against the petitioner by his previous 

employers.   

6. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  

7. 

The  record  shows  that  on  20.08.2010,  the  petitioner  joined 

the  S-WWB,  and  was  posted  as  Assistant  Director  (Welfare)  at  its 

Regional  Office  in  Hyderabad.  On  04.09.2015,  the  petitioner 

applied  to  respondent  No.1/the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Overseas 

Pakistanis  and  Human  Resource  Division,  Islamabad,  for  the 

transfer of his services to WWF or Overseas Pakistanis Foundation 

or  Employees  Old-age  Benefit  Institution.  The  petitioner  claimed 

that he was facing life threats and that it was not possible for him to 

continue  with  his  job  and  keep  his  family  in  Sindh.  On 28.09.2015, 

the  WWF  requested  the  S-WWB  to  post  the  petitioner  as  an 

Assistant Director in the WWF on deputation basis. On 07.10.2015, 

the  petitioner  was  relieved  from  the  S-WWB  for  his  deputation  at 

the  WWF,  Islamabad.  As  per  the  office  order  dated  20.10.2015, 

issued  by  the  WWF,  the  petitioner  joined  the  WWF  on  deputation 

basis  with  effect  from  12.10.2015.  As  mentioned  above,  vide  the 

impugned Office Order dated 20.06.2016, the petitioner along with 

other  officers  working  on  deputation  against  posts  reserved  for 

promotion 

quota  were 

repatriated 

to 

their 

parent 

departments/organizations.  On  23.06.2016,  the  petitioner  made  a 

representation to the Secretary, Workers Welfare Fund against his 

repatriation.  In  the  said  representation,  the  petitioner  sought 

suspension of his repatriation orders primarily on the ground of the 

wedlock  policy.  The  petitioner  also  expressed  his  desire  to  be 

absorbed in the WWF. 

 
4 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

8. 

Now  there  is  no  denying  the  fact  that  the  petitioner  was 

employed  at  the  S-WWB  in  2010  as  Assistant  Director  (Welfare), 

and served in that position until his posting on deputation at WWF, 

Islamabad,  in  October,  2015.  The  fact  that  the  petitioner  was 

posted  as  a  deputationist  has  been  expressly  mentioned  in  the 

following letters:-  

(i)  Letter dated 28.09.2015 (whereby the petitioner's services were 
requisitioned  by  the  Workers  Welfare  Fund  from  the  Sindh 
Workers Welfare Board on deputation basis); 

(ii)  Letter dated 07.10.2015 (whereby the Sindh Workers Welfare 
Board relieved the petitioner from his posting on deputation at the 
Workers Welfare Fund, Islamabad); and  

(iii)  Letter dated 20.10.2015 (whereby the Workers Welfare Fund 
confirmed that the petitioner had joined the Workers Welfare Fund 
Islamabad on deputation basis from the Sindh Workers Welfare 
Board).  

9. 

The  petitioner  was  well  aware  of  the  contents  of  above 

referred  letters  and  never  took  steps  to  correct  the  position  if  he 

firmly  believed  that  his  posting  to  WWF,  Islamabad  was  not  on 

deputation  basis.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  also  did 

not  deny  that  at  the  WWF,  the  petitioner  had  been  working  on  a 

post reserved for promotion quota.  

10.  The  petitioner  has  filed  documents  showing  that  Workers 

Welfare  Boards  were  required  by  the  WWF  to  adopt  the  Workers 

Welfare Fund (Employees Service) Rules, 1997. Rule 23 (1) and (2) 

of the said Rules reads as follows:- 

“(1) Appointment on deputation to posts in the Fund may be made 
by the appointing authority in the interest of the Fund. 
(2) Civil Servants, Federal or Provincial, and employees of the 
corporations or other autonomous bodies set up, managed or 
controlled by the Federal Government or, as the case may be, any 
Provincial Government, holding appointment on regular basis, 
may, with the consent of the Federal Government or, as the case 
may  be,  of  the  Provincial  Government  or  other  authority 
concerned, hereinafter  called the lending authority, be appointed 
by  the  appointing  authority  concerned  on  deputation  to 
appropriate posts in the Fund for such periods and on such terms 
and conditions, as may be determined by appointing authority in 
consultation with the concurrence of the lending authority.” 

11. 

It  is  by  virtue of  the said  Rules  that  the  petitioner  came  as  a 

deputationist  to  the  WWF.  Deputation  has  been  defined  as  an 

administrative  arrangement  between  borrowing  and 

lending 

authorities  for  utilizing  services  of  an  employee  in  public  interest 

and exigency of services against a particular post. Deputation was 

 
 
 
5 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

a  contract  between  the  borrowing  and  the  lending  authorities, 

which  was  liable  to  be  terminated  at  any  stage  during  prescribed 

period of deputation. A deputationist cannot remain on  deputation 

for an indefinite period or stipulated period in accordance with his 

own whims and wishes.  

12. 

It  is  settled  law  that  a  deputationist  may  not  necessarily 

complete  the  tenure  for  which  he  was  deputed  and  the  power 

rested  with  the  competent  authority  to  repatriate  a  deputationist 

without assigning any reason. In case of transfer on deputation, no 

vested right accrued to a deputationist to continue for the period of 

deputation. The competent authority was empowered to repatriate 

a  deputationist  as  and  when  the  exigencies  of  service  required. 

Some of the cases in which this view has been taken are mentioned 

herein below:-  

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Pakistan  VS  Fazal  Rehman  Khundkar  & 

another  reported  as  PLD  1959  Supreme  Court  (Pak.)  82,  it 

has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan that 

it  is  a  matter  of  practice  and  common  experience,  that 

officers  of  the  Provincial  cadres  deputed  for  service  at  the 

Centre  are  frequently  recalled  by  their  Province,  by  the 

Provincial  Government,  in  the  exigencies  of  the  public 

service. Against such a recall they have no right of any kind 

to  object,  being  substantively  officers  of  the  Provincial 

Government and only on deputation to the Centre. The mere 

fact  that  they  may  be  holding  at  the  Centre  a  post  higher  in 

rank  than  that  to  which  their  place  in  the  Provincial  cadre 

entitles them in the Provincial service does not constitute the 

least  bar  to  the  making  of  an  order  by  the  Central 

Government at the request of the Provincial Government, re-

placing  the services  of such an  officer at  the disposal of  his 

parent Government. 

(ii) 

In the case of Dr. Shafi-ur-Rehman Afridi VS CDA, Islamabad 

reported as 2010 SCMR 378, it has been held by the Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  that  the  provisions  of  Civil 

Servants  Act,  1973,  and  rules  made  thereunder,  as  well  as 

Esta  Code  were  silent  about  the  fact  that  a  deputationist 

 
6 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

must serve his entire period of deputation and such omission 

seemed  deliberate  enabling  the  competent  authority  to 

utilize service of an employee in the manner as it might deem 

fit  and  proper.  Period  of  deputation  could  at  the  best  be 

equated  to  that  of  an  expression  of  maximum  period  which 

could  be  curtailed  or  extended  by  competent  authority  and 

no legal or vested rights were available to a deputationist to 

serve  his  entire  period  of  deputation 

in  borrowing 

department. 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Robia  Ayub  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan 

reported as 2013 PLC (CS) 915, it has been held by this Court 

that  a  deputationist  cannot  remain  on  deputation  for  an 

indefinite  period  or  stipulated  period  in  accordance  with 

his/her  own  whims  and  wishes.  Civil  servant  has  no  vested 

right  to  complete  the  deputation  period  as  it  is  a  matter 

relating  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service.  Competent 

authority  of  borrowing  department  having  sole  discretion  to 

decide fate of deputationist could repatriate him at any time 

to parent department.  

(iv) 

In case of Abdul Majeed VS Chief Secretary, Punjab reported 

as  2015 PLC  (CS) 1381,  it  has  been  held  by  the  Hon'ble 

Lahore  High  Court  that  a  deputationist  did  not  have  any 

vested right to remain on the post as deputationist forever or 

for  a  stipulated  period.  A  deputationist  could  be  ordered  to 

be  repatriated  to  his  parent  department  at  any  time  without 

assigning  any  reason.  Parent  department  of  appellant-

employee  was  not  bound 

to  assign  reason 

for  his 

repatriation. 

(v) 

In case of Lal Khan VS Employees Old Age Benefit Institution 

reported  as  2010 PLC  (CS) 1377 (Karachi),  it  has  been  held 

by  the  Hon'ble  High  Court  of  Sindh  that  a  deputationist  had 

no  vested  right  to  remain on  post  forever or for  a stipulated 

period.  A  deputationist  could  not  challenge  order  of  his 

repatriation  as  he  could  be  repatriated  back  to  parent 

department at any time.  

 
 
7 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

13.  On  account  of  the  above  referred  trite  law,  the  petitioner 

could  not  have  any  grievance  against  his  repatriation  by  the 

borrowing  department  (Workers  Welfare  Fund,  Islamabad)  to  his 

parent department (Sindh Workers Welfare Board).  

14. 

In  the  WWF,  the  petitioner  was  posted  against  a  post 

reserved  for  promotion  quota.  This  has  not  been  disputed  by  the 

petitioner.  It  is  a  matter  of  record  that  Constitution  Petition  No.D-

1943/2016,  titled  “Muhammad  Hanif,  etc.,  VS  Federation  of 

Pakistan, etc.” was filed before the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh by 

employees  of  WWF  against 

the  respondents/deputationists 

(including  the  present  petitioner).  The  petitioners  in  the  said  case 

had  voiced  their  grievance  against  deputationists 

in  WWF 

occupying  posts  reserved  for  promotion  quota.  Vide  Order  dated 

16.08.2016, the said petition was disposed of after the Hon'ble High 

Court  was  informed  that  the  deputationists  in  WWF  (including  the 

present  petitioner)  had  been  repatriated 

to 

their  parent 

departments.  

15.  The learned counsel for respondent No.2/WWF made it clear 

that  WWF  does  not  want  to  retain  the  services  of  the  petitioner.  If 

this  Court is  to accept  the  petitioner’s  plea that  on  account of  the 

wedlock  policy,  the  petitioner  should  not  be  repatriated  to  his 

parent department, it would not just be going against the wishes of 

the  petitioner’s  parent  department  (S-WWB)  as  well  as  the 

borrowing  department  (WWF),  but  also  against  the  well-settled 

principle  that  a  deputationist  cannot  occupy  a  post  reserved  for 

promotion  quota.  Reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the 

following case law:- 

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Zubair  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (2016  PLC 

(C.S.) 259) it was held by the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh that 

a  deputationist  could  not  hold  a  post  which  was  required  to 

be  filled  by  promotion  or  direct  appointment  of  a  person 

holding  a  Masters  degree.  A  person  could  be  appointed  on 

deputation  only  if  no  suitable  person  was  available  for  a 

particular post. 

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Dr.  Altaf  Hussain  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan 

(2013  PLC  (C.S.)  1178),  the  respondent  was  appointed  on 

 
8 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

deputation against a post reserved for promotion. This Court 

declared  the  appointment  of  a  deputationist  against  a  post 

reserved  for  promotion  to  be 

illegal.  Furthermore,  the 

department  was  directed  to  commence  the  process  of 

promotion  by  considering  the  eligible  candidates  on  the 

basis of seniority-cum-fitness. 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Safdar  Ali  Sahito  VS  Province  of  Sindh  (2011 

PLC  (C.S.)  956),  the  Hon'ble  High  Court  of  Sindh  observed 

that  the  authorities  had  created  unrest  and  a  sense  of 

deprivation  amongst  employees  already  working 

in  a 

particular department when outsiders are first posed in such 

a  department  on  deputation  basis,  and  then  subsequently 

absorbed.  The  Hon'ble  High  Court  noted  that  if  such  a 

tendency  was  encouraged, 

it  would  create  frustration 

amongst  the  employees  of  the  same  grade  and  cadres  and 

would  obstruct  and  hinder  the  right  of  promotion  of 

deserving employees. 

16.  Although  the  petitioner  has  not  filed  any  document  to  show 

that  his  wife  is  working  as  a  Statistical  Assistant  at  the  Pakistan 

Bureau  of  Statistics,  Islamabad,  but  assuming  that  she  is,  the 

petitioner could not explain as to whether she was working in that 

position  prior  to  his  posting  on  deputation  in  October,  1995.  The 

petitioner’s  application  dated  04.09.2015  for  transfer  makes  no 

mention  about  his  wife’s  employment.  The  petitioner’s  posting  on 

deputation  to  the  WWF,  Islamabad,  was  certainly  not  on  the  basis 

of  the  wedlock  policy.  He  had  explicitly  mentioned 

in  his 

application  dated  04.09.2015,  that  he  could  not  keep  his  family  in 

Sindh.  The  wedlock  policy  placed  reliance  on  by  the  petitioner  is 

contained 

in  Establishment  Division’s  Office  Memorandum 

No.10/30/97-R.II,  dated  13.05.1998,  which  inter  alia  reads  as 

follows:- 

“(vi) Spouses already posted at one station, including those 
posted on deputation beyond the prescribed maximum period, 
may not normally be disturbed without compelling reasons of 
public  interest.  Requests  for  extension  of  deputation  period 
beyond the permissible limit may be considered with compassion 
if interests of public service would permit.” 

 
 
 
9 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

17. 

It  is  indeed  no  pleasant  for  a  husband  and  wife  with  school 

going  children  to  be  working  in  different  provinces.  But  the  law 

cannot  be  circumvented  to  bring  them  to  the  same  station.  The 

question that crops up in the mind is that whether a person posted 

on deputation at a particular station can claim to remain so posted 

for all the period during which his or her spouse remains posted at 

such a station, regardless of decision of the borrowing department 

to  repatriate  the  deputationist  to  the  parent  department.  I  would 

think  not.  To  hold  in  favour  of  such  a  deputationist  would  be 

tantamount  to  disregarding  the  innumerable  authorities  from  the 

Superior  Courts  that  no  legal  or  vested  rights  were  available  to  a 

deputationist to serve his entire period of  deputation in borrowing 

department. 

Interestingly, 

the  petitioner  was  not  sent  on 

deputation for  any  specific  period.  In  the  case  of  Mst.  Robia Ayub 

VS Federation of Pakistan, (2013 PLC (CS) 915), the petitioner had 

challenged the repatriation to the parent department on the ground 

that it was contrary to inter-alia the wedlock policy. The petitioner 

in  that  case  had  also  prayed  for  a  direction  to  the  borrowing 

department to absorb her. This Court dismissed the writ petition by 

inter-alia  holding  that  the  petitioner's  claim  on  the  basis  of  the 

wedlock  policy  was  not  justifiable.  Furthermore,  it  was  held  as 

follows:- 

"10. The  law  on  the  subject  is  very  much  clear.  The 
petitioner is a civil servant and remained on deputation for a 
fixed term and was returned to her parent department in 
consequence of terms and conditions of her deputation. A 
deputationist cannot remain on deputation for an indefinite 
period or stipulated period in accordance with his/her own 
whims and wishes. While taking this view, I am fortified by a 
judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of 
Dr.Shafi-ur-Rehman  Afridi  v.  CDA  Islamabad  through 
Chairman and others (2010 SCMR 378)." 

18.  Additionally, in the case of Asma Shaheen VS Federation of 

Pakistan (2013 PLC (C.S.) 391, this Court spurned the plea that a 

deputation  cannot  be  repatriated  due  to  the  wedlock  policy.  At 

paragraph 13 of the said judgment, it has been held as follows:-  

“13.       From the plain reading of above said wedlock policy, it is 
obvious that the word "may" has been used in the said letters and 
not "shall". It has never been stressed that all the deputationists 
whose spouses are working at Islamabad shall must be absorbed 

 
 
10 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

or will continue to serve at Islamabad. As regards the contention 
that some of deputationists have been absorbed, the same cannot 
be taken into consideration, for the simple reason that it was the 
discretion  of  the  competent  authority  to  absorb  some  of 
deputationists  according  to  requirement  of  department, 
capabilities,  know  how,  performance,  qualification,  general 
reputation and on the basis of annual confidential reports. The 
others  cannot  claim  the  same  treatment  as  of  right.  The 
deputation is a contract and if borrowing department does not 
need the services of a deputationist, he or she must go back to 
parent  department  and  thus  no  fundamental  rights  of  the 
petitioners have been infringed and no provisions of Constitution 
have been violated. Learned counsel for the petitioners have 
failed to rebut the contention of learned Deputy Attorney-General 
that at present no deputationist is being absorbed. There appears 
no political element with regard to repatriation of the petitioners 
to their parent departments.” 

19.  Coming  to  the  petitioner’s  contention  that  he  was  in  fact 

‘transferred’  from  S-WWB  to  WWF,  and  not  sent  on  ‘deputation’. 

The  petitioner  submitted 

that  as  S-WWB  was  under 

the 

administrative  control  of  WWF,  his  transfer  should  be  considered 

as  within  a  department.  The  WWF  was  established  under  the 

provisions  of  the  Workers  Welfare  Fund  Ordinance,  1971,  ("WWF 

Ordinance")  for  providing  low  cost  housing  in  other  amenities  to 

the  industrial  labour.  The  Federal  Government  made  an  initial 

contribution  of  Rs.100  Million,  and  further  resources  were  to  be 

paid  by  the  industrial  establishments  in  terms  of  Section  4  of  the 

said  Ordinance.  Section  11-A  of  the  WWF  Ordinance,  inter-alia, 

provides  that  where  an  allocation  is  made  from  the  WWF  to  a 

Provincial  Government,  such  Provincial  Government  may 

constitute  a  Workers  Welfare  Board  for  the  efficient  management 

and  administration  of  the  allocated  money  and  projects,  etc.  A 

Workers  Welfare  Board  constituted  by  a  provincial  government 

consists  of  a  Chairman  (who  is  required  to  be  a  Secretary  to  that 

government)  and  nine  other  Members  appointed  by  the  Provincial 

Government.  The  Workers  Welfare  Board  is  a  body  corporate 

having perpetual succession and a common seal with the power to 

contract,  acquire,  hold  and  dispose  of  property  etc.  The  S-WWB 

was  constituted 

in  pursuance  of  Section  11-A  of  the  WWF 

Ordinance.  However,  after  the  enactment  of  the  Constitution 

(Eighteenth  Amendment)  Act,  2010,  this  subject  was  devolved  to 

the provinces. Consequently, the Sindh Workers Welfare Fund Act, 

 
 
11 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

2014 (“S-WWF Act”), was enacted. By virtue of Section 20 (1) of the 

S-WWF Act, the provisions of the WWF Ordinance stand repealed in 

its application  to the Province of Sindh. Under Section 3 (1) of the 

S-WWF Act, the Government of Sindh is to constitute and establish 

the  Workers  Welfare  Board.  Section  9(5)  of  the  S-WWF  Act 

provides  that  the  Board  may  also  adopt  the  existing  employees  of 

the  Board  or  Fund  other  than  those  who  are  on  deputation  from 

other  departments,  corporations,  as  the  employees  of  the  Board 

after the commencement of the S-WWF-Act.  

20.  The petitioner did not dispute that he was working at S-WWB 

in October, 2015, when he was sent to WWF. Since the S-WWB was 

functioning  under  the  provisions  of  the  S-WWF  Act,  the  petitioner 

cannot  claim  to  have  been  ‘transferred’  to  WWF.  Since  the 

petitioner’s employer was S-WWB established and operating under 

the provisions of a provincial statute, the petitioner cannot contend 

that he was not sent on deputation by S-WWB to WWF, Islamabad, 

which  was  under  the  administrative  control  of  the  Ministry  of 

Overseas Pakistanis and Human Resource Development.  

21.  As  regards  the  petitioner’s  desire  to  be  absorbed  against 

the post where he was working as a deputationist, at no material 

stage  has 

the  borrowing  department  sought 

the 

formal 

concurrence  of  the  parent  department  for  the  petitioner’s 

absorption during the deputation period. Since the very process 

for  the  absorption  of  the  appellant  had  not  been  initiated  in 

accordance  with  the  applicable  law,  the  desire  or  concurrence 

of the petitioner for absorption is immaterial.  

22.  Another  vital  question  that  needs  to  be  answered  is 

whether the appellant could invoke the constitutional jurisdiction 

of this court to prevent his repatriation to his parent department. 

The law in this regard is also well settled. In the case of Dr. Shafi-

ur-Rehman  Afridi  VS  CDA,  Islamabad  through  Chairman  & 

others    reported  as  2010  SCMR  378,  it  has  been  held  by  the 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  that  a  deputationist  cannot 

be  treated  as  an  'aggrieved  person'  because  he  has  no  vested 

right  to  remain  on  a  post  as  deputationist  forever  or  for  a 

 
12 

W.P.No.2604 of 2016  

stipulated  period  as  mentioned  in  notification  and  can  be 

repatriated at any time. 

23.  By  reason  of  the  aforementioned,  I  do  not  find  any  merit  in 

this petition, which is accordingly dismissed with no order as to 

costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

     JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2016 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

(JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan*  

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
