ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P No.267012019.

Owais Ahmed

VS

Mst. Fauzia Parveen  etc.

S. No. of
order/
nroceedings

Date  of order/
Proceedings

Order with signature of Judge and  that of parties or counsel
where necessary.

01

06.08.2019

Malik Mazhar  Javed, Advocate  for the petitioner.

Through  the instant writ petition,  the petitioner  has assailed

the order dated  14.05.2019, passed  by learned  Judge  Family

Court (East) Islamabad,  whereby interim maintenance  of

respondent  No.2/minor  has been fixed  as Rs.6,500/-  per month.

2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner inter-alia contends  that

learned Judge  Family Court has fixed  the interim  maintenance of

the minor  on higher  side, which  is beyond financial capacity of

the petitioner.

3.  I have heard learned counsel  for the petitioner  and perused

the record.

4.  Perusal of the record reveals that respondent No.l Mst.

Fauzia  Parveen filed suit for recovery  of maintenance  of minor

sor/respondent  No.2 against  the petitioner, whereas  the petitioner

has taken  specific stance in para No.7  of his written statement

that he is jobless and nothing is carved by him and that  he is not

serving  with Careem transport  as mentioned  in the suit. Such

stance  of the petitioner  in his written  statement is considered  as

afterthought  and is designed to avoid financial obligation being

father towards his minor child.  It is responsibility of a father to

maintain  a minor but surprisingly  in this case the petitioner  has

2
W.P No.267012019

not given  any valid figure of his financial status,  through  which

he can manage affairs of the minor  rather has taken the stance

which reflects that  the petitioner  wants  to get rid of his moral  as

well as legal/religious obligation towards  maintenance of his

child.

5.  Leamed counsel for the petitioner has been confronted

regarding maintainability  of instant  writ petition  as there is no

provision of appeal or revision against interim order in the

Family  Court Act, 1964,  whereby learned counsel  for the

petitioner  has contended  that interim  maintenance  of the minor

has been fixed on higher side and is beyond  financial  status of

the petitioner.

6.  The  legislative  wisdom of the Family Court Act,  1964

expresses  short time frame for resolution  of family disputes  and

as such no appeal has been provided  against  interlocutory  order

in the Act, however,  filing of such kind of writ petition  is

considered  an effort to frustrate the proceedings of the Family

Court.

7.  The order impugned in the instant writ petition is

interlocutory in nature and the same cannot be assailed  in writ

jurisdiction,  whereas  the mandate of law clearly  provides  that  no

remedy of appeal  or revision is available  against  the interlocutory

order passed  by learned  Judge Family  Court and the interlocutory

order  can only be assailed  after passing of the final judgment  and

decree.  Reliance is placed uqon 2@

(Shahida Fazil VS Mst. Hina Tahir. etcl, 2015 CLC  990

Islamabad (Sardar Muhammad Jahansir VS Judee Familv

Court. etct & 2014 CLC 330 Islamabad (Mst Maham  Shabbit

VS Salman Haider, etcl.

3
W.P  No.267012019

8.  In view of above discussion,  the instant  writ petition is not
maintainable,  therefore, the same is dismissed  in limine.

However,  learned  Trial  Court seized with the matter is directed

to conclude the trial within  a period  of 02 months.

R.AoJrm

(MOHSIN

JUDGE

