ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD

COURT

ISLAMABAD

Crl. Misc. No.71-B of 2012

Abu Bakar
VS
The State  etc.

Petitioner
State by:

Respondent  No.2 by:
Date of decision:

Nemo.
Mr. Rehan-ud-Din  Khan,  standing counsel
Mumtaz, A.S.r.
Mr. Umer Aslam, Advocate
20-02-2012

SHAIJKAT  AZIZ SIDDIQUI:  J: Petitioner  Abu Bakar  seeks bail in case

registered  vide F.l.R No.570,  dated.19-08-2011,  offence u/s 489-F PPC at

Police  Station  Shalimar,  lslamabad.

2.  Briefly,  the prosecution  story  as gleans out from the FIR is that

complainant of the case  namely, Zeshan  Qasim moved an application to

the SHO,  P.S Shalimar,  lslamabad with the assertion that he is running

the business  of Travel & Tours  known as AL-DOHA  Travel  & Tours,  F-8,

lslamabad.  Petitioner/accused  Abu Bakar Naveed  got executed  work

worth  of Rs.49,92,OOOl-  through the office of complainant  and paid an

amount of Rs.17,55,OOO/-  in presence of one Naveed  Qasim,  whereas for

remaining  amount, issued  postdated  cheques,  detail  given in the FIR is as

under:-

i) 
Cheque  No.0360456,  amounting  to Rs:500,000/-
iil  Cheque  No.0360457,  amounting  to Rs:500  OOI-
iii)  Cheque No.0360458,  amounting  to Rs:500,000/-
iv)  Cheque  No.0360461,  amounting  to Rs:20,87,000/-
v)  Cheque  No.0360462,  amounting  to Rs:100,000/-

All cheques were to be drawn  at Bank-Alfalah,  Jamroad  Road,

Peshawar  but same were dishonoured  on presentation'

3.  Petitioner approached the "Allaqa Judicial  Magistrate" for grant  of

bail but his request  was declined  vide order dated.15-12-2011.  Feeling

aggrieved,  petitioner  approached learned  Sessions  Judge, Islamabad  who

entrusted  his bail petition to the learned Additional Sessions  Judge,

Crl.  Misc.  No.71-B  ot 2012

2

lslamabad but petition  met the same fate, vide impugned order dated.O5-

01-2012.  Resultantly,  petitioner  approached  this court for grant  of bail after

arrest.

4.  As per contents  of the petition,  petitioner has been  implicated

falsely, cheques  were neither  issued  dishonestly, nor Same were issued  in

fulfillment of any obligation, rather  were issued in a business deal, just as

a guarantee,  therefore, section  489-F  PPC, does not attract and that case

of petitioner  is one of further inquiry.
5.  Conversely, the learned counsel  for complainant  assisted by the

learned  standing  counsel,  opposed bail petition, mainly  on the ground  that

petitioner  is also  involved in another  case of similar  nature, registered at

P.S Ghazni, Peshawar,  vide FIR No.539  ol 2011. He further submits that
issuance  of cheques is admitted and amount of cheques is heavy,

therefore, petition  is liable to be dismissed.

6. 
I have heard  the learned counsel  for the pailies and have perused
the record. The plain reading  of Section  489-F PPC which  is being

reproduced  herein  below, makes it abundantly  clear  that, three different

punishments  are provided,  which obviously  in the facts and circumstances

of the case can be inflicted as punishment upon any accused,  obviously

on the strength  of evidence  and data available  on the record.

'n$&E:  Whoever  dishonestly  issues a cheque towards  r*payment
of a loan or fulfiltment  of an obligation which  is dishonoured  on
presentation,  shall be punishable with imprisonment  which may
extend to three  years,  or with fine, or with both, unless  he can
establish, for which the burden of proof shall  rest on him, that  he
had made  arrangements with his bank to ensure  that  the cheque
woutd be honoured  and that  the bank  was at fault in not honouring
the cheque".
As is evident from above,

7

i)

ii)

iii)

lmprisonmentwhich  may  extend to 03 years.

OR
with fine
OR
with  both.

Crl.  Misc.  No.71-B  ot 2012

3

The provision  itself  provides  a right to an accused  to get himself  absolved,

from the charge  by adducing  evidence that he made  arrangements with

his bank to ensure  that cheque  was to be honoured  and it was fault of the

bank  not honouring  the cheque.

L 

ln my estimation, on the conclusion of trial despite finding any

accused  guilty of an offence,  there is every likelihood/probability/possibility

that trial court may impose fine of a meager amount  of Rs:50/- only, as

punishment. When asked from the learned  counsel  of complainant  that

whether  above  said possibility emerges  from this provision  itself or not?

The learned counsel very frankly answered in affirmative. ln such an

eventuality, to deprive  any person  from the concession  of bail is simply

harsh  and unjust.

9. 

lt is being  observed  that ever  since assertion  of Section  489-F PPC

in the statue by Ordinance  LXXXV  of 2002,  dated.2S.10.2002 recovery

proceedings  by way of filing  suits of summary  procedure  on negotiable

instruments,  provided  under order 37 CPC, almost have become  alien.

Cheque, which admittedly is a negotiable instrument, invariably being

used for exerting pressure,  through device of criminal cases, although

there is no mechanism provided by the provision itself, to make it a

recovery mode. ln most of the cases relating to cheques, criminal

proceeding  are being used as a tool to compel  the family  members of an

accused to arrange  the amount,  which results into penalizing the entire

family  for the wrong,  if any of one person. There is no doubt that when

allegation of fraud, conclude in to the guilt of any accused person, he can

be awarded punishment  for the same,  but to punish the entire  family

before finding  of guilt is recorded and that too for an offence, which

provides alternate punishment  of fine only, to my mind is against all
cannons of justice and golden  principle  of "dW))t))9".
10.  It is well settled law with the mandate  of the dictums  of the Superior

Courts  of the country that law has to be stretched  in favour of accused  and

Crl.  Misc.  No.71-B  ol 20'12

4

beneficial interpretation  has to be made in his favour.  When there  is

remoter possibility,  that an accused may not be awarded imprisonment  of

even one month then propriety demands  that discretion has to be

exercised in his favour.  Now,  coming  to the other extreme  that,  maximum

punishment  for offence provided  is up to 03 years, which does  not fall

within  the prohibitory  clause of Section 497(1)  Cr.P.C. The Honorable
Supreme  Court of  Pakistan  through different  authoritative

pronouncements time and again held that when an offence does not fall

within  the prohibitory clause  of Section 497(1) Cr.P.C,  bail is a rule and

refusal an exception.  ln this regard, I sought guidance from 2009 SCMR,

page 1488,  Zalar lqbal VS Muhammad Anwar and others, 2009 SCMR

Page 174, Shameel  VS the State etc.2011 SCMR, Page 1708, Riaz

Jaffar  Natiq VS Muhammad  Nadeem  Dar and others and 2011 SCMR,

page  870, Sikandar  Zaman VS The State etc.

11. Another  very  important  aspect  with regard to provision  of section

489-F  PPC is that it does not differentiate between cheque in accordance

with their pecuniary  value. Till today punishment for cheque valuing

Rs.5000/- and Rs.500:00 million and above is same. ln my humble

estimation,  proviso to this section are required  to be added, which

obviously is domain of the legislature. It is worth to mention here that with

regard  to Narcotic  Substances, categorization has been provided u/s 9 of

Control  of Narcotic  Substances  Act, 1997 which reads as under:-

Punishment for contravention of Sections  6,7 and 8'-..
9. 
whoever  contravenes the provisions  of secfion 6,7 or 8 shall be
punishable  with:
(a) 
imprisonment  which may extend  to two years, or with fine, or
with  both,  if the quantity of the narcotic drug,  psychotropic  substance  or
controlted  subsfance  is one  hundred  grams  or /ess;
(b) 
imprisonment  which may extend  to seven  years and shall  also
be liable to fine, if the quanttty of the narcotic  drug, psychotropic
substance or controlled  substance  exceeds one  hundred  grams  but does
not exceed  one  kilogram;
(c) 
may extend  to fourteen  years and  shall  also  be liable  to fine  which  may

death,  or impisonment for llfe, or imprisonment for a term which

6,-a

Crl.  Misc.  No.71-B  of 2012

5

be up to one million  rupees, if the quantity  of narcotics  drug, psychotropic

substance  or controlled  substance  exceeds the limits specified  in clause
(b):-

Provided  that, if the quantity  exceeds ten kilograms the punishment

shall not be less than imprisonmentfor  life.

12.  Admittedly, all type of narcotics are injurious to human  life but

effects of heroin are like administering  poison to human body. On the

contrary,  offence u/s 489-F  is a white color  crime, which in most of the

cases surface from business transactions  or repayment of loan etc. and

unfortunately  trend of registration of FlRs under this provision  is

increasing,  alarmingly.  This is the right time to bring the categorization

about  quantum  of sentence  corresponding  to the amount  of cheque. lt can

be like this, that for cheque up to Rs.1:00 million,  same punishment  as

already provided  in the statute and for cheque above  Rs.1:00  to Rs.5:00

million, quantum of punishment of imprisonment may be enhanced to 05

years and amount of fine at least 10o/o of the amount of cheque, similarly

cheque having  value of more  than Rs.05 to Rs.50  millions, punishment  of

imprisonment,  up to 07 years, and for cheque having  value  more than

Rs.50 million,  punishment  of imprisonment,  up to 10 years.

13.  Since courts  of law are required to remain within the statutory

provision,  and, section  489-F PPC as it stands,  does not prevent  exercise

of discretion in favour of accused. On enquiry,  the I.O informed  the court

that present  petitioner is previously  non-convict,  as such there is no

exceptional circumstance  on the basis of which petitioner's request  of bail

may be declined. Huge amount of cheque does  not expand the provision

and bring change in the statue.

Thus for the foregoing reasons,  this petition is allowed. The

petitioner is granted bail, subject  to furnishing of bail bond of Rs:500,000/-

(Five lac) with two sureties  of like amount, to the satisfaction of the trial

court.

Crl.  Misc.  No.71-B  ol 2012

b

Office is directed  to send  copy of this order to the Secretary,

Ministry  of Law, Justice  & Parliamentary  Affairs, lslamabad,  tb explore  the

possibilities  with regard  to observation made in para-11 and 12 of instant

order

,(s

T AZ|Z StDDtQUt)

Judge

Approved for Reporting.

"Waqar Ahmed"

sta Ef M

