Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

           WRIT PETITION NO. 2573 OF 2021 

Muhammad Ramzan 

VS 

Shakeela Bibi & others. 

PETITIONER BY:      

Raja Yasir Shakeel, Advocate.  

RESPONDENT BY: 

Proceeded Ex-parte  

DATE OF DECISION:  07.03.2022. 

========================================  

  BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-    Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  impugned  (i)  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the 

learned  Family  Court  (West),  Islamabad  dated  28.10.2020 

pursuant to which the suit for recovery of dower/gift in shape of 

a house measuring 5 Marlas bearing Khasra No. 1062 situated in 

village  Sari  Seral  was  decreed  to  the  extent  of  the  petitioner’s 

share  or  in  the  alternative  market  price  in  lieu  thereof,  and  (ii) 

the  judgment  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge 

(West),  Islamabad  dated  17.05.2021  pursuant  to  which  the 

judgment and decree of the learned Family Court was upheld. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner’s  main  contention 

was  that  both  judgments  have  been  passed  on  the  basis  of  Ex-

C1, which is a map of the property (“Makan”) being claimed by 

the  respondent,  which  was  marked  as  Mark-A  and  never 

exhibited  in  accordance  with  law  and  the  petitioner  was  never 

afforded  an  opportunity  to  cross-examine  respondent  No.1  in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 W.P No. 2573 of 2021 

2 | P a g e  

such regard. He contended that there was no specification of the 

Makan  or  description  of  its  boundaries  in  the  Nikah  Nama.  That 

Mark-A  on  the  basis  of  which  the  suit  was  decreed  was  not 

properly  exhibited,  both  judgments  suffered  from  infirmities. 

While  acknowledging  that  it  was  mentioned  in  clause  17  of  the 

Nikah  Nama  dated  12.08.1996  (Ex-P5)  that  a  Makan  had  been 

granted to respondent No.1, he  submitted  that the reference to 

such  Makan  was  for  purposes  of  both  spouses  living  together 

and  the Makan was not a marital gift given by the petitioner to 

respondent No1.  

3. 

Notices were duly issued to respondent No.1 but no one 

tendered appearance on behalf of the said respondent. She was 

proceeded against ex-parte. 

4. 

The 

learned  Family  Court  after  appreciating  the 

evidence produced by the parties held that the Nikah Nama was 

not  denied  by  the  petitioner  and  neither  was  the  fact  that  the 

property  being  claimed  by  respondent  No.1  as  a  gift  from  the 

petitioner,  as  noted  in  the  Nikah  Nama,  was  inherited  property 

owned  by  the  petitioner.  That  the  said  property  was  mentioned 

in  clause  17  of  the  Nikah  Nama  and  was  a  gift  made  by  the 

petitioner  to  respondent  No.  1  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the 

Nikah  Nama.  That  the  learned  Family  Court  had  jurisdiction 

under  the  Family  Court  Act,  1964,  to  deal  with  any  disputes 

related to marital gifts. That in the event that the petitioner was 

unable to hand over possession of the Makan as described in the 

map  appended  by  respondent  No.1  with  her  suit  (mark-A)  the 

petitioner would compensate respondent No.1 in lieu of such gift 

 
 
 
 W.P No. 2573 of 2021 

3 | P a g e  

by  paying  her  the  market  price  for  such  gift,  which  price  would 

be determined during the course of execution proceeding. 

5. 

The  arguments  raised  by  the  petitioner  before  this 

Court  was  also  raised  before  the  learned  Additional  District 

Court,  which  after  hearing,  the  parties  also  passed  a  reasoned 

judgment  holding  that  the  learned  Family  Court  had  correctly 

relied  on  the  law  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Yasmeen  Bibi  VS  Muhammad  Ghazanfar  Khan  and  others 

(PLD 2016 SC 613) and assumed jurisdiction over adjudication 

of  the  dispute  involving  marital  gifts.  After  reviewing  the 

evidence presented before the learned Family Court, the learned 

Appellate Court noted that any doubts regarding the specification 

of  the  boundaries  of  the  property  being  claimed  by  respondent 

No.1  was  of  no  avail  to  the  petitioner  as  he  had  admitted  joint 

ownership of inherited house and even if the specification of his 

portion  of  the  Makan  in  question  could  not  be  settled  during 

execution proceedings the learned Family Court had held that in 

the  alternative  the  petitioner  would  be  liable  to  pay  respondent 

No.1 the price of the Makan in lieu of delivery of his possession.   

6. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out 

any  infirmities  in  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  passed 

by the learned Family Court as well as the judgment rendered by 

the  learned  appellate  Court.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 

has failed to point out any peace of evidence that was either not 

read  or  misread  by  the  learned  Family  Court  and  the  learned 

Additional  District  Court.  His  contention  that  reference  to 

bestowing  a  “Makan”  on  respondent  No.1  through  the  Nikah 

 
 
 
 W.P No. 2573 of 2021 

4 | P a g e  

Nama what the petitioner meant was that he would merely invite 

respondent  No.1  to  live  in  such  Makan  makes  no  sense.  Clause 

17 of the Nikah Nama very clearly states that a Makan has been 

granted  by  the  petitioner  to  respondent  No.1,  which  clause  has 

been  rightly  interpreted  by  the  learned  Family  Court  and  the 

learned  appellate  Court  to  mean  that  it  was  a  bridal  gift  which 

formed  part  of  the  marriage  deed  between  the  petitioner  and 

respondent No.1. The reasoning of the learned Additional District 

Judge does not suffer from any infirmity when it notes that even 

if  the  specifications  of  the  property  are  in  question  or  that  the 

map  introduced  by  respondent  No.1  as  Mark-A  cannot  be  read 

into the evidence, it does not help the petitioner  as the learned 

Family Court has held that the price of such Makan is to be paid 

to respondent No.1 in lieu of the Makan.  

7. 

For  the  aforementioned  reasons,  the  instant  petition  is 

without merit and is dismissed. 

Shakeel Afzal/-  

          (BABAR SATTAR) 

   JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
