Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       WRIT PETITION  NO. 2896 OF 2021 

Mst. Irshad Ijaz 

VS 

The learned Justice of Peace, etc.   

PETITIONERS BY:       Dr. G.M Chaudhry, Advocate.  

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Barrister  Syeda  Jugnoo  Kazmi,  State 
Counsel.  
Mr. Muhammad Ismail Baloch, Advocate.  
Mr. Riasat, ASi, P.S Aabpara Islamabad.     

DATE OF HEARING: 

16.09.2021. 

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  Through  this  petition  the 

order of the learned Ex-officio Justice of Peace dated 29.06.2021 

has  been  impugned,  pursuant  to  which  the  application  filed  by 

the  petitioner  under  section  22-A  of  Criminal  Procedure  Code, 

1898  (“Cr.P.C.”)  for  directions  to  be  issued  to  the  police 

authorities was turned down.   

2. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  stated  that 

applications  filed  by  the  petitioner  dated  12.04.2021  and 

06.05.2021  with  the  police  authorities  for  registration  of  FIR 

included 

information  related 

to  cognizable  offences  and 

consequently the FIR ought to have been registered.  He stated 

that  only  question  before  the  learned  Justice  of  Peace  was 

whether  or  not  the  complaint  filed  with  the  police  related  to  a 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 2 

cognizable  offence  and  by  observing  that  the  dispute  between 

the petitioner and respondents No. 4 to 9 relates to partition of a 

house  and  that  another  FIR  No.  90/2021  already  stood 

registered,  the  learned  Justice  of  Peace  has  exceeded  his 

authority  and  did  not  act  in  accordance  with  law.  He  relied  on 

Khizar  Hayat  VS  Inspector  General  of  Police  (Punjab), 

Lahore  (PLD  2005  Lahore  470),  Younas  Abbas  VS 

Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Chakwal  (2016  PLD  SC  581), 

Fariq  Khan  VS  Bakhtawar  Jan  (2019  P.Cr.LJ  1588), 

Muhammad  Saleem  VS  Investigation  Officer  Levies 

Station,  Hanna,  Quetta  (2019  MLD  1719)  and  Sadruddin 

VS Province of Sindh (2019 YLR 951).  

3. 

Learned counsel for respondents No. 5 to 9 stated that 

the petitioner had come to the court with unclean hands and had 

not mentioned FIR No. 90/2021 registered on 13.02.2021 to the 

learned  Justice  of  Peace  while  moving  her  application  under 

section  22-A,  Cr.P.C.  He  further  contended  that  the  complaint 

filed by the petitioner with the police authorities was false as the 

alleged incident related to a day when respondents No. 4 and 5 

were booked on flight to travel from Islamabad to United States. 

He  further  contended  that  respondent  No.  4  was  the  father  of 

the petitioner’s husband and respondent No.5 was the brother of 

the  petitioner’s  husband  who  lived  on  the  first  storey  of  the 

premises  in  which  the  petitioner  lived  and  differences  between 

the  petitioner  and  the  said  respondents  were  in  the  nature  of  a 

family  dispute  and  could  not  be  transformed  into  a  criminal 

matter.     

 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 3 

4. 

The  learned  State  Counsel  submitted  that  the  police 

believed  that  there  was  discrepancy  in  the  account  of  the 

petitioner  included  in  the  complaint  and  the  police  did  not 

believe  the  veracity  of  the  complaint  in  view  of  the  fact  that 

within  a  few  hour  of  the  reported  incident,  respondents  No.  4 

and 5 were scheduled to fly out to the United States. She further 

submitted that given that FIR No. 90/2021 was in relation to an 

incident  dated  13.02.2021,  a  similar  subsequent  incident  would 

constitute  a  fresh  cause  for  filing  a  complaint  with  the  police 

authorities  and  the  registration  of  an  FIR  in  relation  to  such 

complaint was not barred by law.   

5. 

In rebuttal, the learned counsel for the petitioner stated 

that  the  incident  in  relation  to  which  FIR  No.  90/2021  was 

registered was entirely independent of the incident in relation to 

which the police refused to register the FIR leading to the instant 

petition.  He  submitted  that  the  allegation  in  the  present 

complaint  included,  inter  alia,  trespass  into  the  petitioner’s 

house  in  the  night,  use  of  criminal  force,  assault  of  a  women, 

tearing the clothes of a women, and threats to kill a women and 

that the incident attracted, among others, section 354-A of PPC, 

the  prescribed  punishment  for  which  was  the  death  penalty  or 

imprisonment  for  life.  In  refusing  to  register  an  FIR,  the  police 

disbelieved the version of events as stated by the petitioner and 

the  learned  Justice  of  Peace  also  seemed  to  have  decided  the 

petitioner’s application under section 22-A, Cr.P.C by forming an 

opinion regarding the truth and veracity of the complaint filed by 

the petitioner. And in doing so both the police authorities as well 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 4 

as the learned Justice of Peace acted in a manner not envisaged 

by law.   

6. 

 The  manner  in  which  the  FIR  is  to  be  registered  and 

the  scope  of  the  authority  of  the  Justice  of  Peace  and  the 

manner  in  which  such  authority  is  to  be  exercised  came  before 

the  august  Supreme  Court  and  was  settled  in  Muhammad 

Bashir  VS  Station  House  Officer,  Okara  Cantt.  (PLD  2007 

SC  539).  After  tracing  the  scheme  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 

Procedure,  1898,  the  Police  Rules  and  powers  vested  in  the 

police  authorities  thereunder,  the  august  Supreme  Court  held 

the following: 

“27.  The  conclusions  that  we  draw  from  the  above,  rather 

lengthy discussion, on the subject of F.I.R., are as under; 

(a)  no  authority  vested  with  an  Officer  Incharge  of  a 
Police  Station  or  with  anyone  else  to  refuse  to  record 
an  F.I.R.  where  the  information  conveyed,  disclosed 
the commission of a cognizable offence; 

(b)  no  authority  vested  with  an  Officer  Incharge  of  a 
Police Station or with any one else to hold any inquiry 
into  the  correctness  or  otherwise  of  the  information 
which  is  conveyed  to  the  S.H.O.  for  the  purposes  of 
recording of an F.I.R; 

(c)  any  F.I.R.  registered  after  such  an  exercise  i.e. 
determination of the truth or falsity of the information 
conveyed  to  the  S.H.O.,  would  get  hit  by  the 
provisions of section 162, Cr.P.C. 

(d) existence of an F.I.R. is no condition precedent for 
holding  of  an  investigation  nor  is  the  same  a 
prerequisite for the arrest of a person concerned with 
the commission of a cognizable offence; 

(e)  nor  does  the  recording of an  F.I.R.  mean  that  the 
S.H.O.  or a police  officer  deputed by  him was  obliged 
to  investigate  the  case  or  to  go  through  the  whole 
length  of  investigation  of  the  case  mentioned  therein 
or that any accused person nominated therein must be 
arrested; and finally that; 

(f)  the  check  against  lodging  of  false  F.I.Rs.  was  not 
refusal  to  record  such  F.I.Rs,  but  punishment  of  such 
informants under S.182, P.P.C. etc. which should be, if 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 5 

enforced,  a  fairly  deterrent  against  misuse  of  the 
provisions of S.154, Cr.P.C. 

7. 

With regard to the scope of the authority vested in the 

Justice of Peace and the manner in which it  is to be exercised, it 

was held in Muhammad Bashir that: 

“36.  For  the  purposes  of  this  petition,  we  are  concerned, 

primarily,  with  clause  (i)  of  the  above  quoted  provisions  of 

subsection  (6)  of  the  section  22-A  of  the  Cr.P.C.  These 

provisions create a new forum to rectify a wrong done by an 

Officer  Incharge  of a Police  Station by  refusing to  register a 

criminal case i.e. not recording an F.I.R. We have held above 

that the provisions of section 154, Cr.P.C. command a S.H.O. 

to  lodge  an  F.I.R.  if  the  information  conveyed  to  him 

disclosed the commission of a cognizable offence irrespective 

of  the  information  being  correct  or  incorrect.  Undoing  this 

wrong of non-registration of a criminal case would mean only 

an order to the S.H.O. to register the case. The provisions of 

the  said  subsection  (6)  of  section  22-A,  Cr.P.C.  confer  no 

additional  powers  on  an  Ex-officio  Justice  of  the  Peace  to 

hold  any  enquiry  to  assess  the  credibility  of  such  an 

information communicated for the purpose in question nor do 

the  said  provisions  give  any  extra  authority  to  the  said  Ex-

officio  Justice  of  the  Peace  to  refuse  registration  or  order 

non-registration'  of  an  F.I.R.  in  violation  of  or  beyond  the 

mandatory requirements of section 154, Cr.P.C. 

37. We know that the prescribed forum for the determination 

of the correctness or falsity of the accusation levelled against 

some  one  was  a  court  of  law  and  not  a  police  man  or  even 

an Ex-officio Justice of the Peace irrespective of his rank and 

status.  And  we  also  know  from  the  provisions  of  section 

190(1)  of  the  Cr.P.C.  that  the  lodging  of  an  F.I.R.  and  the 

report  consequently  submitted  by  a  police  officer  under 

section  173,  Cr.P.C.  was  only  one  of  the  three  modes  of 

reaching  the  prescribed  competent  court 

for  such  a 

determination.  The  other  two  channels  being  a  private 

complaint  and  a  suo  motu  action  taken  by  the  authorized 

Magistrate leading to the taking of cognizance. 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 6 

38.  And  if  an  Ex-officio  Justice  of  the  Peace  who  also 

happens to be the higher of the two subordinate courts and a 

trial  Court  with  respect  to  certain  offences  and  an  appellate 

and  a  revisional  court  in  other,  was  to  declare,  like  it  was 

done  in  the  present  case,  that  no  offence  at  all  had  been 

committed and that the accusations were false and that also 

on the basis of a mere report by a police officer without any 

evidence  having  been  examined  by  a  Court  of  Law  then  we 

would not only be shutting out the other two channels which 

had  been  made  available  by  law  but  would  also  be  deciding 

the  fate  of  criminal  cases  in  a  manner  never  visuallised  by 

the law makers even in the wildest of their dreams. 

39. This could never be allowed. 

40.  Therefore,  in  our  opinion,  the  only  jurisdiction  which 

could be exercised by an Ex-officio Justice of the Peace under 

section  22-A(6),  Cr.P.C.  was  to  examine  whether  the 

information  disclosed  by  the  applicant  did  or  did  not 

constitute a cognizable offence and if it did then to direct the 

concerned  S.H.O.  to  record  an  F.I.R.  without  going  into  the 

veracity  of  the  information  in  question,  and  no  more. 

Offering  any  other  interpretation  to  the  provisions  in 

question would be doing violence to the entire scheme of the 

Cr.P.C. which could not be permitted. 

8. 

The  question  of  legality  of  the  direction  to  register  an 

FIR  in  exercise  of  powers  under  section  22-A,  Cr.P.C    came 

before  the  august  Supreme  Court  most  recently  in  Abdul 

Rehman  Malik  VS  Synthia  D.  Ritchie,  Americans  National 

(2020  SCMR  2037),  wherein  the  august  Supreme  Court 

reiterated the law laid down in Muhammad Bashir and held the 

following: 

“We  have  also  carefully  examined  Rule  24.4  of  the  Police 

Rules,  1934,  referred  to  by  the  learned  counsel  to  argue 

that once the police had definitely concluded the accusation 

as motivated and false, there was no occasion left to record 

a  First  Information  Report  so  as  to  undertake  a  futile 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 7 

pursuit.  The  supra  Rule  possibly  suspends  the  mechanism 

to  be  followed  under  section  154  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 

Procedure,  1898,  however,  commanding  unambiguously  to 

record  a  First  Information  Report  upon  receipt  of 

information  disclosing  commission  of  a  cognizable  offence. 

The Rule ibid runs as follow: 

“24.4.  Action  when  reports  are  doubtful:-  (1)  If  the 
information  or  other  intelligence  relating  to  the  alleged 
commission of a  cognizable  offence is  such that an officer 
in charge of a police station has reason to suspect that the 
alleged  offence  has  not  been  committed,  he  shall  enter 
the  substance  of  the  information  or  intelligence  in  the 
station  diary  and  shall  record  his  reasons  for  suspecting 
that the alleged offence has not been committed and shall 
also  notify  to  the  informant,  if  any,  the  fact  that  he  will 
not investigate the case or cause it to be investigated." 

Rule  24.4  does  not  tyrannically  foreclose  doors  to  a 

complainant  to  voice  his/her  grievance  nor  it  dogmatically 

empowers  an  Officer  Incharge  to  terminate  a  prosecution 

before  its  inception  on  his  subjective  belief  of  its  being 

false; its application is subservient to the scheme laid down 

in  Part  V  of  the  Code  ibid  and,  thus,  has  to  be  essentially 

read in conjunction with section 169 thereof. Therefore, an 

Officer Incharge can  possibly invoke the Rule, that too, for 

reasons  strong  and  manifest  after  registration  of  First 

Information Report.” 

9. 

In  Mst.  Sughran  Bibi  VS  The  State  (PLD  2018  SC 

595) a larger bench of the august Supreme Court endorsed the 

law laid down by a full bench of the Lahore High Court in Khizar 

Hayat  and  others  VS  Inspector  General  of  Police 

(Punjab),  Lahore  and  others  (PLD  2005  Lahore  470)  on 

the  manner  in  which  power  to  arrest  is  to  be  exercised  and 

reproduced the said in relevant part: 

“21.  One  of  the  cardinal  principles  of  criminal  law  and 

jurisprudence  is  that  an  accused  person  is  presumed  to  be 

innocent  until  proved  guilty  before  a court  of  law.  However, 

of  late  we  have  noticed  a  growing  tendency  on  the  part  of 

the  complainant  party  to  insist  upon  arrest  of  an  accused 

person  nominated  by  it  in  the  F.I.R.  and  an  increasing 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 8 

willingness,  nay  eagerness,  on  the  part  of  the  investigating 

officer  of  a  criminal  case  to  affect  arrest  of  the  accused 

person  even  before 

initiating  or 

launching  a  proper 

investigation of the allegations levelled in the F.I.R.. Such an 

approach has been found by us to be absolutely against the 

spirit  of  the  relevant  law,  to  be  wrought  with  inherent 

dangers  to  cherished  liberty  of  citizens  who  may  ultimately 

be  found  to  be  innocent  and  to  amount  to  putting  the  cart 

before the horse!”  

10. 

In  view  of  the  law  as  enumerated  in  Muhammad 

Bashir,  Abdul  Rehman  Malik  and  Sughran  Bibi,  it  is  clear 

that  (i)  the  registration  of  an  FIR  is  an  obligation  to  be 

discharged  by  the  police  authorities  in  the  event  that  the 

complaint filed by a person makes out a cognizable case, and (ii) 

the  registration  of  an  FIR  does  not  automatically  lead  to  the 

arrest of the person against whom the complaint has been filed. 

It  was  held  in  Muhammad  Bashir  and  reiterated  in  Abdul 

Rehman Malik that it is neither for the police authorities nor for 

the  learned  Justice  of  Peace  to  engage  in  an  enquiry  to  assess 

the  credibility,  veracity  or  correctness  of  the  information 

contained  in  the  complaint  seeking  the  registration  of  an  FIR. 

Such  investigation  of  the  complaint  is  to  be  undertaken  by  the 

police authorities and if in view of their investigation a conclusion 

is drawn that the complainant was false, the appropriate course 

of  action  is  exercise  of  authority  under  section  182  of  PPC. 

Likewise,  the  Justice  of  Peace  is  also  vested  with  no  authority 

and  jurisdiction  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  veracity  and  the 

correctness  of  the  complaint    in  relation  to  which  a  direction  is 

being  sought  under  section  22-A  of  Cr.P.C.  Section  22-A  of 

Cr.P.C  provides  for  curative  action  and  vests  in  the  Justice  of 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 9 

Peace  the  authority  to  issue  directions  in  the  event  that  the 

police  has  been  non-feasant  and  has  refused  to  exercise  its 

authority  under  section  154  of  Cr.P.C.  In  doing  so  the  sole 

question  before  the  Justice  of  Peace  is  whether  or  not  the 

information in the complaint in question makes out a cognizable 

offence which ought to be investigated by the police.   

11. 

In  the  instant  case,  the  allegation  included  in  the 

complaint  is  that  respondents  No.  4  to  9  resorted  to  trespass, 

beat  up  the  petitioner  and  tore  her  clothes,  which  actions 

constitute  cognizable  offences  under  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code. 

The  fact  that  a  similar  incident  was  also  reported  a  few  months 

earlier  in  relation  to  which  FIR  No.90/2021  was  registered  is 

irrelevant  for  present  purposes.  Even  if  a  similar  incident 

transpired a few months back, the complaint relates to a repeat 

incident  which  would  constitute  an  independent  cause  to  file  a 

complaint.  By  engaging 

in  an  enquiry  to  ascertain  the 

correctness  and  veracity  of  the  complaint  while  refusing  to 

register the FIR, the police acted in breach of its obligation under 

section 154 of Cr.P.C. And by engaging in a similar enquiry, the 

learned  Justice  of  Peace  also  acted  in  excess  of  his  authority 

under section 22-A of Cr.P.C.  

12. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  petition  is  allowed  and 

consequently the  impugned order  passed by  the learned  Justice 

of  Peace  dated  29.06.2021  is  set  aside.  Respondent  No.3  is 

directed  to  record  a  First  Information  Report  in  light  of  the 

application filed by the petitioner. It is, however, reiterated that 

the  registration  of  an  FIR  does  not  automatically  require  the 

 
 
 
 
W.P 2896/021 

P a g e  | 10 

police to exercise its arrest powers as laid down in Sughran Bibi 

and    Muhammad  Bashir.  Further,  in  the  event  that  after 

registration of case, the police comes to the conclusion that the 

complaint on the basis of which the FIR was registered was false, 

it ought to initiate appropriate proceedings under section 182 of 

PPC.                     

        (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

 Announced in the open Court on 23.09.2021. 

 JUDGE 

Saeed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
