ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Revision No.53/2019 
Abdul Waheed Awan 
VS
The State & another. 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Zahid Farooq Cheema, Advocate.  

Respondents by: 

Mr. Fareed Khan Jadoon, Advocate.  
Ms. Saima Naqvi, State Counsel.  
Yasir, ASI, P.S. Margalla, Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

17.09.2019. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  criminal 

revision  petition,  the  petitioner  has  called  in  question  the  concurrent 

findings of Courts below, whereby the petitioner has been convicted in 

case  FIR  No.147,  dated  18.07.2017,  under  Section  489-F  PPC,  P.S. 

Margalla,  Islamabad  and  sentenced  to  01  year  and  06  months  rigorous 

imprisonment. Benefit of Section 382-B, Cr.P.C was also extended to the 

petitioner.  

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  case  are  that  Abdul  Hameed 

Nasir  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  “complainant”)  with  view  to  purchase  a 

plot  and  house  from  Abdul  Waheed  Awan  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

“petitioner”)  had  paid  him  Rs.4,000,000/-  and  Rs.5,000,000/-, 

respectively,  however,  the  petitioner  had  failed  to  transfer  the  said 

properties  in  the  name  of  complainant.  On  persistence  of  complainant, 

petitioner  issued  him  a  cheque  amounting  to  Rs.9,000,000/-  (Exh.PA), 

which  dishonored  on  its  presentation  in  the  bank  vide  dishonor  slips 

Exh.PB  to  Exh.PD.  Consequently,  case  FIR  No.147,  dated  18.07.2017, 

under  Section  489-F  PPC,  P.S.  Margalla,  Islamabad  was  registered 

 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 2 

against  the  petitioner.  Pursuant  to  investigation  and  submission  of 

challan under Section 173 Cr.P.C. against the petitioner, the learned trial 

Court  vide  impugned  judgment  dated  19.03.2019  has  convicted  the 

appellant  under  Section  489-F  PPC  and  sentenced  him  to  undergo  01 

year and 06 months rigorous imprisonment, however benefit of Section 

382-B  Cr.P.C.  was  also  extended  to  the  petitioner.  Feeling  aggrieved 

thereby, the petitioner filed appeal before the learned Additional District 

Judge-V,  Islamabad  (West),  which  was  dismissed  vide  impugned 

judgment dated 17.04.2019. Hence, the instant criminal revision.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contended  that  the  prosecution 

case  is  a  result  of  deliberations  and  consultations  and  the  FIR  was 

lodged at a belated stage after concocting a false story; that the learned 

trial  Court  had  not  considered  the  stance  taken  by  the  petitioner  in  his 

statement under Section 342 Cr.P.C.; that there are glaring discrepancies 

in  the  prosecution  evidence,  which  have  been  ignored  by  the  learned 

Trial Court while passing the impugned judgment; that the prosecution 

witnesses  are  interested  witnesses,  whose  statements  have  not  been 

corroborated  by  independent  witnesses;  that  the  amount  of  the  cheque 

differs  from  the  amount  paid;  that  the  concurrent  findings    of  both  the 

Courts  below  are  based  on  misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence, 

therefore, the same may kindly be set-aside.  

4. 

Conversely, learned State Counsel as well as learned counsel for 

complainant  opposed  the 

instant  criminal  revision  petition  and 

contended  that  issuance  of  cheque  has  not  been  disputed  by  the 

petitioner; that the prosecution has successfully proved the case against 

the petitioner in terms of Section 489-F PPC, on the basis of which both 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 3 

the  Courts  below  have  rightly  passed  their  findings;  that  the  petitioner 

has dishonestly issued the cheque as the petitioner committed repeated 

defaults in paying back the complainant’s hard  earned money; that the 

concurrent findings of both the Courts below are based on solid reasons 

and  suffer  from  no  illegalities,  therefore,  the  instant  criminal  revision 

petition may be dismissed.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.  

Perusal  of  record  reveals 

that  complainant  /respondent 

No.2/Abdul  Hameed  Nasir  got  lodged  the  complaint  Ex.PE  on 

02.06.2017  with  the  allegation  that  he  was  retired  from  Government 

service as Inspector of Intelligence Bureau and petitioner Abdul Waheed 

Awan  contacted  him  and  offered  to  sell  Plot  No.  848,  Street  No.  26, 

Sector G-9/1, Islamabad and  one House  No.  375, Street No. 166, Sector 

G-11/1,  Islamabad  belonging  to  one  person,  who  was  allegedly  facing 

financial 

issues  and  was  selling  out 

the  properties.  The  sale 

consideration of house was fixed at Rs. 40,00,000/- and agreement dated 

24.06.2014  was  executed  in  presence  of  witnesses,  whereby  the  amount 

was  paid  in  cash,  however,  property  could  not  be  transferred  and  the 

respondent No.2/complainant insisted for return of amount, whereupon 

the  petitioner  issued  the  post  dated  cheque  No.  11061130073,  dated 

30.08.2016, Bank of Punjab, F-8 Markaz Branch, Islamabad amounting to 

Rs.  90,00,000/-  as  of  Rs.  40,00,000/-  against  house  and  Rs.  50,00,000/- 

against plot, however, the cheque was dishonoured on its presentation, 

therefore,  FIR  No.147,  dated  18.07.2017,  U/s  489-F,  PPC,  P.S  Margalla, 

Islamabad  (Ex.PU)  was  lodged.  The  complainant  has  submitted  the 

cheque  of  Rs.  90,00,000/-  as  Ex.PA  and  dishonoured  slips  as  Ex.PB  to 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 4 

Ex.PD in his evidence as PW-1, whereby the details of Bank receipt have 

been verified through PW-3 Nusrat Tariq, Manager, Bank of Punjab, F-8 

Markaz  Branch,  Islamabad  in  her  report  Ex.PT.  The  investigation  was 

conducted by PW-4 Ghulam Abbas, S.I, who chalked out the FIR (Ex.PU) 

and  prepared  site  plan  (Ex.PV),  whereas  PW-5  Dariya  Khan,  S.I,  i.e. 

second Investigation Officer of the case conducted partial investigation. 

The  challan  has  been  submitted  in  the  Court  and  after  completion  of 

trial, the petitioner has recorded his version U/s 342, Cr.P.C. and denied 

the charges together with the factum of issuance of cheque and took the 

plea  that  the  cheque  in  question  was  forcibly  received  from  him  by 

extending life threats to him and his family.  

7. 

The  Learned  Trial  Court  has  convicted  the  petitioner  U/s  489-F, 

PPC and awarded the sentence of one year and six months with benefit 

of Section 382-B, Cr.P.C. 

8. 

The  entire  case 

is  based  upon 

the 

testimony  of 

the 

complainant/PW-1  being  a  star  witness  of  this  case,  who  had  not 

produced  the  agreement  to  sell  the  properties,  which  is  the  basic 

document  to  establish  the  relationship  between  complainant  and 

petitioner,  rather  the  complainant/PW-1  has  relied  upon  document 

called as Ex.PF, which is a subsequent agreement for settlement of claim 

in  shape  of  cheques,  which  was  executed  at  pre-arrest  bail  stage, 

although  the  presentation  of  said  document  has  been  objected  by  the 

defence  side,  but  their  request  has  been  turned  down.  Similarly,  the 

complainant/PW-1 has submitted three (03) different cheques Ex.PG to 

Ex-PJ  to  substantiate  his  claim  that  the  petitioner  agreed  to  pay  the 

amount,  although  the  said  cheques  were  also  dishonoured  vide 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 5 

dishonoured  slips  Ex.PK  to  Ex.PS.  During  the  course  of  cross-

examination,  the  complainant  acknowledged  the  agreement  dated 

24.06.2014  Ex.DA  executed  between  Abdul  Waheed  Awan/petitioner 

and  Abdul  Hameed  Nasir/complainant,  whereby  possession  of 

House/Plot  No.  848,  Street  No.  26,  Sector  G-9/1,  Islamabad  was 

delivered  to  the  complainant/PW-1  against  the  consideration  of  Rs. 

40,00,000/-.  Similarly,  the  complainant/PW-1  has  also  acknowledged 

the  affidavit  Ex.DB  executed  by  him  regarding  receiving  of  amount  of 

Rs. 45,50,000/- by him, whereby it has specifically been stated as under:- 

 ںیه
 با

 ںیه ٹروک و ہضبق اک ٹلاپ وک رصان دیوحلادبع یوسه فلحه نه ہک اھت اوہ ےط ہیروا
 روا ۔اگ ےد ےکرک
لوکه
 ہاه ود روها
 ےک
 CDA 
روا یوریپ لوکه یک سیک یرگڈ
 دیوحلادبع یوسه فلحه نه
 ماک لااب ہجردنه فلحه نه ہک ہی
 ۔ےہ اہر ماکان ںیه ےنرک
 روها ماوت ہکات ںوہ اہر گناه تلہه یک کت
 ینعی ہاه ود ےس رصان
 نه وت اکس ےد ہن ماجنا  رس ےک روها ہدش ےط ماک رگا فلحه نه ۔ںوکس رک لوکه
 یوسه فلحه
 ھکلا ے وناکا غلبه انگ ود ینعی لبڈ اک نقر ہدش لوصو وک رصان دی
 ےپور

وحلادبع
Rs. 91,00,000/-

 اگ ںوہ دنباپ اک ےنید )

 لیرپا

5102

30 

۔ 

9. 

The  above  referred  undertaking  and  contents  of  previous 

agreement  Ex.DB  disclose  the  relationship  among  the  parties  for 

possession  and  settlement  of  the  civil  suit  qua  the  property  in  dispute 

and  acknowledgement  of  amount  of  Rs.  45,50,000/-.  Conversely,  the 

petitioner took the stance while answering question No. 2 that:-  

“At  that  time  consideration  of  the  possession  was  settled  as 
Rs. 40,00,000/- (Four million) (whereas at that time price of such like 
house/plot was about Rs. 350,00,000/- and above), the all amount was 
gone  to  the  Shah  Nawaz  through  me  and  I  got  only  commission  fee 
Rs.200,000/- and nothing else. It is appraisal to mention here that the 
complainant remain in possession of the said house later on he further 
sold the house to one Mr. Altaf etc.” 

10. 

Similarly,  the  petitioner  has  answered  question  No.  3  regarding 

compromise  deed  Ex.PF  and  post  dated  cheques  Ex.PG  to  Ex.PJ 

alongwith  dishonoured  slips  Ex.PK  to  Ex.PS  that  he  has  executed  the 

agreement  under  coercion,  therefore,  the  said  document  has  no 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 6 

relevancy  with  the  case.  He  has  also  taken  the  stance  that  the  said 

document  was  written  with  reference  to  clause-3,  whereby  he  has 

withdrawn  the  suit  for  cancellation  of  cheque  amounting  to  Rs. 

90,00,000/- against the complainant.  

11. 

The  entire  scenario  referred  above  gives  rise  to  the  proposition 

that  the  complainant  had  entered  into  agreement  for  delivery  of 

possession of the house against Rs. 40,00,000/- through Ex.DA only and 

subsequently  through  Ex.DB,  amount  of  Rs.  550,000/-  was  paid  for 

settlement of CDA issues as well as of civil suit. The available document 

clearly  spells out that  it is meant for  possession of the house  only  and, 

not  for  transfer  of  the  property  as  petitioner  is  not  the  owner  of  the 

property,  therefore,  the  cheque  in  question  of  Rs.  90,00,000/-  Ex.PA 

dated  30.08.2016  drawn  on  Bank  of  Punjab,  F-8  Markaz  Branch, 

Islamabad  and  its  dishonoured  slips  Ex.PB  to  Ex.PD  are  without 

valuable  consideration  as  the  petitioner  has  only  received  commission 

fee  amounting  to  Rs.  200,000/-  only,  which  has  been  referred  in  the 

statement  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  of  the  petitioner,  therefore, 

dishonestly  issuance  of  cheques  to  the  extent  of  Rs.90,00,000/-  is  not 

visible,  which  does  not  commensurate  with  due 

liability  of 

Rs.45,50,000/-.  By  comparing  the  entire  evidence  of  the  prosecution 

witnesses, the ingredients of Section 489-F PPC for dishonestly issuing a 

cheque are not proved as total liability of petitioner is of Rs. 45,50,000/-, 

although the same was only meant for possession of the house. 

12. 

The  complainant  has  managed  the  registration  of  criminal  cases 

U/s 489-F PPC and even high-handedness on the part of complainant is 

visible,  who  exerted  pressure  upon  the  petitioner  and  got  additional 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 7 

three cheques of Rs. 90,00,000/- through a subsequent document, which 

were  dishonoured,  although  the  original  claim  is  only  to  the  extent  of 

Rs.45,50,000/-,  and  as  such  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  the  case, 

however, learned Trial Court has not considered these technical aspects 

of  the  case,  where  consideration  of  agreement,  referred  in  Ex.DA  and 

Ex.DB was for possession of the property only and not for transfer of the 

rights of the property, which is the key factor in the entire case. 

13.  As  such  doubt  emerges  on  record  regarding  dishonestly  issuing 

cheque  of  Rs.  90,00,000/-  by  petitioner,  in  order  to  clear  his  financial 

liability,  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  that  the  petitioner  had 

received  an  amount  of  Rs.  90,00,000/-  from  complainant,  rather  there 

was  dispute  of  payment  of  Rs.  45,50,000/-  that  too  was  in  respect  of 

delivery  of  possession  of  House  No.  848,  Street  No.  26,  Sector  G-9/1, 

Islamabad. 

14. 

I  have  gone  through  the  judgment  dated  19.03.2019,  passed  by 

learned  Judicial  Magistrate,  Section  30,  (West),  Islamabad  as  well  as 

judgment  dated  17.04.2019,  passed  by  learned  Additional  District  & 

Sessions Judge-V (West), Islamabad in appeal, whereby the evidence has 

been discussed by the Appellate Court in the following manner. 

“Issuance  of  cheque  is  admitted.  Signature  of  petitioner  on  disputed 
cheque  is  admitted.  Compromise  between  the  parties  is  admitted. 
Wherein he admitted his liability and also admitted receipt of amount 
in  question.  After  FIR  petitioner  also  executed  another  compromise 
deed  and  issued  three  other  cheques.  The  complainant  placed  various 
proof  in  shape  of  documents  to  support  his  version.  Petitioner  has 
failed  to  point  out  any  circumstances,  to  disprove  the  version  of 
complainant. It is proved that the accused  received amount but failed 
to fulfill  his  obligation/liability and for repayment he issued disputed 
cheque 
offence  under  Section  489-F,  PPC 
liability/repayment and issuance of cheque and dishonour is sufficient 
to  prove  the  criminal  intention  and  commission  of  offence,  so,  the 
learned  trial  court  has  rightly  appreciated  the  record  and  evidence. 
There  is  no  mis-reading  or  non-reading  of  evidence.  There  is  no 

and 

the 

for 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 8 

illegality  and  no  need  to  interfere  in  the  findings  of  learned  trial 
court.”      

15. 

The  above  referred  view  is  not  up  to  the  mark  and  Appellate 

Court lacks the basic quality to write down the judgment, even para-6 of 

the judgment is without logical explanation where no evidence has been 

discussed as  required in such type of cases. The  learned first Appellate 

Court has not discussed the basic ingredients of Section 489-F PPC, even 

otherwise,  the  settlement  deed  being  contrary  to  the  statement  of 

complainant and his witnesses was unreliable and insignificant, but this 

fact  has  not  been  taken  into  consideration  by  the  Appellate  Court. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  2017  P.Cr.LJ  1305  (Mehmood  Khan  VS  Sohail 

Khan). 

16. 

Besides the above  referred background, it is  obligatory upon  the 

Court  to  go  through  minimum  requirements  of  Section  489-F  PPC, 

which has specific conditions to be fulfilled before passing the judgment 

of  conviction.  Such  conditionalities  have  been  explained  in  details  in 

case  reported  as  2010  SCMR  806  (Muhammad  Sultan  VS  The  State), 

wherein it has been held as under:  

“A perusal of Section 489-F PPC reveals that the provision will 
be attracted if the following conditions are fulfilled and proved by 
the prosecution:--- 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

Issuance of cheque; 
Such issuance was with dishonest intention.  
The purpose of issuance of cheques should be:--- 
(a)  To repay a loan; or 
(b) To fulfill an obligation (which in wide term inter alia 
applicable  to  lawful  agreements,  contracts,  services, 
promises by which one is bound or an act which binds 
person to some performance). 

(iv) 

 On presentation, the cheque is dishonoured. 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 9 

17. 

Likewise,  the  other  important  element  which  has  not  properly 

been  appreciated  is  the  dishonest  intention  to  defraud  the  complainant 

while issuing the check without any intent to pay or return the amount. 

In  absence  of  all  these  ingredients,  the  appellate  Court  is  bound  to 

appreciate the evidence in such a manner whereby the requirements of 

Section  423  Cr.P.C.  are  strictly  observed.  The  legislature  has  used  the 

terms in the said provision that “after perusing such record” and “there is 

no  sufficient  ground  for  interfering,  dismissed  the  appeal.”  These  two 

concepts cast certain duties upon the Appellate Court to write down the 

judgment after discussing every incriminating piece of evidence against 

the  petitioner  as  the  Appellate  Court  is  to  reappraise  the  evidence  of 

controversy  afresh  and  non  appraisal  of  evidence  amounts  to  a 

substantial  and  grave  injustice,  especially  when  the  statutory  right  of 

appeal  confers  a  right  of  rehearing  of  whole  dispute  unless  expressly 

restricted in scope and the appellate court is not confined to the reasons 

which have been given by the Court below as the ground of its decision. 

The  learned  first  Appellate  Court  has  to  consider  the  controversy 

entirely  afresh,  both  as  regards  to  facts  and  law,  and  can  substitute  its 

own opinion in place of the decision taken by the lower court. Reliance 

is  placed  upon  PLD  1954  Federal  Court  123  (Appellate  Jurisdiction) 

(Imran Ullah VS The Crown).  

18.  While considering the principles settled by the superior Courts in 

cases  reported  as  1971  SCMR  628  (Abdul  Saddique VS  The  State), 2002 

SCMR  1806  (Arshad  Ali  alias  Achhu  VS  The  State),  1986  SCMR  59 

(Muhammad  Bakhsh  VS  The  State),  2011  PCr.LJ  [Lahore]  344  (Zahid 

Hussain  VS  The  State  and  others),  2012  YLR  474  [Balochistan]  (Lal 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 10 

Muhammad  VS  Abdullah  and  others),  2011  PCr.LJ  856 Federal  Shariat 

Court] (Mst. Salma Bibi VS Niaz alias Billa and 2 others), 2013 PCr.LJ 

374  [Sindh]  (Fateh  Muhammad  Kobhar  VS  Sabzal  and  4  others)  it  is 

necessary to highlight the principles of appraisal by the Appellate Court 

for future guidance of the lower court in criminal cases.  

(a)  While  hearing  criminal  appeal  against  conviction,  the 

Appellate Court has to reconsider the case afresh.  

(b) 

Evidence  of  the  prosecution  and  defence  has  to  be 

discussed.  

(c) 

Status  of  documentary  evidence  in  terms  of  Qanun-e-

Shahadat  Order,  1984  be  considered  for  the  purpose  of 

admissibility or inadmissibility.  

(d) 

The judgment should contain an elaborated view of entire 

case.  

(e) 

Question  of  law  should  be  answered  after  appraisal  of 

evidence while considering the ingredients of offence.  

(f) 

No appeal shall be decided without referring to record and 

proceedings of the learned Trial Court.  

(g)  Appellate Court has to apply its judicial mind and in case 

the  evidence  has  not  been  discussed,  the  requirement  of 

Section 423 Cr.P.C. stands negated.  

(h) 

Efforts should be shown to explore sufficient grounds for 

interfering in the findings of the Trial Court, whereafter 

a view is to be rendered.  

(i)  While hearing the appeal the learned first Appellate Court 

is bound to dispose of the appeal on merits after examining 

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 11 

the evidence despite the fact that counsel for appellant had 

not pressed the appeal on merits. 

(j) 

In case the counsel or advocate for the appellant failed to 

argue the case on merits, even then  the Appellate Court 

is bound to reappraise the entire evidence and the Court 

is  not  relieved  of  its  duty  to  peruse  the  record  and  to 

find  out  whether  there  is  ample  evidence  against  the 

appellant to convict him for which he has been charged.  

(k)  After  admission  of  criminal  appeal,  it  could  not  be 

dismissed  without  adverting  to  the  merits,  even  in  case 

of  non-appearance  of  appellant  or  his  counsel  as 

Appellate  Court  is  duty  bound  to  consider  the  factual 

and  legal  aspect  as  contemplated  under  Section  423 

Cr.P.C.  

(l) 

The  Appellate  Court  shall  conclude  the  judgment  by 

elaborating  the  sentence  whether  the  Court  agrees  with 

the  findings  of  the  Trial  Court  or  reduce  or  modify  the 

sentence,  however  in  such  eventuality,  separate  reason 

has to be recorded.  

(m)  While  considering  judgment  of  acquittal,  extra  caution 

should  be  extended  as  the  standards  for  assessing  the 

evidence  in  appeal  against  acquittal  are  quite  different 

from  those  laid  down  in  appeal  against  conviction. 

Appraisal of evidence is done strictly against conviction, 

whereas  in  appeal  against  acquittal,  such  rigid  method 

of appraisal was not to be applied.  

 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 12 

(n) 

The  Appellate  Court  would  not  exercise  jurisdiction 

under Section 417 Cr.P.C., unless the acquittal judgment 

of  the  Trial  Court  was  perverse  or  there  was  complete 

misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  resulting  in 

miscarriage of justice.  

19. 

This Court while exercising the revisional jurisdiction in terms 

of  Section  435  Cr.P.C.  has  to  examine  the  record  for  the  purpose  of 

satisfying its conscience to check the correctness, legality or  propriety 

of  any  findings/sentence  or  order  recorded  or  passed  by  the  lower 

Courts,  therefore,  the  duty  casted  upon  the  High  Court  on  its 

revisional  side  compels  it  to  reappraise  the  entire  evidence  on  the 

touchstone of  principles of  fair trial as referred in Article 10-A of the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973.  If  the  first 

Appellate  Court  in  disposing  of  the  appeal  did  not  discuss  the 

evidence at all, the findings could not be considered valid, rather such 

decision  amounts  to  failure  on  the  part  of  the  first  Appellate  Court, 

who  was  bound  to  render  independent  findings  on  the  points 

involved, therefore, such kind of practice is deprecated.   

20. 

 In view of above discussion, by extending the benefit of doubt 

to  the  petitioner,  judgment  dated  19.03.2019,  passed  by  learned 

Judicial  Magistrate,  Section  30,  Islamabad  and  the  Judgment  dated 

17.04.2019,  passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-V  (West), 

Islamabad are hereby SET-ASIDE, the petitioner is ACQUITTED from 

the charges in case FIR No.147, dated 18.07.2017, U/s 489-F, PPC, P.S 

 
 
 
Crl. Revision No.53/2019 

Page | 13 

Margalla,  Islamabad.  The  petitioner  be  released  forthwith,  if  not 

required in any other criminal case.       

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
    JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 9th October, 2019. 

    JUDGE 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 

Ramzan 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
