ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Crl.Misc.No. 746-8/2019 
Muhammad Bahadur alias Muhammad Shabeer 
VS
The State and another 

S.  No. of order I  Date of  order/  Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
proceedings 

Proceedings 
05.12.2019  Mr. All Hussain Bhatti, Advocate for the petitioner 

necessary. 

Ms.  Rabi  Bin  Tariq,  learned  State  Counsel  with 
lftikhar  A.S.I. 

Through-  the 

instant  criminal  miscellaneous 

petition,  the  petitioner,  Muhammad  Bahadur  alias 

Muhammad Shabeer S/o Muhammad Sadiq, seeks bail 

after-arrest  in  case  F.l.R.No.306,  dated  22.07.2019, 

under  Sections  380, 411, 457 and  34 of the  Pakistan 

Penal  Code,  1860  ("P.P.C.")  registered  at  Police 

Station Kohsar, Islamabad. 

2. 

Earlier the  petitioner's  post-arrest  bail petitions 

were  dismissed  by  the  learned  Courts  below,  vide 

orders  dated  11.10.2019 and 08.11.2019. Thereafter, 

the  petitioner  has  filed  the  instant  petition  for  post  

arrest  bail. 

3. 

Learned counsel for  the  petitioner  submits that 

the  petitioner  has falsely  been implicated  in the case 

with  ma/afide  intentions  and ulterior  motives; that  no 

recovery  of  stolen/lost  jewelery  items  etc.  was  ever 

effected  from  the  petitioner  in  spite  of  his  being 

remanded in police custody for  over six days; that the 

offences  under  Sections  380  and  411  P.P.C. carry 

penalties  of  07  years'  and  03  years'  imprisonment; 

that  both  the  offences  Sections  380  and  411  P.P.C. 

with  which  the  petitioner  stands  charged  do  not  fall 

within  the  prohibitory  clause  of  Section  497 Cr.P.C.; 

that there  is no evidence collected  by the prosecution 

to  connect  the  petitioner  with  the  commission  of 

alleged  offence  under  Section  457  P.P.C., which  has 

2 

Crl.Misc.No.  746-B/2019 

been added  with  the  purpose  to  make the  offences 

look more serious and grave than they really are;  that 

the  petitioner  has  been  behind  bars  for  over  three 

and a half months and is no more required for further 

investigation;  and  that 

the  case 

against 

the 

petitioner  is one of  further  inquiry within the meaning 

of Section 497(2) of the Cr.P.C. Learned counsel has 

prayed  for  the  petition  to  be  allowed  and  for  the 

petitioner to be released on bail. 

4.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  State  Counsel 

opposed the grant of post-arrest  bail, contending that 

the  petitioner  is  involved  in  other  cases  of  similar 

nature.  Learned  State  Counsel  made  reference  to 

four  other  F.l.R.s, including  F.l.R.No.306, registered 

at  police  station  Margalla,  and  F.l.R.No.577, 

registered  at police  station  Margalla; that  a diamond 

set  (necklace  and  ear  rings),  a  Rolex Watch,  etc. 

alleged  to  have been stolen  from  the  complainant's 

brother's  house were recovered from  the petitioner's 

possession; 

that  the  offence  under  Section  457 

P.P.C. carries  a  penalty  of  14  years'  imprisonment 

and  as  such  the  petitioner  is  not  entitled  to  the 

discretionary  relief  of  grant  of  bail.  Learned  State 

Counsel  has  prayed  for 

the  bail  petition  to  be 

dismissed. 

5. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned 

counsel for  the  contesting  parties  and have perused 

the record with their  able assistance. 

6. 

Brief  facts  as  stated  in  the  F.l.R. are  that  the 

complainant  namely,  Lft.  (Retd.)  Col.  Saadi  Faraz, 

informed  that  theft  had taken  place  at  his  brother's 

residence  (i.e.  House No.1 situated  at  Parbat  Road 

Sector F-7/3, Islamabad) on 22.07.2019. According  to 

the  F.l.R., the  complainant's  brother  along  with  his 

family  left  the  house for  a  walk  at  7.15 p.m.  leaving 

behind  a  servant/Cook,  Khursheed.  In  the  short 

3 

Crl.Misc.No.  746-B/2019 

absence  of  about  one  and  a  half  hour,  Khursheed's 

cousin also visited  him. It is also reported  in the F.l.R. 

that the said Khursheed's cousin and may be another 

accomplice  also visited  the said house in absence of 

housemates.  On  21.07.2019, 

the  complainant's 

brother  and family did not notice that  theft  had taken 

place.  On  the  very  next  day,  i.e.  22.07.2019,  the 

complainant's  brother  and 

family 

found 

the 

cupboard's  lock broken and valuables (i.e. a diamond 

set,  a  Ruby's diamond  ring,  a  gold  necklace,  a  gold 

madrasi  karha,  a  diamond  bracelet,  a gold  set,  gold 

rings,  a  Rolex watch  and Apple watch)  were missing. 

The complainant  reported  the  matter  at  once  to  the 

local police and accordingly  the F.l.R. in question was 

registered  against the culprits. 

7. 

Admittedly, 

the  petitioner 

is  not  directly 

nominated in the  F.l.R. and was arrested  in this  case 

on 26.08.2019. The record  shows that  soon after  the 

petitioner's  arrest,  he  was  produced  before  the 

Magistrate  concerned  and  remained  on  physical 

remand for  six days for  the purposes of investigation. 

On  02.09.2019,  the  petitioner  was  sent  to  judicial 

lock-up.  "Fard Maqboozqi"  appended with the record 

shows that  besides a  Rado watch,  stolen  gold  items 

(i.e.  necklace,  two  earrings,  one  chain,  two  sets  of 

studs, one bangle/ karha, total  weighing 6/7 to/as) and 

one  set  of  earrings  were 

recovered 

from 

the 

possession of the  petitioner.  Furthermore,  the  stolen 

items  alleged  to  have  been  recovered  from  the 

petitioner  apparently  matched  with 

the 

items 

mentioned  in identification  memo appended with  the 

record. These stolen items have already been handed 

over  to  the  complainant  on  superdari  as  revealed 

through  the  order  dated  06.09.2019  passed  by  the 

learned  Judicial  Magistrate  Section-30,  Islamabad. 

Even  otherwise,  the  petitioner,  being  involved  in 

4 

Crl.Misc.No.  746-B/2019 

several other  cases of similar  nature  appears to be a 

habitual  offender  and  in  some  of  the  cases  he was 

declared as guilty/convict. 

8. 

Taking  a  tentative  assessment of  the  available 

record, 

the  accused/petitioner 

is,  prima-facie, 

connected  with  the  commission  of  alleged  offence, 

and is thus not entitled  to the concession  of bail. The 

bail  petition,  being  bereft  of  any  merits,  stands 

dismissed  accordingly.  The  observations  made 

hereinabove are tentative  in nature, and shall have no 

impact on the merits of the case. 

QamarKhan* 

(MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

