ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 
Hassan Zia & another 

VS           

Mrs. Umera Arsam and others 

Date of Hearing: 
Appellant by: 

10.06.2016   
M/s Umar Sohaib Pirzada, and Faisal Iqbal  
Khan, Advocates 
Dr. Khalid Ranjha, learned ASC  

Respondent No.1 by: 
_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-Through  the 

instant 

appeal under Section 19 of Intellectual Property Organization of 

Pakistan Act, 2012, (“IPOP Act”), the appellants, Hassan Zia and 

Babar Javed, impugn the order dated 18.02.2016, passed by the 

Court  of  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad 

(exercising  the  powers  of  Intellectual  Property  Tribunal  under 

the  provisions  of 

IPOP  Act),  allowing  Mrs.  Umera 

Arsam/respondent  No.1’s  application  under  Order  XXXIX  Rules 

1&2  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (C.P.C.)  filed  along  with  her 

suit  for  permanent  injunction,  damages,  recovery  of  possession 

under Sections 60, 63 and 65 of the Copyright Ordinance, 1962. 

2. 

Respondent  No.1  has  authored  a  novel  called  “Thoda    Sa 

Aasman”,  which,  she  claims  is  protected  by  copyright.  In  2008, 

respondent  No.1  wrote  a  script  for  a  drama,  by  the  same  name 

as  the  novel  and  based  on  the  novel.  This  script  was  sold  to 

respondent  No.2  (Pakistan  Television  Corporation),  which  aired 

the  drama  in  2009.  Under  the  agreement  between  respondent 

No.1  and  respondent  No.2,  the  latter  gained  proprietary  rights 

over the said script. In 2005, the appellants, with the consent of 

respondent No.2, have used the said script with new characters 

and  advanced  technology  with  the  intention  of  airing  the  same. 

Aggrieved  by  this,  respondent  No.1 

instituted  the  above 

mentioned suit. Along with the said suit, respondent No.1 filed an 

application  for  interim  injunction.  Vide  order  dated,  18.02.2016, 

the  learned  trial  Court  allowed  the  said  application.  The  said 

order has been impugned by the appellants in the instant appeal.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  drew  the  attention  of 

the  court  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  agreement  through 

which  respondent  No.1  had  sold  all  rights  with  respect  to  the 

script for the 26 episode drama called “Thoda Sa Aasman”, and 

submitted  that  respondent  No.2 was  well  within  its  rights  to  sell 

the  said  script  to  any  other  party;  that  having  sold  the  script, 

respondent  No.1  did  not  have  any  rights  with  respect  to  the 

same; that in the year 2008-2009, respondent No.2 had produced 

and  broadcast  the  drama  on  an  adapted  version  of  the  novel 

“Thoda  Sa  Aasman”;  that  the  appellants  had  no  intention  to 

breach  respondent  No.1’s  copyrights  in  her  novel  “Thoda  Sa 

Aasman”;  that  the  respondents  had  no  intention  to  alter  or 

change  the  script  of  the  drama  which  had  been  earlier  sold  by 

respondent  No.1;  that  as  respondent  No.1  had  sought  damages 

in her suit, she was not entitled to an interim injunction; that the 

mere  fact  that  the  appellants  had  been  proceeded  against  ex-

parte  before  the  learned  trial  court  did  not  deprive  them  from 

pursuing 

the  appeal  against 

the 

impugned  order  dated 

18.02.2016;  and  that  the  statute  (IPOP  Act)  gave  the  appellants 

the  rights  to  challenge  an  interim  order  passed  by  the  learned 

trial court.  

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent 

No.1  raised  a  preliminary  objection  to  the  effect  that  an  appeal 

against the interim order dated 18.02.2016 was not maintainable. 

He drew the attention of the Court to Section 19 of the IPOP Act, 

and submitted that an appeal is maintainable only against a final 

judgment  or  a  final  order  passed  by  the  Intellectual  Property 

Tribunal;  that  the  order  dated  18.02.2016,  being  an  interim 

order,  an  appeal  against  the  same 

is  not  maintainable. 

Furthermore,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submitted 

that  as  the  appellants  had  been  proceeded  against  ex-parte 

before the learned trial court, and that since their application to 

set-aside  the  order  whereby  they  were  proceeded  against  ex-

parte  has,  till  date,  not  been  decided,  the  appeal  is  liable  to  be 

dismissed.  Learned  counsel  prayed  for  the  dismissal  of  the 

appeal on these grounds only.  

3 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

5. 

Learned counsel for respondent No.1 submitted that a right 

of  appeal  has  to  be  expressly  conferred  by  statute.  He  referred 

to  Section  67(3)  of  the  Representation  of  Peoples  Act,  1976, 

Section  23  of  the  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Act,  1997, 

and  Section  33  of 

the  Punjab  Consumer  Act,  2005 

to 

demonstrate that a right of an appeal against the orders passed 

by  tribunals  created  by  law,  has  to  be  expressly  conferred.  He 

also  made  reference  to  Section  28  of  the  Punjab  Rented 

Premises  Act,  2009  and  Section  14  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family 

Courts Act, 1964 to show that a right to file an appeal against an 

interim/interlocutory order can be excluded by statute. 

6. 

On  the  merits  of  the  case,  the 

learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.1 submitted that the appellants had substantially 

changed  the  script  of  the  drama  which  had  been  sold  by 

respondent  No.1  to  respondent  No.2  in  2008;  and  that  in 

changing  the  script,  the  appellants  had  used  contents  of 

respondent No.1’s novel, the copyright of which is protected.  

7. 

In  rebuttal,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  placed 

reliance  on  the  cases  of  KhadimHussain  VS  The  Additional 

District  Judge,  Faisalabad  (PLD  1990  Supreme  Court  632), 

Muhammad  Musa  Ansari  VS  Gul  Sahib  Jan  Khattak  (1991  CLC 

1483),Rauf  B.  Qadri  VS  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2002 

Supreme  Court  1111),  ZahidZaman  Khan  VS  Khan  Afsar  (PLD 

2016  Supreme  Court  406),  and  District  Council  Haripur  VS 

ZaheerUllah  Khan  (PLD  1994  Peshawar  228),  in  support  of  his 

contention  that  an  appeal  against  an 

interim  order  was 

maintainable  under  Order  XLIII,  C.P.C.  and  that  procedures  are 

meant only to regulate and foster the cause of justice and not to 

thwart the same. 

8. 

It may be mentioned that when the instant appeal was  first 

taken up for hearing on 06.04.2016, this Court issued notices to 

the  respondents,  without  suspending  the  operation  of  the 

impugned  order  dated  18.02.2016.  Again  on  13.04.2016,  the 

appellants'  request  for  the  suspension  of  the  said  order  dated 

18.02.2016  was  not  entertained.  On  18.04.2016,  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  appellants  submitted  that  the  appellants  had  no 

4 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

intention of changing or modifying the script but were  intending 

to  reset  the  drama 

in  a  new  environment  with  advance 

technology. On the said date, the following order was passed:- 

 “During the course of the arguments, the learned counsel for 
contesting parties were in unison on their submission that the 
script of the drama under the name of “Thoda Sa Aasman” had 
been sold by respondent No.1 to respondent No.2 in the year 
2008 and that the drama was aired by the said respondent No. 2 
during the year 2008/2009. As per the agreement between the 
respondents, No.1 & 2 all rights with respect to the thereafter 
vested in respondent No.2 which had the authority to sell or 
lease the script. The concern of respondent No.1 is not the sale 
of the said script by respondent No.2 to any third party but that 
the said script should not be in any manner be modified so as to 
include  passages  or  portions  of  the  novel  authored  by 
respondent No.1 which has the same name as the drama. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that they have 
absolutely no intention of changing or modifying the script but 
the drama is going to be reset in a new environment with 
advanced technology.  
A copy of the script which was sold by respondent No.1 to 
respondent No.2 shall be handed over to respondent No.1’s 
counsel only for the purpose of verifying as to whether it is the 
same script which had been sold to respondent No.2. As long as 
the script is not changed or modified, respondent No.1 does not 
have any grievance. Le the needful be done.” 

9. 

On  25.04.2016,  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

submitted that a copy of the script was given to respondent No.1, 

and  that  she  was  well  aware  of  the  import  of  the  order  dated 

18.04.2016. However, respondent No.1 had expressed her desire 

to  engage  the  services  of  some  other  counsel.  Respondent 

No.1’s husband was in attendance and sought time to engage the 

services  of  another  counsel.  As  respondent  No.1,  after  having 

been  given  a  copy  of  this  script  of  the  drama  intending  to  be 

telecast,  had  not  taken  a  position  as  to  whether  this  script  had 

been changed or modified, this Court suspended the operation of 

the impugned order. 

10. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  

11. 

I  first  propose  to  deal  with  the  preliminary  objections 

raised by the learned counsel for respondent No.1. Section 19 of 

the IPOP Act, is reproduced herein below:- 

“19. Any person aggrieved by the final judgment and order of 
the Tribunal under this Act may, within thirty days of the final 

 
 
 
 
5 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

judgment or order of the Tribunal, prefer an appeal to the High 
Court having territorial jurisdiction over the Tribunal.” 

12.  The right to file an appeal is a substantive right, and has to 

be  specifically  conferred  by  a  statute.  It  is  not  a  matter  of 

procedure.  Now  under  Section  19 ibid  a  person  aggrieved  by  a 

“final judgment and order”  of  the  Intellectual  Property  Tribunal 

can file an appeal before the High Court. Section 17 of the IPOP 

Act, inter alia  provides  that  in  an  Intellectual  Property  Tribunal 

shall, in exercise of its civil jurisdiction have all the power vested 

in  a  civil  court  under  the  C.P.C.  Furthermore,  in  all  matters  the 

said tribunal is to follow the procedure laid down in the C.P.C., if 

the  procedure  has  not  been  provided  for  in  the  IPOP  Act.  Thus 

the Intellectual Property Tribunal, while exercising powers under 

the C.P.C., can pass all order that a civil court can pass. This is 

subject  to  the  caveat  that  the  IPOP  Act  does  not  provide  for  a 

procedure  different  from  that  provided  for  in  the  C.P.C.  Neither 

has the term “final judgment”, nor the term "order" being defined 

in  the  IPOP,  Act.  Section  19  of  the  IPOP  Act  is  an  enabling 

provision  for  filing  an  appeal,  and  does  not  explicitly  bar  an 

appeal  from  an  interlocutory  order.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the 

impugned  order  dated  18.02.2016  has  finally  disposed  of 

respondent No.1's application under Order XXXIX, Rules 1 and 2 

C.P.C. In view of the law laid down by the superior courts that a 

provision  barring  a  right  of  appeal  has  to  be  strictly  construed, 

the  term  “final 

judgment”  and  “order”  have  to  be  read 

disjunctively.  I  am  therefore  of  the  view  that  an  appeal  against 

the  order  allowing  respondent  No.1’s  application  for  interim 

injunction  is  maintainable  under  Section  19  of  the  IPOP.  A 

reference  to  the  following  case  law  at  this  stage  would  be 

apposite:- 

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Shafique  Ahmad  Butt  VS  Punjab  Labour 

Appellate Tribunal (1993 CLC 1352), it has been held as follows:- 

“8. …according to well-settled rule of interpretation of statutes, 
every provision which has the effect of taking away the right of 
appeal is to be construed strictly and in case there is any doubt 
as to the availability of the right of appeal that doubt is to be 
resolved in favour of the existence of the right of appeal. 
Reference  may  be  made  to  Muhammad  Hussain  v.  The 
Additional District Judge [PLD 1986 Lah. 128] and Wahid Bus 

 
6 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

and Mailsi Transport Co. Ltd. V. Afzal Transport Co. Ltd. [PLD 
1966 Lah. 684]” 

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  University  of  Punjab  VS  Rehmatullah  (PLD 

1982 Lahore 729), it has been held as follows:- 

“In any case right of appeal in the absence of provision to the 
contrary cannot be impliedly presume to have been taken away 
and if there is any doubt as to existence of right of an appeal, 
then the doubt is to be resolved in favour of the party seeking 
the appeal.” 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Amjad  Mustafa  VS  Muhammad  Faiz  (2005 

YLR  419),  the  Division  Bench  of  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court 

has held as follows:- 

“10.…it is settled rule of interpretation of statute that every 
provision, which has the effect of taking away the right of 
appeal is to be construed strictly and in case there is any doubt 
as to the availability of right of the appeal that doubt be 
resolved in favour of the existence of right of appeal. In arriving 
to this conclusion we are fortified by the following judgments:-- 
(1)  Shafique Ahmad Butt v. Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal 

and others 1983 CLC 1352. 

(2)  University of the Punjab and 2 others v. Rehmantullah PLD 

1982 Lahore 729. 

(3)  Mumtaz  Khan  v.  Chief  Settlement  and  Rehabilitation 

Commissioner and another PLD 1966 SC 276. 

(4)  Syed Arif Raza Rizvi v. Messrs Pakistan International 
Airlines through Chairman/M.D. Karachi PLD 2001 SC 182. 
(5)  Messrs  Modern  Continental  Business  (Pvt.)  Limited 
through  Chief  Executive  v.  Government  of  Pakistan 
through  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Finance,  Revenue  and 
Economic Affairs, Pak Secretariat, Islamabad and another 
2002 CLC 233.” 

13.  Furthermore,  a read of Section  19 of the IPOP Act, and its 

comparison with the following laws which bar an appeal against 

an  interim/interlocutory  order  shows  that  the  right  to  file  an 

appeal  against  an  interlocutory  order  passed  by  the  Intellectual 

Property Tribunal has not been explicitly barred:- 

1  S.24 of Cantonments Rent 
Restriction Act, 1963 

2  S.12, Banking Companies 

(Recovery of Loans) 
Ordinance, 1979 

Any 

Appeal. (1) 

24. 
party 
aggrieved  by  an  order,  not  being 
an  interim  order,  made  by  the 
Controller  may,  within  thirty  days 
of such  order, prefer an  appeal to 
the High Court. 
12.  Appeals.--(I)  Any  person 
aggrieved by any order, judgment, 
decree  or  sentence  of  a  Special 
Court  may,  within  thirty  days  of 
such  order,  judgment,  decree  or 
sentence,  prefer  an  appeal  to  the 
whose 
High 

within 

Court 

 
 
 
 
 
7 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

under 

jurisdiction  the  order,  judgment, 
decree or sentence is passed; 
Provided  that  no  appeal  shall  lie 
from  an  interlocutory  order  which 
does not dispose of the entire case 
before the Special Court.  
21. 
party 
Any 
Appeal. (1) 
aggrieved  by  a  final  order  of  the 
Controller  made 
this 
Ordinance  may,  within  thirty  days 
of the date of such order, prefer an 
appeal to the District Judge. 
(2)  No  appeal  shall  lie  from  an 
interlocutory  order  passed  by  the 
Controller. 
(3) ……….. 
(4) ……….. 
(5) ……… 
(7) ………. 
(8) ………." 
3.  Appeal  to  High  Court  in  certain 
cases. —(1) An appeal shall lie to a 
Bench of  two or  more Judges of a 
High  Court  from  a  decree  passed 
or  final  order  made  by  a  single 
Judge of that Court in the exercise 
of its original civil jurisdiction. 
(2)  An  appeal  shall  also  lie  to  a 
Bench of  two or  more Judges of a 
High Court from an order made by 
a single Judge of that Court under  
clause  (1)  of  Article 199  of  the 
Constitution 
Islamic 
of 
Republic  of  Pakistan  not  being  an 
order  made  under  sub-paragraph 
(i) of paragraph (b) of that clause: 
Provided  that  the  appeal  referred 
to  in  this  sub-section  shall  not  be 
the 
available  or  competent 
if 
application  brought  before 
the 
High  Court  under  Article 199 
arises  out  of  any  proceedings  in 
which  the  law  applicable  provided 
for  at 
least  one  appeal or  one 
revision  or  one  review  to  any 
court, tribunal or authority against 
the original order. 
(3)  No  appeal  shall  lie  under  sub-
section  (1) or sub-section (2) from 
an interlocutory  order  or  an  order 
which  does  not  dispose  of  the 
entire case before the Court….." 
14.Appeal. ---(1) Notwithstanding 
anything provided in any other law 
for the time being in force, a 
decision given or a decree passed 
by a Family Court shall be 
appealable--- 

the 

3  S.21(2) of Islamabad Rent 

Restriction Ordinance, 2001 

4  S.3(2) of the Law Reforms 

Ordinance, 1972 

5  S.14(3) of the West Pakistan 
Family Courts Act, 1964 

8 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

under  Section 

(a)…. 
(b)…. 
(2)…. 
(a)…. 
(b)…. 
(c)…. 
(3)  No  appeal  or  revision  shall  lie 
against an interim order passed by 
a Family Court…." 
(1)  Any  party 
15.  Appeal-- 
aggrieved by an order made by the 
Controller 
4, 
Section  10,  Section  12  or  Section 
13  may,  within  thirty  days  of  the 
date  of  such  order,  prefer  an 
appeal  in  writing  to  the  District 
Judge  having  jurisdiction  over  the 
area  where  the  building  or  rented 
land, in relation to which the order 
is assed, is situated; 
Provided  that  no  appeal  shall  lie 
against  an  order  made  by 
Collector  under  sub-section  (6)  of 
determining 
Section 
approximately  the  amount  of  rent 
due  or 
the  rate  of  rent  and 
directing  the  tenant  to  deposit  all 
the rent due; 
Provided  further  that  no  appeal 
shall 
interlocutory 
from  an 
order passed by the Controller. 
21. Appeal.--(1) ….. 
(2)…….. 
(3)……. 
(4)…. 
(5)  No  appeal,  review  or  revision 
shall  lie  against  an  interlocutory 
order  of  the  Banking  Court  other 
than  an  order  passed  under  sub-
section (6) of Section 18. 

13 

lie 

6  S.15 of West Pakistan Urban 
Rent Restriction Ordinance, 
1959 

7  S.21 (5) of the Banking 

Companies (Recovery of 
Loans, Advances, Credits 
and Finances) Ordinance 
1997 

14.  As  regards  the  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for 

respondent No. 1 that since the appellants are being proceeded 

against ex-parte by the learned trial court, this appeal is liable to 

be  dismissed,  has  also  not  impressed  me.  The  impugned  order 

was passed prior to the appellants being proceeded against  ex-

parte.  The  appellants’  application  for  the  recall  of  the  order 

(whereby the appellants proceeded against ex-parte) is pending 

before  the  learned  trial  court.  Therefore,  this  appeal  cannot  be 

dismissed  due  to  the  mere  fact  that  the  appellants  have  been 

proceeded against ex-parte.  

 
9 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

15.  Coming  to  the  merits  of  the  case,  the  record  shows  that 

during  2005,  respondent  No.1  wrote  a  novel  called  “Thoda  Sa 

Aasman”  and  had  it  published.  Subsequently,  respondent  No.1 

entered 

into  an  agreement  with  respondent  No.2/Pakistan 

Television Corporation for the dramatization of the said novel for 

airing  as  a  drama.  As  per  the  terms  of  the  agreement, 

respondent  No.2  was  entitled  to  repeat  telecasts  and  sell  the 

program  both  locally  and  abroad  without  payment  of  royalty. 

Clause 21 of the said agreement is reproduced herein below:- 

“21.  All  scripts,  characters  and  performance  under  this 
agreement will  be  the property of the Corporation. Script 
writers or artists will have no right to use, sell or lease such 
scripts, characters and performances to any other party. The 
Corporation may at its sole discretion, allow the use of such 
scripts,  characters  or  performances  to  any  person  or 
organization against payment to the corporation of such royalty 
as it may deem fit.” 

16.  Respondent  No.1  with  her  suit  annexed  the  terms  and 

conditions  of  the  agreement.  Respondent  No.1  has  taken  the 

position  that  she  had  not  transferred  copyrights  of  her  novel  to 

the appellant, and that the subject matter of the agreement was 

limited  to  the  ‘script’  and  ‘unpublished  work’.  It  is  not  disputed 

that respondent No.1 wrote a 26 episode script in 2008, and the 

drama was shot and aired in 2009. Respondent No.1 was paid for 

every  episode.  Respondent  No.1’s  grievances  began  when  she 

came  to  know  about  the  steps  that  were  being  taken  to 

dramatize  her  novel  by  changing  the  script  which  was  in 

possession  of  respondent  No.2.  These  steps  were  alleged  to 

have been taken by the appellants and respondents No.2 and 3. 

This caused respondent No.1 to file a suit on 13.08.2015, before 

the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad. 

Respondent  No.1  maintains  that  she  did  not  transfer  any 

copyright of her novel to any person, and that the appellants and 

respondents  No.2  and  3  were  infringing  her  copyright  by 

dramatizing her novel.  

17.  Vide  order  dated  18.02.2016,  the 

learned  trial  court 

allowed  respondent  No.1’s  application  for  temporary  injunction 

as  prayed  for.  In  the  said  application,  respondent  No.1  prayed 

for the defendants in the suit to be retrained from the following:- 

 
10 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

“(a) Broadcasting the drama on any of the channels or entering 
into any agreement or negotiations for broadcasting the same; 
(b) Using, distributing, supplying or providing copies of the 
infringing script or the produced drama from the said infringing 
script or any part thereof – whether modified or unchanged and 
whether in lieu of or without consideration to any person or 
entity whatsoever; and  
(c) Further copying, adapting, changing, distorting or modifying 
the plaintiffs’ novel;” 

18.  Perusal  of  the  impugned  order  dated  18.02.2016,  shows 

that  the 

learned  trial  court,  while  giving 

its  findings  on 

respondent  No.1’s  application  for  interim  injunction,  has  not 

adverted  to the  terms  and  conditions  of the  agreement  that had 

taken  place  in  2008  between  respondent  No.1  and  respondent 

No.2. As mentioned above, these terms and conditions were filed 

by  respondent  No.1  along  with  her  suit.  The  preamble,  and 

clause  21  of  the  said  agreement  (extracted  above)  shows  that 

respondent No. 2 had purchased the script of the drama “Thoda 

Sa  Aasman”,  from  respondent  No.1,  whereafter  the  same 

became  the  property  of  respondent  No.2,  who  had  the  right  to 

allow  the  use  of  the  said  script,  characters  or  performances  to 

any other person or organization. In this view of the matter, I am 

of the view that the appellants and respondents No.2 and 3 could 

not  be  restrained  from  using  the  script  which  had  been  sold  by 

respondent  No.1  to  respondent  No.2  in  2008.  However,  the 

appellants and respondents No.2 and 3 could not tamper with or 

change around the script, which had become respondent No.2’s 

property. A changed/altered script would give respondent No.1 a 

cause to seek a restraint against the use of the same. However, 

the  adaptation  of  the  original  script  to  modern  technology  with 

new characters and in a new setting does not prima facie violate 

respondent No.1’s rights.  

19.  From  the  perusal  of  the  documents  on  record  and  after 

hearing  the  learned  counsel  for  the  contesting  parties,  I  have 

formed a prima facie view that in 2008 respondent No.1 had sold 

out her all rights with respect to the script for the drama “Thoda 

Sa  Aasman”  to  respondent  No.2.  Subject  to  proof  before  the 

learned  trial  Court,  respondent  No.1  may  be  enjoying  the 

copyright  regarding  her  novel  “Thoda  Sa  Aasman”.  However, 

 
11 

F.A.O.No.32 of 2016 

assuming  that  the  copyright  with  respect  to  the  novel 

is 

protected, respondent No.1 cannot make any grouse against the 

appellants  or respondent No.2 and  3  for  using  the script  for  the 

drama called “Thoda Sa Aasman” which she had sold in 2008 to 

respondent  No.2.  The  appellants  and  respondent  No.2  and  3 

cannot alter, change or modify the script of the drama which was 

sold  by  respondent  No.1  in  2008.  There  is,  however,  nothing 

preventing the appellants and respondent No.2 and 3 from using 

the  same  script  in  a  drama  with  new  characters  and  new 

technology in a modern setting.  

20. 

In view of the above the instant appeal is partly allowed and 

the interim order is modified to the extent that defendants in the 

suit are restrained only from altering, changing or modifying the 

script  for  the  drama  “Thoda  Sa  Aasman”  sold  by  respondent 

No.1  to  respondent  No.2  in  2008.  Needless  to  mention  that  the 

observations made herein shall not be taken into account by the 

learned trial Court in deciding the suit filed by respondent No.1.  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2016 

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

JUDGE  

APPROVED FOR REPORTING  

   (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan*   

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
