ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.3492/2018 
Mst. Nasreen & another 
VS
Raja Muhammad Shahid Bashir, etc. 

Petitioners by: 

Malik Atif Raza Kalwar, Advocate. 

Respondent No.3 by:  Mr. Muhammad Kowkab Iqbal, Advocate.  

Date of Decision: 

18.01.2019. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioners have assailed the concurrent findings passed by the learned Judge 

Guardian  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  21.03.2018  and  learned 

Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad vide judgment and decree dated 

24.07.2018,  whereby  the  Guardian  Court  ex-parte  decided  the  custody 

petition  U/S  25  of  the  Guardians  &  Wards  Act,  1890  and  appeal  of  the 

petitioners  against  the  said  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  was dismissed by 

learned Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief 

facts  referred 

in 

the  captioned  writ  petition  are 

that, 

Mst.  Nasreen/petitioner  No.1  was  married  to  Raja  Muhammad  Shahid 

Bashir/ respondent No.3 on 04.04.2004 against the dower of Rs.50,000/- and 

during the subsistence of marriage, Muhammad Sarim (son)/petitioner No.2 

was  born  on  27.05.2006,  who  is  presently  in  custody  of  petitioner  No.1  at 

Karachi.  Respondent  No.3/father  filed  a  custody  petition  U/S  25  of  the 

Guardians  &  Wards  Act,  1890  on  09.05.2017  at  Islamabad  and  Mst. 

Nasreen/petitioner No.1 deserted him in the first week of August, 2008 and 

she by removing the minor from legal guardianship took away the minor son 

to Karachi to her parents’ house when respondent No.3/father was allegedly 

performing his duties at Naval Hospital PNS Hafeez, Islamabad. The custody 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 2 

petition  was  ex-parte  decided  in  favour  of  respondent  No.3/father  vide 

judgment  and  decree  dated  21.03.2018  by  the  Guardian  Judge  (West), 

Islamabad as petitioners failed to appear before the Court. Feeling aggrieved 

whereby,  petitioners  filed  Appeal  No.7/2018,  which  was  dismissed  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  vide  judgment  and 

decree dated 24.07.2018. Hence, the instant writ petition.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contended  that  both  the  courts  below 

neither  appreciated  the  law  on  subject  nor  the  facts  which  were  brought  on 

record  at  the  appellate  stage,  whereby it  was  specifically  contended  that  the 

custody  matter  was  settled  through  consolidated  judgment  dated  06.11.2013 

passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  XVI,  Karachi  South  passed  in 

Family  Suit  No.384/2011  and  Guardian  Petition  No.428/2011,  whereby  the 

custody  application  filed  by  respondent  No.3/father  was  dismissed  and  he 

was  granted  a  visitation  schedule  to  meet  the  minor  on  first  and  third 

Saturday  from  10  am  to  12  noon  of  each  calendar  month  in  Court  premises 

with  direction  to  pay  Rs.5,000/-  as  conveyance  charges.  The  said  order  was 

upheld  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (VII),  Karachi  South  vide 

order  dated  21.10.2015,  whereas  the  Sindh  High  Court  vide  order  dated 

01.04.2016  dismissed  in  limine  the  C.P.  No.S-1198/2015  of  respondent 

No.3/father,  but  all  these  facts  have  been  concealed  by  respondent 

No.3/father  and  even  the  same  were  not  appreciated  by  the  learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  hence,  the  impugned  judgments  are 

contrary to law and against the settled principles of the judgments passed by 

the  superior  Courts;  that  minor  is  studying  in  Army  Public  School,  Malir, 

Karachi and at present he is 13 years old and respondent No.3/father has not 

paid due maintenance despite the decree passed against him and as such, he 

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 3 

is neither entitled for any relief nor custody should be handed over to him in 

these circumstances as welfare of minor lies with the mother.  

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.3 contends that minor 

was removed from Islamabad in the first week of August, 2008 and as such, 

this  Court  has  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  matter  and  the  petitioner  mother 

never  allowed  the  visitation  despite  the  fact  that  respondent  No.3  has  paid 

maintenance in the Family Court, Karachi, which was received by petitioner 

No.1/mother;  that  petitioners  intentionally  failed  to  appear  before  the  trial 

Court  at  Islamabad,  which  resulted  into  issuance  of  ex-parte  decree,  which 

was  further  upheld  by  the  first  Appellate  Court  and  constitutional  courts 

cannot interfere into concurrent findings.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.  

From the perusal of record, it has been observed that Raja Muhammad 

Shahid  Bashir/respondent  No.3  was  married  to  Mst.  Nasreen/petitioner 

No.1  on  04.04.2004  and  during  the  subsistence  of  marriage,  Muhammad 

Sarim/petitioner  No.2  was  born  on  27.05.2006  and  due  to  acute  disparity 

amongst  the  parties,  the relationship  ended on  divorce, which was  executed 

by  respondent  No.3,  who  later  on  also  filed  custody  application  U/S  25  of 

Guardian & Wards Act, 1890 at Islamabad and claimed custody of the minor 

on the basis of following two paragraphs of the petition: 

4. 

5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

That  in  the  first  week  of  August  2008,  the  Respondent 
deserted  the  petitioner  and  took  away  his  said  minor  son 
with her at Karachi, where her parents live, the said minor 
was removed from the legal Guardianship of the petitioner 
by the Respondent, while the petitioner was on duty in the 
Naval Hospital P.N.S. Hafeez at Islamabad.  
…… 
…… 
…… 
That  the  cause  of  action  arose  in  the  first  week  of  2008 
when  the  minor  was  removed  by  the  Respondent  from  the 
legal guardianship of the petitioner and is continuing with 
each  passing  day  with  denial  by  the  Respondent  of  giving 

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 4 

the  custody  of  the  minor  to  the  petitioner,  therefore,  the 
petitioner is within time.   

7. 

The above referred custody petition was filed on 09.05.2017 before the 

Guardian  Court,  Islamabad,  however  the  said  petition  was  proceeded  and 

decided  ex-parte,  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  21.03.2018,  which  was 

upheld  by  the  first  Appellate  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

24.07.2018. Hence, this writ petition. 

8. 

At the first instance, I have gone through the pleadings of respondent 

No.3/father,  wherein  he  has  not  mentioned  the  reasons  as  to  why  he 

approached  the  Guardian  Court  at  Islamabad  on  09.05.2017  when  his  son, 

who was born on 27.05.2006, was removed in the first week of August, 2008 

by  petitioner  No.1/mother  and  he  kept  silent  for  nine  (09)  long  years  and 

even  he  has  not  referred  any  other document  or  reference  or  proceedings  in 

his  petition  for  custody.  However,  the  record  further  reveals  that  petitioner 

No.1/mother  filed  application  on  09.12.2017  for  rejection  of  guardian 

application  along  with  her  affidavit  in  which  she  has  categorically  referred 

the proceedings of the Guardian Court at Karachi, which was earlier decided 

in  favour  of  petitioner  No.1/mother  and  custody  application  of  respondent 

No.3/father was dismissed concurrently up to the Sindh High Court and the 

judgment passed by the Guardian Court (South), Karachi dated 06.11.2013 in 

Guardian  Application  No.428/2011  was  placed  on  record.  The  judgment  in 

appeal  dated  21.10.2015  passed  by  learned  Additional  District  Judge-VII 

Karachi  South  and  judgment  of  the  Sindh  High  Court  passed  in  C.P. 

No.S-1998/2015 dated 29.03.2016, whereby findings of the Guardian Court in 

favour  of  petitioner  No.1/mother  were  upheld  and  writ  petition  filed  by 

respondent No.3/father was dismissed in limine. But despite availability of all 

these  judgments,  the  Guardian  Judge  at  Islamabad  has  not  considered  all 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 5 

these  previous  proceedings  and  proceeded  against  petitioner  No.1/mother 

through ex-parte judgment and the said application for rejection of guardian 

application was also dismissed vide order dated 16.03.2018 on the strength of 

reported  judgment  PLD  2012  SC  66  (Major  Muhammad  Khalid  Karim  VS 

Sadia Yaqoob).  

9. 

In  order  to  resolve  the  controversy,  I  have  gone  through  the  said 

judgment  of  the  apex  Court,  wherein  the  following  principles  have  been 

settled:  

10. 
Anyhow, in order to settle the proposition in hand, in view 
of the provisions of the law quoted above and the preponderance of 
the  view  set  out  in  the  judicial  pronouncements,  we  do  not  find 
ourselves  in  a  position  to  form  an  opinion  different  from  the 
judgments  of  the  Peshawar  and  Lahore  High  Courts  and  this 
Court  (supra),  holding  that  Section  5  of  the  Act,  1964  confer 
exclusive 
jurisdiction  upon  the  Family  Court  to  hear  the 
matters/disputes  covered  by  the  items  mentioned  in  the  schedule. 
In  Anne  Zehra's  case  (supra),  it  has  been  made  clear  that  the 
question  of  'territorial  jurisdiction'  is  not  purely  a  procedural 
question  and,  therefore,  would  not  be  settled  on  account  of  the 
provisions of Act, 1890, as per force of section 25 of the Act 1964 
and  this  is  the  correct  exposition  of  law.  It  seems  that  this  Court 
was  not  properly  assisted  in  the  case  Muhammad  Iqbal  supra, 
because  we  have  endeavoured  to  examine  the  entire  law  on  the 
subject, as has been amended from time  to time and are unable to 
locate any amendment introduced, as a proviso to subsection (2) of 
section 7 of the Act, 1964 by virtue of which the jurisdiction for the 
purposes  of  the  guardianship/custody  disputes  was/is  conferred 
upon  the  Family  Court,  where  the  wife  resides.  The  proviso  to 
which  reference  perhaps  is  intended  in  Muhammad  Iqbal's  case 
supra, reads as:-- 

"Provided  that  a  plaint  for  dissolution  of  marriage  may 
contain all claims relating to dowery, maintenance, dower, 
personal property and belongings of the wife, custody of the 
children  and  visitation  rights  of  the  parents  to  meet  their 
children" 

The  said  proviso  only  permits  the  joinder  of  different  causes  of 
action  in  one  suit,  whereas  the  determination  of  'territorial 
jurisdiction' still remains to be regulated by Rule 6 of the Family 
Courts  Rules,  1965  (reproduced  above).  The  proviso  does  not 
envisage that if such a composite suit is either filed or if any one of 
the claims covered by that is separately initiated, the Family Court 
where  the  wife  resides  would  have  the  jurisdiction  in  the  matter, 
rather it is Rule 6 ibid which shall provide the answer in the given 
situation;  it  seems  that  on  account  of  lack  of  proper  legal 
assistance, the said judgment is per incuriam. 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 6 

Be that as it may, from the ratio of all the law cited above, 

11. 
the legal position, which emerge is as under:-- 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the 

the  purposes  of  determining 

Under section 5 of the Act 1964, the Family Court has the 
exclusive  jurisdiction  to  entertain,  hear  and  adjudicate 
(emphasis  supplied)  all  the  matters  which  fall  within  the 
first  schedule  to  the  Act;  this  admittedly  includes  the 
custody and guardianship matter. 
For 
'territorial 
jurisdiction"  of  the  Family  Court,  it  is  Act  1964,  and  the 
rules  framed  thereunder  which  shall  be  taken  into  account 
and  not  the  provision  of  the  Guardian  and  Wards  Act 
1980, even as per force of section 25 of the Act 1964. 
According  to  Rule  6  (a)  of  the  Family  Court  Rules  1965, 
there  are  three  factual  eventualities  which  are  relevant  for 
the  purposes  of  the  determination  of  the  'territorial 
jurisdiction' of the Family Court; firstly, where the cause of 
action wholly or in part has arisen, meaning thereby, in the 
custody  or  guardianship  disputes  if  the  minors  were  with 
the  mother  and  they  have  been  illegally  and  improperly 
removed  and  taken  away  that  from  the  place  where  they 
were  living  with  her  (or  vice  versa  for  father  as  well),  the 
cause  of  action  shall  be  said  to  have  arisen  at  such  place, 
otherwise the cause of action shall be deemed to have arisen 
where  the  minors  are  residing;  secondly,  under  Rule  6(b) 
where  the  parties  reside  or  last  resided;  thirdly  as  per 
proviso  to  Rule  6,  in  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  or 
dower where the wife ordinarily resided. And in view of the 
addition  of  proviso  to  section  7(2)  of  the  Act  1964,  which 
was introduced on 1-10-2002 if in a suit for the dissolution 
of  marriage  join  other  causes  of  action  mentioned  in  the 
said  proviso,  such  suit  shall  also  fall  in  the  last  category, 
otherwise not. 

10.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  am  in  full  agreement  with  the  above  settled 

principles,  however,  the  abovementioned  case  of  Major  Muhammad  Khalid 

Karim supra, if applied in present  situation, there are other exceptions which 

were  not  considered by  the  Courts  below  and  the  concurrent  findings  given 

by the learned Guardian Court and learned first Appellate Court could not be 

appreciated,  although  important  factors  were  available,  therefore,  the 

abovementioned case law has to be seen in the light of those factors which are 

given below for the just conclusion of the case, such factors are as under:  

i. 

Raja  Muhammad  Shahid  Bashir/Respondent  No.3  kept  silent 

for  9  long  years  for  filing  of  Guardian  petition  U/S  25  of 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 7 

Guardian & Wards Act, 1890 and as such, he has not given any 

specific reasons for this delay.  

ii. 

Respondent  No.3/father  has  not  mentioned any  specific  stance 

or factors which precluded him to agitate the matter in nine (09) 

years at Islamabad. The pleadings are silent to that extent.  

iii. 

The pleadings of respondent No.3/father, if read in conjunction 

with  application  for  rejection  filed  by  petitioner  No.1/mother 

with  all  the  details  of  decisions  made  by  Guardian  Judge 

(South),  Karachi  as well  as  first  Appellate  Court  and  the  Sindh 

High  Court,  respondent  No.3/father  not  merely  concealed  all 

these  factors  for  consideration  of  the  Court  but  also  remained 

silent  about  the  proceedings  of  Guardian  Court,  Karachi 

initiated  by  him in  which  the  question  of welfare  of  minor  has 

already been settled.  

iv. 

Respondent No.3/father himself chose to file a custody petition 

U/S 25 of Guardian & Wards Act, 1890 at Karachi after having 

conscious  knowledge  that  his  minor  son  was  living  with 

petitioner  No.1/mother  at  Karachi  and  the  minor  was  sterling 

in  Karachi,  hence,  by  filing  Guardian  Petition  No.428/2011  at 

Karachi,  he  conceded  to  the  jurisdiction  of  Guardian  Court 

(South),  Karachi,  therefore,  he  was  estopped  by  his  words  and 

conduct to again challenge a similar question on previous cause 

of action at Islamabad, especially when he himself not agitated 

the matter at Islamabad at the very first instance.  

v. 

The question of welfare of minor was already adjudicated up to 

the  Sindh  High  Court  in  favour  of  petitioner  No.1/mother, 

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 8 

which  has  never  been  agitated  to  the  apex  Court  and  the 

custody  attained  finality  in  favour  of  petitioner  No.1/mother, 

whereas the visitation schedule was already given by Guardian 

Court vide order dated 06.11.2013.  

vi. 

Respondent  No.3/father  conceded  before  this  Court  that  he 

regularly  paid  the  maintenance  of  the  minor  up  till  09.01.2016, 

and  the  amount  so  deposited  by  him  w.e.f.  20.09.2011  till 

09.01.2016 is Rs.180,000/- in the Nazarat Branch of District and 

Sessions  Court,  Karachi  South  in  Family  Suit  No.384/2011  was 

received  by  petitioner  No.1/mother  and  in  this  regard,  he 

placed  certified  record  of  the  withdrawal  of  amount,  which 

further  confirms  that  he  conceded  to  the  jurisdiction  of  Family 

Court at Karachi and satisfied the decree of the Family Court as 

well as of the Guardian Court partly, but after his non-payment 

of maintenance w.e.f. 09.01.2016, he has not visited the minor in 

last  three  years,  which  shows  his  defiance  of  Court’s  decree 

passed  against  him  and  minor  was  not  paid  his  due 

maintenance.  

vii.  Respondent No.3/father also conceded before the Court that at 

the  time  of  filing  of  his  custody  petition,  he  was  posted  at 

Karachi and after 2008, he has never been to Islamabad and his 

last  10  years  service was in  Karachi  and  Gawadar,  in  which  he 

appeared  before  the  Guardian  Court  and  Family  Court  South 

Karachi  on  different  occasions  in  the  custody  petition  and  he 

never came to Islamabad.  

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 9 

11.  While considering the above referred reasons and factors, this Court is 

of  the  view  that  respondent  No.3/father  himself  is  in  defiance  of  the 

maintenance  decree  of  petitioner  No.2/minor  and  not  paying 

the 

maintenance from the last three years, hence the question of welfare of minor, 

which was already adjudicated and settled by the Guardian Court at Karachi 

and the same was upheld up to the Sindh High Court, infers the jurisdiction 

of  Karachi,  which  is  in  the  knowledge  of  respondent  No.3/father,  who 

concealed  all  these  factors  from  the  Guardian  Court  at  Islamabad  and  re-

agitated the matter at Islamabad at old cause of action pertaining to the year 

2008  and  as  such,  it  is  not  permissible  to  do  so  and  his  case  does  not  fall 

within the purview of case of Major Muhammad Khalid Karim (PLD 2012 SC 66) 

supra.  Even  otherwise, 

the  person,  who 

is  guilty  of  misstatement, 

misrepresentation  of  facts  and  concealing  previous  proceedings,  is  not 

entitled for any relief as he was estopped by his words and conduct, whereas, 

respondent No.3 being father is under lawful obligation to  regularly pay the 

maintenance despite the fact that the Guardian Court at Islamabad as well as 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  passed  concurrent  findings  in  his  favour 

but  this  does  not  absolve  him  from  the  payment  of  maintenance  unless  the 

custody  of  minor  is  actually  handed  over  to  him,  hence,  respondent 

No.3/father is not entitled for the custody of minor.  

12. 

Besides the above referred findings, I am surprised to see the findings 

of  both  the  Courts  below,  who  have  not  given  due  consideration  to  the 

conduct  of  respondent  No.3/father  and  even  not  interpreted  the  law  in  its 

true  perspective,  especially  the  first  Appellate  Court,  which  is  under 

obligation  to  decide  the  questions  on  a  legal  point,  rather  the  order  was 

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 10 

passed in a mechanical fashion or otherwise as the matter was decided in the 

following way:  

 “7.  ……Consequently, the said application was dismissed and 

the  learned  trial  Court  decided  the  guardianship  application  in 

favour  of  the  petitioner  in  the  light  of  ex-parte  evidence  of  the 

respondent Raja Muhammad Shahid Bashir. Even no attested copy 

of any decision about guardianship in her favour could be brought 

on the file during the pendency of the instant appeal, therefore, this 

Court is also left with no option but to dismiss the appeal in hand 

as the impugned order has been passed on the basis of ex-parte un-

rebutted evidence of the respondent and it does not suffer with any 

illegality  or  irregularity  or  misreading  and  non-reading  of  record 

and there is no need to interfere in it.” 

13. 

The  first  Appellate  Court  in  the  above  referred  findings  neither 

discussed  the  evidence  of  respondent  No.3/father  nor  considered  the 

judgments  of  the  Sindh  High  Court  as  well  as  of  the  Guardian  Court  at 

Karachi  and  the  first  Appellate  Court  at  Karachi,  where  respondent 

No.3/father  failed  to  make  out  his  case,  even  the  first  Appellate  Court  at 

Islamabad  has  not  considered  it  appropriate  to  ask  respondent  No.3/father 

and confirm all those factors, which clearly reflected on record.  

14. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  affidavit  of  evidence  Exh.A1  of 

respondent  No.3/father  filed  before  the  Guardian  Court  at  Islamabad,  who 

himself referred his address as “presently residing at P.N.S. Muhaffiz, at PN 

Dockyard,  Karachi”  and referred  certain  important  facts  regarding  previous 

proceeding in ambiguous situation.  

 “ 

That the said Mst. Nasreen Rafiq didn’t allow the deponent 

to  meet  his  said  son  (Muhammad  Sarim).  The  deponent  filed  a 

petition U/S 25 of Guardian & Wards Act, 1925 to get the custody 

of his said son and was succeeded in getting order of meeting with 

the  minor  in  the  Court,  but  later  on  his  main  petition  for 
getting  the  custody  of  his  said  son  was  dismissed  by  the 

Guardian  Judge  on  the  ground  that  the  said  minor  was  at  that 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 11 

time  of  tender  age  and  the  learned  guardian  judge  told  the 

deponent to wait, so that the minor grows up.  

That the deponent has now filed the above petition for 

getting the custody of his minor son after long wait of about 

5 years, the minor is now more than 11 years old.  

That  the  said  Mst.  Nasreen  Rafiq  has  not  allowed  the 

deponent even to see the face of his said son and has deprived him 

from meeting his son.  

That the said act of Mst. Nasreen Rafiq of not allowing the 

deponent even to see the face of his said son is against the interest 

and  welfare  of  the  said  minor,  who  has  been  deprived  of  the  love 

and affection of the deponent who is his real father.  

That  the  said  minor  would  hardly  recognized  the 
deponent, when the deponent will have a chance to see him and in 

this  way  the  said  Mst.  Nasreen  Rafiq  is  committing  great 

callousness and cruelty on both the son and the father.  

(Underlining is provided for emphasis) 

15. 

The above referred stance in evidence of respondent No.3/father is of 

great importance which was not taken into account by the Guardian Court as 

well  as  by  the  first  Appellate  Court  in  which  respondent  No.3  has  not 

referred any reasons for agitating the matter at Islamabad despite the fact that 

he  himself  referred  that  his  son  is  at  Karachi  with  petitioner  No.1/mother, 

even  he  has  not  mentioned  a  single  fact  that  he  is  regularly  paying  the 

maintenance and he referred that petitioner No.1/mother is not allowing him 

to see the face of his son but all these eventualities place a heavy burden upon 

the  Guardian  Court  as  well  as  on  the  first  Appellate  Court  to  probe  and 

consider  these  important  factors  while  deciding  guardian  petition  as 

petitioner No.1/mother admittedly shifted to Karachi in the year 2008 along 

with  the  minor  and  the  explanation  of  delay  in  filing  the  second  custody 

petition by respondent No.3 at Islamabad is not available on record, therefore, 

in  my  humble  view,  the  cause  of  action  qua  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of 

Islamabad and Karachi has not been considered for all practical reasons. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 12 

16. 

This Court is of the view that  petitioner No.1/mother has the right to 

shift  from  one  jurisdiction  to  another  jurisdiction  along  with  minor  on  the 

reasons of security, job, or to look after her parents as she is the best judge to 

decide such factors and no court can put a clog in her right of free movement 

as every citizen of Pakistan has been ensured with the protection provided in 

the  constitution  in  which  the  right  of  free  movement  or  to  enter  into  any 

lawful profession or trade has been guaranteed, even otherwise, the law does 

not deprive the mother or a wife from shifting from one place to another for 

all  these factors  referred  above  and in  such  eventuality,  if  a reasonable  time 

has  already  been  elapsed,  especially  in  this  case  when  9  years  has  been 

passed,  then  the  cause  of  action  within  territorial  jurisdiction  of  Islamabad 

ceased  to  exist  and  respondent  No.3/father  has  to  approach  the  Guardian 

Court at Karachi for his grievances, if any.  

17. 

Keeping in view the above background, this Court while exercising the 

powers  of  in  loco  parentis  and  to  safeguard  the  interest  of  minor,  called 

petitioner No.1/mother and petitioner No.2/minor son for resolution of this 

issue  once  and  for  all,  however  both  the  petitioners  could  not  appear before 

this  Court  despite  the  order  dated  06.11.2018  as  they  had  to  travel  from 

Karachi  and  the  learned  counsel  for  petitioners  showed  his  inability  and 

contended that due to financial implications of mother/petitioner, she could 

not  bear  any  further  cost  of  traveling  and  even  the  schooling  of  minor  may 

affect,  hence,  by  exercising  the  powers  available  to  this  Court  vide  order 

dated  21.12.2018,  I.T  Department  was  directed  to  arrange  Video  call,  in 

compliance 

thereof,  petitioner  No.1/mother  as  well  as  Muhammad 

Sarim/minor  were  taken  on  video  conference  link  in  the  open  Court  today, 

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 13 

whereby  Muhammad  Sarim/minor  has  been  interviewed,  during  which  the 

following questions and answers have been recorded: 

مراص  

 دمحم

:باوج

؟ےہ ایک مان اک پآ :لاوس

۔ےہ لاس

13 

 تقو سا رمع یریم

:باوج

؟ےہ رمع ایک یک پآ :لاوس

۔ںیم سلاک

 th6

:باوج

؟ںیہ ےتھڑپ ںیم سلاک یسنوک پآ :لاوس

۔یچارک ،ریلم ،سیا یپ ےا

:باوج

؟ےہ ایک مان اک لوکس ےک پآ :لاوس

۔یچارک

ٹنیک ریلم

:باوج

؟ےہ عقاو رپ ںاہک لوکس :لاوس

 لایخ  اریم  روا  ےہ  یتاھڑپ  دوخ  ےھجم  ہدلاو  یریم  :باوج
 ۔ںوہ شوخ تہب ھتاس ےک نا ںیم روا ےہ یتھکر

 رکیل ےس یئاھڑپ یک لوکس وک پآ :لاوس
؟ےہ اترک ددم نوک ںیم ماک مامت ےک رھگ

۔ںیہن دای ےھجم

:باوج

۔ایآ ںیہن یھب یھبک

:باوج

 ےلم بک راب یرخآےس بحاص دلاو :لاوس
؟ےھت
؟ےھت ےئآ بک دابآ ملاسا پآ :لاوس

۔ںیہ ےتہر ںیم یچارک

:باوج

 ںیم  روا  ںوہ  شوخ  تہب  ھتاس  ےک  ہدلاو  ینپا  ںیم
 ت

:باوج
اقلام ےس دلاو ےھجم ہتبلا ںوہ اتہاچ انہر ھتاس ےک یہنا
۔ںیہن ضارتعا یئوک رپ

 ےتہر  ںاہک  بحاص  دلاو  ےک  پآ  :لاوس
؟ںیہ
  ایک
  :لاوس
؟ںیہ ےتہاچ

 انہر  ھتاس  ےک  بحاص  دلاو  پآ

Similarly, this Court also put certain questions to petitioner No.1/mother, in 

response to which she answered in the following manner:  

۔ںیم یچارک

:باوج

۔ںیہ تانیعت یہ ںیم یچارک یوین ناتسکاپ

:باوج

 ںاہک  رہوش  ہقباسےک  پآ  تقو  سِا

  :لاوس
؟ںیہ ےتوہ
 سِا یتانیعت یک رہوش ہقباس ےک پآ :لاوس
؟ےہ رپ ںاہک تقو

  ںیم

ےلھچپ

قباطمب

 رپ  خیرات  ررقم  یچارک  جج  نیڈراگ  مکح
:باوج
رگم ںوہ یتاج ھت ٔواس علض ےیلیک ےناولم وک غلابان
 3 
ہن ےنلم وک ےچب غلابان دلاو ریشب دہاش دمحم ہجار ےس لاس
 م
قر یک یرگڈ یک ہقفن نان یک غلابان ےن سا ہکنویک ںیہ ےئآ
 یرونج

 ۔
ےہ یک ہن ادا کت جآ ےس

2016

 ےس

ےچب وک دلاو

 ےک

ےچب

 ےن پآ
 :لاوس
؟اھت ایاولم بک

 وت ےرک تاقلام ےس دلاو ےنپا ہچب :لاوس
؟ںیہن وت ضارتعا یئوک وک پآ

 ےک  دلاو  ےک  سا  وک  ےچب  تقو  رہ  ںیم  ۔ںیہن  یج
:باوج
 ےس  دلاو  ےنپا  یک  غلابان  مر
اص
  دمحم  روا  ںوہ  یتاتب  قلعتم
 دمحم ہجار ہیلع لوسم رگم ےہ ہن ضارتعا یئوک رپ تاقلام
 رک  اج  ںیم  دابآ  ملاسا  ےیلیک  ےنرک  گنت  ںیمہ  ریشب  ہجار
 ینہ
ذ
 ہچب غلابان روا ںیم ہکات ےہ ید رک عورش یزاب ہمدقم
 یک  یضرم  ینپا  ےس  مہ  ہو  روا  ےئاجوہ  راچ  ود  ےس
  تیذا
 ھ
لوسم ہکنلااح ےکس اونم تاب
 ۔ےہ ریذپ شئاہر رپ روط لقتسم ںیم یچارک

تاس ےک یلیمیف ینپا دوخ ہیلع

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

 ںیم لوکس کلبپ یچارک روا ںوہ رچیٹ لوکس کیا ںیم :باوج
 ۔ںوہ یترک تمزلام

Page | 14 

؟ںیہ یترک ماک ایک پآ :لاوس

18. 

The minor has recorded his version and in my humble view, the minor 

fully understands the nature and questions put forward to him by this Court 

and  he  has  expressed  his  intention  in  unequivocal  terms  that  he  is  living  in 

Karachi, studying in Army Public School, Malir, Karachi Cantt. and he has no 

objection  to  meet  his  father  at  Karachi,  especially  when  his  father  is  also 

residing  in  Karachi,  however  he  is  not  willing  to  leave  his  mother  in  any 

circumstances as he is happily living with his mother.  

19.  While  considering  the  above  referred  details,  the  will  of  child  is  the 

most important factor in addition to other parameters of welfare of the child, 

whereas in this case, a boy of 13 years, who fully understands the issues and 

dispute of his parents, when expressed his willingness to live with his mother 

then there is no other occasion left to disturb the custody in any manner.  

20. 

Besides  the  above  referred  details,  I  have  also  perused  the  record  of 

this Court and observed that the service report submitted by the office reveals 

that  respondent  No.3  is  not  living  at  the  address  provided  by  him  in  the 

learned  Trial  Court  i.e.  House  No.12/5-B,  Street  No.110,  Sector  G-7/4, 

Islamabad, whereas the residents of the said street confirmed that respondent 

No.3 is not a resident of the said address, which also shows that the address 

mentioned  by  respondent  No.3 in  order  to  justify  his  cause  of  action  within 

the  territorial jurisdiction  of  this  Court  is  based  upon  misrepresentation  and 

by  concealing  the  facts  as  referred  in  Para-9  of  the  petition  U/S  25  of  the 

Guardians  &  Wards  Act,  1890  as  no  cause  of  action  of  respondent  No.3 

proved to be within the territorial jurisdiction of Islamabad. This demeanor of 

respondent  No.3  led  this  Court  to  the  conclusion  that  this  case  is  the  classic 

example  of  abuse  on  the  part  of  respondent  No.3  by  filing  the  custody 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 15 

petition  at  Islamabad  to  frustrate  petitioner  No.1/mother,  therefore,  the 

following directions are required to be observed in such like matters: 

(a) 

All 

the  Guardian/Family 

Judges, 

Islamabad  are  under 

obligation to verify the address of mother/wife as well as of the 

minor  independently  in  the  learned  Trial  Court  with  the 

intention  to  provide  due  protection  to  mother  and  the  minor 

from  unnecessary  harassment  and  financial  constraints  of 

traveling cost.  

(b) 

In  case,  the  mother  or  a  wife  as  well  as  minor,  is  living in  any 

other  part  of  the  country,  other  than  the  district  in  which  the 

family suit or a guardian petition has been filed by the father or 

husband,  in  such  eventuality,  the  Guardian  Judge/Family 

Judge shall record the statement of the mother, child (minor) or 

a  wife,  as  the  case  may  be,  through  a  video  link  in  order  to 

facilitate  the  mother/wife  or  a  minor  from  unnecessary 

hardship of traveling, whereas the video link conferencing calls 

shall  be  arranged  by  the  District  and  Sessions  Judges  of  the 

district,  in  such  eventuality,  this  on  the  other  hand  will  also 

increase  the  performance  of  the  courts  and  avoid  unnecessary 

adjournments.  

(c) 

The statement of minors should be given preference along with 

other factors while deciding the question of welfare of minor.  

21.  At last, respondent No.3 has failed to justify and defend the concurrent 

findings  in  his  favour  on  all  legal  points  and  as  such,  the  very  filing  of 

custody petition U/S 25 of the Guardians & Wards Act, 1890 is not justified, 

the  same  is  hit  by  principle  of  estoppel,  concealment  of  facts  as  well  as 

 
 
W.P. No.3492/2018 

Page | 16 

misrepresentation on the part of Raja Muhammad Shahid Bashir/respondent 

No.3,  therefore,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  ALLOWED  and  both  the 

judgments and decrees of the Guardian Judge as well as of the first Appellate 

are hereby SET ASIDE as the same are based on misreading of evidence and 

not maintainable. 

22. 

Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  the  conduct  of  respondent  No.3 

confined this Court to impose penalty on him, therefore, respondent No.3 is 

burdened  with  cost  of  Rs.100,000/-  for  causing  unnecessary  litigation  at 

Islamabad  and  also  for  causing  undue  hardship  to  the  petitioner/mother. 

Respondent No.3/father is, therefore, directed to pay the said amount within 

a  period  of  two  (02)  months  directly  to  the  petitioner  No.1/mother  through 

banking  channel  and  he  is  advised  to  approach  the  Guardian  Court  at 

Karachi for any of his grievance with respect to visitation.  

APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 

Khalid Z. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
    JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
