ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 4215 OF 2022 

SYED KHURRAM ABBAS NAQVI. 
VS    
THE ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE, ISLAMABAD-EAST AND 
OTHERS. 

Petitioner by       : 

Ms. Asima Noreen Ch., Advocate. 

Respondents by  : 

Mr. M. Khan Nazar, Advocate. 

Date of hearing     : 

30.03.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.    

Through the instant writ petition, the 

Petitioner  (Syed  Khurram  Abbas  Naqvi)  has  assailed  the  Judgment  and 

Decree  dated  11.09.2021  (Impugned  Judgment-I)  passed  by  the  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  whereby  his  appeal  against 

Judgment and Decree dated  15.04.2021 (Impugned Judgment-II) passed 

by 

the 

learned  Senior  Civil  Judge/Judge  Family-Guardian  Court, 

Islamabad-East was dismissed and consequently the Impugned Judgment-II 

was upheld.  

2. 

Brief facts as per the Memo of Petition are that the Petitioner [Syed 

Khurram Abbas Naqvi] was married to Respondent No.3 [Tayyaba Batool]  

and the couple had three daughters i.e. Respondents No. 4 to 6. As per the 

Petitioner, the Respondent No.3 was a disobedient wife and the Petitioner 

tried his level best but she did not mend her ways which left Petitioner with 

no other option but to divorce the Respondent No.3 on 22.03.2020.  

3. 

The Respondent No.3 to 6 filed Suit for Maintenance for herself and 

the minor daughters on 10.08.2020. The record reflects that the  Petitioner 

contested the said suit by filing his Written Statement.  Issues were framed 

and evidence was recorded.  Thereafter, the suit of the Respondents No.3 to 

6  was  partially  decreed  vide  Impugned  Judgment  &  Decree-II,  whereby 

Petitioner was directed to pay an amount of Rs. 12,000/- per month to each 

minor  (Respondents  No.  4  to  6)  with  effect  from  01.04.2020  with  10% 

annual  increase  till  their  legal  entitlement  whereas  with  respect  to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2|W.P No.4215/2021 

Respondent No. 3’s claim it was held that she may file a separate suit for 

maintenance after final resolution of the dispute regarding effectiveness of 

the divorce which the Respondent No. 3 had challenged by way of separate 

proceedings.  

4. 

Being  aggrieved  of  the  Impugned  Judgment  &  Decree-II,  the 

Petitioner  preferred  an  appeal  under  Section  14  of  the  West  Pakistan 

Family  Court  Act,  1964 before  the  Respondent  No.1  for setting aside  the 

same.  However,  Respondent  No.  l  dismissed  the  Petitioner’s  appeal  vide 

Impugned  Judgment  &  Decree-I.  Feeling  aggrieved  of  both  the  said 

Impugned  Judgments  &  Decrees  passed  by  the  learned  Courts below,  the 

Petitioner has preferred the instant Writ Petition.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the 

Impugned  Judgments  &  Decrees  are  the  result  of  non-reading  and 

misreading of the evidence produced by the parties and are totally against 

the  law and facts of the case; that during the  subsistence of marriage, the 

Petitioner  provided  all  the  necessities  of  life  to  Respondents  No.3  to  6 

within his means but the Respondent No.3 always misbehaved and finally 

left the house of the Petitioner without his consent or permission; that the 

Petitioner  is  a  retired  officer  who  has  a  minor  daughter  from  second 

marriage  and  is  also  looking  after  his  sister  and  nephew  in  his  meager 

pension amounting to Rs.64,652/- per month; that the Petitioner is ready to 

pay the maintenance allowance of the Respondents No.4 to 6 according to 

his  financial  position  but  the  learned  Respondent  No.2  allowed  an 

exaggerated amount of maintenance allowance which is beyond the income 

of the Petitioner; that before passing the Impugned Judgment & Decree-II 

dated  15.04.2021  the  department  passed  the  retirement  order  of  the 

Petitioner dated 09.04.2021 and the Petitioner also submitted his retirement 

order before the learned Trial Court but the learned Trial Court overlooked 

the said important fact, hence the Impugned Judgments & Decrees are not 

sustainable  in  the  eyes  of  law;  that  during  the  pendency  of  appeal,  the 

Petitioner  submitted  an  application 

for  production  of  additional 

documentary  evidence  regarding  proof  of  his  weak  financial  position  but 

the  learned  Appellate  Court  did  not  give  any  weightage  to  the  financial 

 
 
 
3|W.P No.4215/2021 

status  of  the  Petitioner.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  prayed  for 

acceptance of instant petition by setting aside the  Impugned Judgments & 

Decrees.  He  further  prayed  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  be  directed  to 

reduce  the  quantum  of  maintenance  of  minors  according  to  monthly 

income of Petitioner/judgment debtor. 

6. 

Conversely,  learned counsel  for  Respondents  No. 3  to  6, supported 

the  Impugned  Judgments  &  Decrees  as  being  lawful  and  justified  which 

have been passed after proper appreciation of facts and evidence as well as 

application of judicial mind. Learned counsel in support of his contentions 

placed  reliance  on  Amjad  Khan  VS Muhammad  Irshad  (deceased) 

through LRs., 2020 SCMR 2155, Syed Arif Ali Sabri VSAbdul Samad 

through L.Rs. and others, 2008 YLR 2309 and an unreported judgment of 

this  Court  passed  in  Rehan  Khalid  VS Mst.  Uzma  Nawaz  and  others, 

W.P.No. 550/2021. 

7. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused 

the Impugned Judgments & Decrees as well as available record. 

8. 

It  is  trite  law  that  factual  disputes  cannot  be  resolved  in  writ 

jurisdiction and that a High Court in exercise of constitutional jurisdiction 

cannot  reappraise  evidence  as  a  Court  of  Appeal.    While  exercising  such 

jurisdiction  the  Court  must  ensure  that  the  subordinate  courts  have  not 

acted  without  jurisdiction  or in violation of  law.    However,  in  the  instant 

case, no error of jurisdiction or violation of law has been pointed out by the 

Petitioner.   

9. 

The Petitioner’s only plea is that the Courts below did not consider 

his  financial  position  and  obligations  when  granting  maintenance  for  the 

Respondents No. 4 to 6 and that he was not allowed to produce evidence.   

10. 

It is noted that the Respondent No.3 who is the Plaintiff in the  Suit 

for Maintenance before the Family Court stated in her plaint as well as the 

Examination-in-Chief that present Petitioner is Lt. Commander in Pakistan 

Navy  and  his  earning  is  more  than  Rs.150,000/-  per  month  as  salary.  In 

response the Petitioner admitted in his Written Statement that he is indeed 

serving  as  Lt.  Commander  in  Pakistan  Navy,  however,  he  denied  the 

 
 
 
4|W.P No.4215/2021 

quantum  of  salary  as  alleged.  Despite  said  denial  he  neither  stated  any 

specific  amount  that  he  is  earning  as  per  his  own  contention  nor  was 

original  pay  slip  or  any  other  original  document  produced  in  evidence  to 

show  his  salary.  The  amount  stated  to  be  his  pension  in  the  Memo  of 

Petition was not mentioned in the proceedings before the Courts below.  

11.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  was  unable  to  identify  any 

evidence  produced  by  the  Petitioner  which  was  not  considered  by  the 

Courts below.  According to the Impugned Judgment-II, the Petitioner did 

not submit his Examination-in-Chief before the learned Trial Court which 

fact has not been controverted by the Petitioner in the instant petition. The 

documents  produced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  Petitioner  before  the 

learned  Trial  Court  have  been  listed  as  Mark  D/1  to  Mark  D/5  in  the 

Impugned  Judgment-II.    Time  and  time  again  this  Court  as  well  as  the 

Honorable  Supreme  Court  has held  in various  judgments including  in  the 

cases  of  State  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of  Pakistan  VS  Javaid  Iqbal 

2011  SCMR  1013,  Chaudhary  Wajid  Ayub  VS  Malik  Rizwan  Ahmed 

PLD  2020  Islamabad  250,  Asif  Ali  Hashmi  VS  Muhammad  Arif  Mian 

PLD  2015  Islamabad  191  and  Pakistan  Engineering  Consultants  VS 

Pakistan International Airlines Corporation PLD 2006 Karachi 511 that 

documents not produced but only marked cannot be considered by Courts 

as legal evidence of fact.  In such circumstances, the learned Judge, Family 

Court  rightly  observed  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree-I  as 

under:- 

“Since no evidence in rebuttal is produced by the defendant, therefore, the 
documents brought on record in the statement of the learned counsel are 
extend  no  corroboration  to  the  stance  of  the  defendant.  Keeping in view 
the evidence produced by the plaintiff which remains unrebutted by the 
defendant, this issue is partially resolved in favour of the plaintiffs only to 
the extent of payment maintenance to the minors.”[Emphasis added]. 

12.  Similarly,  the  learned  Appellate  Court  rightfully  observed  in  the 

Impugned Judgment-I that the photocopies of the documents produced by 

the  Petitioner  were  marked,  which  have  no  legal  value  or  sanctity  in  the 

eyes of the law. In view of the foregoing, the Petitioner’s plea that he was 

not allowed to produce evidence is against the record. 

 
5|W.P No.4215/2021 

13.  The  application  for  production  of  additional  evidence  was  filed  by 

the  Petitioner  in  appeal  before  the  learned  Appellate  Court  without  any 

reason  as  to  why  they  were  not  produced  in  evidence  before  the  Family 

Court.    In  any  event  neither  any  order  passed  by  the  learned  Appellate 

Court  in  respect  of  such  application  has  been  filed  nor  impugned  by  the 

Petitioner in the instant petition. It is not even clear whether the documents 

sought  to  be  produced  by  the  Petitioner  through  such  application  were 

original  or  photocopies.    Therefore,  the  learned  Appellate  Court  vide 

Impugned Judgment & Decree-II has correctly held as follows:- 

“Admittedly,  the  appellant  has  not  recorded  his  statement  before  the 
learned  trial  court.  Only  the  learned  counsel  for  appellant  has  tendered 
the above mentioned documents before the court. No original documents 
are tendered by the learned appellant counsel and the learned trial court 
has placed the same on the record as by placing on these documents the 
sign  of  mark  which  is  neither  the  primary  documents  nor  secondary 
evidence. As no evidence is produced by the appellant before the learned 
trial Court, therefore, on the basis of said documents the same could not 
be inferred that whether the appellant was having the capability of paying 
maintenance to the appellant or is concealing his actual financial position 
from the court.”  

14.  The  Petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  or  infirmity  or 

misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  in  the  Impugned  Judgments  & 

Decrees.    In  view  of  the  foregoing,  interference  by  this  Court  in  the 

concurrent  findings  of  the  Courts  below  is  unwarranted.  Hence,  present 

petition being devoid of any merit is hereby dismissed.  

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 07.04.2022. 

Adnan. 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
