Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       WRIT PETITION NO. 4332 OF 2021 

 Shaza Tehseen   

VS 

  Tehseen Butt, etc. 

PETITIONER BY:     

Ms. Jamila J. Aslam, Advocate.  

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr. Abid Hussain Chaudhry, Advocate, for 
respondent No. 1. 
Syed  Asad  Ali  Saeed,  Advocate 
respondent No.3.      

for 

DATE OF HEARING: 

21.02.2022.  

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  The  petitioner  is  aggrieved  by 

judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge 

dated  20.09.2021  through  which  the  judgment  and  decree  for 

dissolution  of  marriage  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court 

dated 21.06.2021 was set-aside.   

2.   

Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that pursuant 

to  the  proviso  of  section  10(4)  of  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act, 

1964 (“Family Courts Act”), the learned Family Court is under an 

obligation  to  pass  a  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage  forthwith 

upon  failure  of  reconciliation  proceedings.  That  after  the  failure  of 

reconciliation  proceedings  in  the  instant  case  the  learned  Family 

Court  rightly  passed  the  judgment  and  decree  to  the  extent  of 

dissolution  of  marriage  while  the  question  of  quantum  of 

maintenance and the custody of minor remained pending before the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 2 

learned  Family  Court.  That  the  question  raised  before  the  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  in  appeal  regarding  the  quantum  of  dower 

to be returned by the petitioner to respondent No.1 on dissolution of 

marriage which the petitioner was ready to repay. And thus the only 

dispute  between  the  parties  related  to  the  exact  dower  and  the 

manner  in  which  it  was  to  be  returned  for  purposes  of  which  the 

matter could be remanded back to the learned trial court. However, 

what  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  could  not  do  was  to  set-

aside  the  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage  as  once  such  a  decree 

had been passed the marriage had been dissolved and could not be 

resurrected  by  the  learned  appellate  Court  while  setting  aside  such 

decree.  She  further  submitted  that  under  section  14(2)(a)  of  the 

Family  Courts  Act  no  appeal  could  be  filed  against  the    decree  of  a 

Family Court for dissolution of marriage except when the dissolution 

of  marriage  was  pursuant  to  section  2(viii)(d)  of  the  Dissolution  of 

Muslim  Marriages  Act,  1939  (i.e.  where  dissolution  is  due  to  the 

husband treating the wife with cruelty and disposing of her property 

or  preventing  her  from  exercising  her  legal  rights  over  it).  She 

submitted that as the dissolution of marriage had not been ordered 

pursuant  to  such  provision  of  the  Dissolution  of  Muslim  Marriages 

Act, 1939, the appeal against the decree for dissolution of marriage 

was  not  maintainable  in  terms  of  section  4(2)(a)  of  the  Family 

Courts  Act.  She  relied  on  Sadia  Arif  VS  Adnan  Shahid  and  2 

others  (2021  YLR  1753)  wherein  this  Court  had  held  that 

dissolution  of  marriage  through  Khula  was  neither  revocable  nor 

appealable.           

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 3 

3.   

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submitted  that  there 

was no infirmity in  the judgment rendered by the learned appellate 

court.  That  the  proviso  to  section  10(4)  of  the  Family  Courts  Act 

itself provided that husband was entitled to restoration of Haq Mehr 

received  by  wife  in  consideration  of  marriage.    In  the  event  of 

dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of  Khula,  such  repayment  of 

Haq  Mehr  was  condition  precedent  for  issuing  a  decree  for 

dissolution  of  marriage.  That  in  the  instant  case  as  the  learned 

Family Court had not passed any order with regard to repayment of 

Haq Mehr received by the petitioner, the learned appellate court had 

set-aside  the  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage  in  accordance  with 

the requirement of section 10(4) of the Family Courts Act. He relied 

on  Malik  Khawaja  Muhammad  VS  Marduman  Babar  Kahol 

(1987  SCMR  1543),  Muzaffer  Ali  VS  Mst.  Mehrun  Nisa  (1989 

CLC  1805),  Naila  Azmat  VS  Judge,  Family  Court  and  others 

(1999  MLD  3090),  Ahmed  Khan  VS  Mst.  Sarwar  Khatoon 

(2004 MLD 555), Shagufta Bibi VS Judge Family Court, Mailsi 

(2013  MLD  487)  and  Mst.  Shahida  VS  Sardar  Shah  (2018 

MLD 146) for the proposition that grant of decree for dissolution of 

marriage  was  contingent  on  repayment  of  Haq  Mehr  paid  by  the 

husband to  the wife  at the  time of marriage and such decree could 

not be passed without repayment of Haq Mehr.  

4.   

Let us reproduce provisions of the Family Courts Act which 

are relevant for our present purposes: 

10. Pre-trial proceedings.— (1) When the written statement is 

filed,  the  Court  shall  fix  an  early  date  for  a  pre-trial  hearing  of 

the case.  

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 4 

(2) On the date so fixed, the Court shall examine the plaint, the 

written  statement  (if  any)  and  the  precise  of  evidence  and 

documents  filed  by  the  parties  and  shall  also,  if  it  so  deems  fit, 

hear the parties and their counsel.  

(3) At the pre-trial, the Court shall ascertain the points at issue 

between  the  parties  and  attempt  to  effect  a  compromise  or 

reconciliation between the parties, if this be possible.  

(4) If no compromise or reconciliation is possible the Court shall 

frame  the  issues  in  the  case  and  fix  a  date  for  recording  of 

evidence.   

14.  Appeals.—  (1)  Notwithstanding  anything  provided  in  any 

other law for the time being in force, a decision given or a decree 

passed by a Family Court shall be appealable—  

(a) to the High Court, where the Family Court is presided 

over  by  a District Judge,  an  Additional  District  Judge  or a 

person  notified  by  Government  to  be  of  the  rank  and 

status  of  a  District  Judge  or  an  Additional  District  Judge; 

and 

 (b) to the District Court, in any other case. 

(2)  No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by Family Court—  

(a)  for  dissolution  of  marriage,  except  in  the  case  of 

dissolution for reasons specified in clause (a) of item (viii) 

of  section  2  of  the  Dissolution  of  Muslim  Marriages  Act, 

1939;  

(b) for dower not exceeding rupees fifteen thousand;  

(c)  for  maintenance  of  rupees  five  hundred  or  less  per 

month.   

5.   

The  two  questions  that  arise  before  the  Court  are  whether 

repayment  of  Haq  Mehr  received  by  the  wife  in  consideration  of 

marriage  at  the  time  of  marriage  is  a  condition  precedent  for 

issuance of a decree in suit for dissolution of marriage on the basis 

of Khula and whether  an appeal against a judgment and decree for 

dissolution of marriage is maintainable in view of section 14(2)(a) of 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                             
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 5 

the Family Courts Act. In view of the provisions of the Family Courts 

Act  together  with  the  provisions  of  the  Dissolution  of  Muslim 

Marriages  Act,  1939,  it  becomes  apparent  that  dissolution  of 

marriage can be sought by a wife either on the basis of any fault of 

the  husband  or  on  a  no-fault  basis.  Where  the  wife  is  seeking 

dissolution  of  marriage  due  to  cruelty  on  part  of  the  husband  and 

the  Family  Court  comes  to  the  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  evidence 

adduced  before  it  that  the  wife  is  entitled  to  the  dissolution  of 

marriage  due  to  cruelty  the  wife  in  such  case  cannot  be  burdened 

with the liabilities returning dower received at the time of marriage. 

This  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Abid  Hussain  VS 

Additional District  Judge, Alipur, District Muzaffargarh (2006 

SCMR  100).  It  was  further  held  in  the  said  judgment  that  “non-

provision of appeal in case of dissolution of marriage was to protect 

women … from prolonged and costly litigation”.  

6.   

The question of repayment of Haq Mehr does however arise 

in  case  wife  seeks  dissolution  of  marriage  on  no-fault  basis  i.e.  on 

the  basis  of  her  own  considered  judgment  that  she  can  no  longer 

live  with  her  husband  within  the  bond  of  marriage.  No-fault 

dissolution of marriage does not contradict Islamic jurisprudence. A 

woman  cannot  be  forced  to  continue  to  suffer  within  the  bond  of 

marriage that she does not wish to remain tied up in and she need 

not prove and justify the cause of her decision before a court to seek 

dissolution  of  marriage.  Dissolution  of  marriage  is  not  a  welcome 

outcome  and  thus  there  is  emphasis  on  making  efforts  to  facilitate 

reconciliation  between  spouses  to  ensure  that  the  union  preserves. 

But where it becomes obvious that the wife is unwilling to stay in the 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 6 

bond  of  marriage  during  pretrial  reconciliation  proceedings,  the 

Family  Court  is  under  an  obligation  to  pronounce  dissolution  of 

marriage  forthwith.  The  question  whether  dissolution  of  marriage 

was sought due to the husband’s fault or not and whether return of 

Haq  Mehr  is  due  from  the  wife  are  additional  questions  for  which 

issues  can  be  framed  and  evidence  recorded.  But  the  question  of 

determination  of  liabilities  while  contingent  on  whether  the  wife  is 

seeking dissolution  due to husband’s fault, is  not a precondition for 

dissolution  of  marriage.  The  question  of  such  determination  arises 

post-dissolution  and  thus  dissolution  of  marriage  is  not  contingent 

on  repayment  of  Haq  Mehr  by  the  wife.  There  is  no  concept  of 

personal servitude within the concept of marriage in Islam and none 

can be imported in section 10(4) of the Family Courts Act. A woman 

cannot  be  forced  to  live  with  her  husband  when  she  wants  the 

marriage  dissolved  merely  because  the  matter  of  calculation  or 

settlement of civil liabilities is outstanding between them.  

7.   

The aforementioned scheme of the law is also evident from 

section  14(2)(a)  of  the  Family  Courts  Act  which  prohibits  filing  an 

appeal  against  a  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage  except  when 

such dissolution is on the basis of finding of the court that a husband 

has  indulged  in  cruelty  and  the  marriage  is  liable  to  be  dissolved 

pursuant to section 2(viii)(d) of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages 

Act,  1939.  In  this  context  it  was  held  by  the  learned  Sindh  High 

Court  in  Aurangzeb  VS  Mst.  Gulnaz  and  another  (PLD  2006 

Karachi  563)  that  the  decision  with  regard  to  determination  and 

restoration  of  benefits  at  the  time  of  dissolution  of  marriage  is 

appealable and such appeal is not barred by section 14 of the Family 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 7 

Courts  Act.  The  learned  Lahore  High  Court  came  to  a  similar 

conclusion  in  Khawaja  Jameel  Ahmed  VS  Judge  Family  Court, 

Multan  and  another  (PLJ  2013  Lahore  185).  Likewise,  the 

august  Supreme  Court  held  in  Abid  Hussain  VS  Additional 

District Judge, Alipur, District Muzaffargarh (2006 SCMR 100) 

that  where  the  family  court  dismissed  a  suit  seeking  dissolution  of 

marriage  on  ground  of  cruelty  and  non-maintenance,  the  wife 

aggrieved by such  decision could file an appeal under  section 14  of 

the  Family  Courts  Act.  What  emerges  from  the  law  laid  down  by 

superior courts is that the question of determination of civil liabilities 

between spouses upon dissolution of marriage was appealable under 

section 14 of the Family Courts Act. In the event that a decree has 

been passed by holding that the husband was liable for cruelty and 

not entitled to the return of Haq Mehr, the husband can  appeal the 

said  part  of  the  judgment  which  held  him  for  liable  for  cruelty  and 

disentitled him from return of Haq Mehr. He can however not seek to 

have  the  decree  of dissolution  of  marriage  itself  set-aside.  In  other 

words,  the  only  appealable  part  under  section  14(2)  is  a  finding  of 

the Family Court which determines his civil liabilities for lack of grant 

of  Haq  Mehr  upon  dissolution  of  marriage.  Likewise,  a  wife  who 

seeks  dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of  cruelty  and  the 

dissolution  is  not  granted  on  such  basis,  can  appeal  such  order  in 

the  event  that  she  is  aggrieved  of  the  determination  by  the  Family 

Court  for  civil  liability  to  repay  Haq  Mehr  she  received  from  the 

husband.  In  such  case  as  well  it  is  the  only  part  of  the  judgment 

determining  the  civil  liabilities  of  the  parties  that  is  appealable  and 

not  the  decree  of  dissolution  of  marriage  as  it  cannot  be 

countenanced  that  marriage  having  been  dissolved  by  a  decree 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 8 

passed by the Family Court can subsequently be resurrected by the 

appellate court on the basis that a dispute continues with regard to 

their  civil  liabilities  as  determined  by  the  Family  Court  in  the 

aftermath of the dissolution of marriage.  

8.  

In forming such opinion this Court relies on the judgment of 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Dr.  Akhlaq  Ahmed  VS  Mst. 

Kishwar Sultana (PLD 1983 SC 169), wherein the following was 

held: 

As  regards  the  third  submission  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner  that  dissolution  of  marriage  by  Khula'  cannot  stand 

whilst an  inquiry  on fact  with  regard to  the  terms on which  it  is 

to be granted is yet to take place, it appears plausible but is not 

quite  sound.  It  was  held  in  the  case  of  Moonshee  Buzul-ul-

Raheem v. Luteefutoon Nisa (8 Moore's Ind. App. 379) that non-

payment  of  stipulated  consideration 

for  Khula'  does  not 

invalidate the dissolution of marriage by Khula'. Once the Family 

Court  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  parties  cannot  remain 

within the limits of God and the dissolution of marriage by Khula' 

must  take  place,  the  inquiry  into  the  terms  on  which  such 

dissolution  shall  take  place  does  not  affect  the  conclusion  but 

only  creates  civil  liabilities  with  regard  to  the  benefits  to  be 

returned  by  the  wife  to  the  husband  and  does  not  affect  the 

dissolution itself. 

Likewise,  the  learned  Sindh  High  Court  in  Aurangzeb VS Mst. 

Gulnaz (PLD 2006 Karachi 563) held the following: 

Thus,  the  consensus  of  judicial  opinion  is  that  restitution  of 

dower  is  not  an  indispensable  condition  for  the  grant  of  Khula' 

and  non-restoration  of  dower  and  other  benefits  will  not  have 

any  effect  upon  the  validity  of  the  decree.  Once  the  Family 

Court comes to conclusion that a wife was entitled for Khula' it 

must  pass  such  decree  in  her  favour.  The  decision  regarding 

the  restoration  of  mutual  benefits  will  have  to  be  taken  in  the 

light  of  facts  of  each  case  and  it  will  have  the  effect  of  only 

creating  a  civil  liability.  If  the  contention  of  the  petitioner  that 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 9 

Khula' cannot be granted without restitution of dower and other 

benefits  is  accepted,  then  a  destitute  wife,  who  is  found 

otherwise  entitled  to  Khula',  will  stand  deprived  of  the  right 

simply  because  of  her  incapacity  to  return  the  benefits,  which 

will be highly unfair and against the spirit of law and justice. 

10.  …Though  a  decree  for  the  dissolution  of  marriage  on  the 

ground  of  Khula'  is  not  appealable  in  view  of  the  proviso  to 

section  14  of  the Family Courts  Act,  1964,  a  decision  with 

regard  to  determination  and  restoration  of  mutual  benefits  is 

always appealable and for this view reference may be made to 

the  cases  of  Muhammad  Shafi  v.  District  Judge  Gujrat  and 

another  1982  CLC  2057  Lahore,  Muhammad  Sanaullah  v. 

Muhammad Ilyas, Senior Civil Judge/Judge Family Court Toba 

Tek Singh and 2 others PLD 1987 Lahore 70, and Muhammad 

Shaban  v.  Judge  Family  Court  and  others  2003  YLR  2708 

Lahore.  

9.   

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  relied  on  Naila 

Azmat VS Judge  Family  Court  (1999  MLD  3090  Lahore)  for 

the  proposition  that  dissolution  of  marriage  is  not  absolute  and  is 

subject to fulfillment of certain conditions by the wife i.e. repayment 

of Haq Mehr. He further relied on Shagufta Bibi VS Judge Family 

Court,  Mailsi  (2013  MLD  487  Lahore)  wherein  the  learned 

Lahore  High  Court  held  that  decree  on  the  basis  of  khula  granted 

under  section  10(4)  of  Family  Courts  Act  was  conditional  upon 

repayment  of  Haq  Mehr.  Likewise,  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

respondent while relying on Mst. Shahida VS Sardar Shah (2018 

MLD  146  Peshawar)  submitted  that  the  learned  Peshawar  High 

Court in the said judgment held that unless the amount of khula was 

not  paid  to  the  husband  the  dissolution  would  not  attain  finality. 

With  due  respect  this  Court  is  not  in  agreement  with  the  view  that 

dissolution  of  marriage  is  contingent  on  prior  discharge  of  civil 

liabilities by a wife i.e. through return of Haq Mehr. It also appears 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 10 

that  the  judgment  of  the  learned  Peshawar  High  Court  in  Mst. 

Shahida VS Sardar Shah (2018 MLD 146 Peshawar)  has been 

misconstrued by not just the learned counsel for the respondent but 

also  by  the  law  journal  that  published  it  due  to  the  construction  of 

the  head  note.  In  the  said  judgment  it  has  not  been  held  that 

dissolution of marriage on the basis of khula does not attain finality 

till  such  time  that  the  amount  of  khula  is  repaid  by  the  wife  to  the 

husband.  The  question  in  this  case  related  to  the  maintainability  of 

appeal. As has been discussed above an appeal against a part of the 

judgment  determining  liability  of  the  wife  to  repay  Haq  Mehr  or 

disentitlement of the husband to receive repayment of Haq Mehr on 

dissolution of marriage is appealable. The reopening of such matter 

in appeal does not undo the decree for dissolution of marriage as the 

question dissolution of marriage itself is not appealable. It was held 

by  learned  Lahore  High  Court  in  Muhammad  Shaban VS Judge 

Family  Court  (2003  YLR  2708)  that  “a  decree  for  dissolution  of 

marriage on the ground of Khula' is not appealable but decision as to 

fixing  of  the  amount  of  consideration  payable  to  the  husband  for 

wife's release from marriage bond is appealable under section 14 of 

the Family Courts Act, 1964.” 

10. 

In view of the law laid down by the august Supreme Court 

in  Dr.  Akhlaq  Ahmed  VS  Mst.  Kishwar  Sultana  (PLD  1983  SC 

169)  and  the  clear  language  used  in  the  proviso  of  section  10(4) 

read  together  with  section  14(2)(a)  of  the  Family  Courts  Act  it  is 

evident  that  the  matter  of  dissolution  of  marriage  itself  is  not 

appealable.  In  the  instant  case  the  learned  Family  Court  had 

correctly  issued  a  decree  to  the  extent  of  dissolution  of  marriage 

upon failure of reconciliation proceedings between the petitioner and 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4332/2021 

P a g e  | 11 

respondent  No.1.  Such  dissolution  could  not  be  reopened  or  a 

decree to such effect could not be set-aside by the learned appellant 

court.  To  such  extent  the  judgment  of  the  learned  appellate  court 

suffers  from  infirmity  and  is  liable  to  be  set  aside.  The  question  of 

determination of civil liabilities of the wife i.e. quantum of Haq Mehr 

payable by the wife to the husband upon dissolution of marriage on 

the  basis  of  khula  was  a  question  to  be  determined  by  the  learned 

Family  Court  and  to  the  extent  that  it  was  not  determined,  the 

matter was rightly remanded back by the learned appellate court to 

the learned Family Court to frame an issue and allow the parties to 

adduce evidence in relation thereto. 

11. 

 The  instant  petition  is  allowed  and  the  impugned 

judgment  of  the  learned  appellate  court  dated  20.09.2021,  to  the 

extent  of  setting  aside  the  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the 

learned Family Court dated 21.06.2021 for dissolution of marriage in 

favour  of  the  petitioner,  is  set-aside.  However,  the  question  of 

determination  of  Haq  Mehr  payable  by  the  petitioner  to  respondent 

No.1 will be deemed pending before the learned Family Court which 

will  frame  an  issue  for  such  purpose  and  pass  judgment  after 

allowing the parties to adduce evidence.  

     (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

   Announced in open Court on 29.04.2022. 

Approved for reporting. 

Saeed.  

    JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
