Form  No:  HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 

ISLAMABAD 

{JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.4198/2021 

Muhammad Zubair 

VS

Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

S.  No. of 
order/ 
proceedlnqs 

Date of order/ 
proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

09-12-2021 

Hafiz  Arfat  Ahmed  Ch.,  Mr  Tariq  Zaman  Ch.,  Advocate  for 
petitioner. 
Syed  Muhammad  Tayyab,  Dy.  Attorney  General. 
Mr Wajid  Ali  Khan,  Dy.  Secretary,  Establishment  Division. 
Mr  Ramish  Hassan  Rana,  Section  Officer,  Establishment 
Division. 
Mr M.  Arfan,  Section  Officer,  Establishment  Division. 

Athar  Minallah, C.J.-  The petitioner  has 

asserted in the  memorandum of  petition  that  he was 

selected by the competent authority  to  be appointed 

against 

the  post  of  Deputy  Secretary  General 

(Transport  and  Communication,  Project  and 

Economic Research and Statistics)  at  the  Secretariat 

of Economic Cooperation Organization, Tehran, Iran. 

It  has  been  further  asserted  that  despite  the 

appointrnent  having  attained  finality,  respondent 

no.4  was  refusing  to  issue  diplomatic  passports  in 

his  favour  and  in  favour  of  the  members  of  his 

family. 

Pg:2 
W.P.  No.4198/2021 

2. 

In  response  to  notices  issued  by  this 

Court, the  respondents have filed written comments. 

Perusal of the comments shows that  the  selection of 

the  petitioner  had  not  been  finalized  and  that  the 

competent  authority  has  decided  to  review  the 

entire  process.  The  respondents  have  taken  the 

stance  that  the  petitioner  was  not  eligible  and, 

therefore,  the  matter  is  being  considered  by  the 

competent  authority.  It  is  noted that  the  grievance 

of  the  petitioner  is  regarding  appointment  of  a 

representative  of 

the  Government  of  Pakistan 

against the  post of  Deputy Secretary General at  the 

Secretariat  of  Economic Cooperation  Organization. 

The  competent authority  has decided to  review the 

entire  process keeping in view the  national interests 

of  the  State. The nature  of  the  process of  selection 

essentially  entails  taking 

into  consideration  the 

national interests of the  State as well as the  foreign 

policy. There is  no reason for the Court to doubt that 

the  process would  ultimately  not  be  completed  in 

conformity  with 

the  national  interests  and  the 

'foreign  policy  of  the  State.  Since  the  selection 

process had not  been completed, therefore,  no right 

had accrued in favour  of  the  petitioner  for  directing 

respondent  no.4  to  issue  diplomatic  passports  in 

Pg:3 

W.P.  No.4198/2021 

favour  of  the  petitioner  and  members of  his family. 

Moreover, no case is  made out  to  direct  respondent 

no.2  to  complete  the  process so that  the  petitioner 

&Zt.ould  be  facilitated  to  join  the  Secretariat  of  the 

Economic Cooperation Organization. 

3. 

For  the  above  reasons,  the  petition  is. 

without  merit  and, therefore,  accordingly dismissed. 

luqman Khan. 

(CHIEF  JUSTICE) 

