ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

I.C.A.No171 of 2017 
Ch. Naseer Ahmed and another  

VS          

The Rent Controller and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Appellants by: 
Respondents No.2 to 5 by:  Messrs Shahzada Naeem Bokhari  

26.04.2017 
Mr. Shehryar Tariq, Advocate  

and Ijaz Janjua, Advocates.  

_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB.J-  Through  the  instant 

Intra  Court  Appeal,  the  appellant,  Ch.  Naseer  Ahmed  and  his 

wife,  Mrs.  Nusrat  Naseer, 

impugn 

the 

judgment  dated 

10.04.2017,  passed  by  the  learned  Single  Judge-in-Chambers, 

whereby  writ  petition  No.302/2017,  instituted  by  the  appellants, 

was dismissed. Through the said writ petition, the appellants had 

impugned the order dated 23.01.2017, passed by the Court of the 

Rent  Controller,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  appellants’  application 

under  Section  34  of  the  Arbitration  Act,  1940  (“the  1940  Act"), 

was dismissed.  

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  this  appeal  are  that 

on  01.01.2006,  respondents  No.2  to  5  (landlords)  and  the 

appellants  (tenants)  entered  into  a  lease  agreement.  As  per  the 

recitals of the said lease  agreement,  respondents No.2 to 5 and 

the  appellants  are  co-owners  of  Plot  No.8,  F-10  Markaz, 

Islamabad,  which  has  been  divided  into  two  halves.  One  half  of 

the said plot (towards the mosque) belongs to respondents No.2 

to 5, whereas the other half (towards the petrol pump) belongs to 

the  appellants.  The  lease  agreement  is  with  respect  to  that 

portion of the Plot No.8, which is owned by respondents No.2 to 

5, and which measures 100 x 200 feet i.e. 2222.22 square yards 

(“the rented premises”). The initial lease period was agreed to be 

10  years  commencing  from  01.10.2006.  The  lease  agreement 

was extendable with the mutual consent of the parties.  

3. 

On  01.12.2016,  respondents  No.2  to  5  instituted  a  petition 

under  section  17  of  the  Islamabad  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

2001  (“IRRO”),  seeking  the  appellants’  eviction  from  the  rented 

premises. The primary ground taken by respondents No.2 to 5 in 

their eviction petition was the expiry of the lease agreement. On 

02.01.2017,  the  appellants  filed  an  application under  Section  34 

of  the  1940  Act,  praying  for  the  legal  proceedings  pending 

before the learned Rent Controller to be stayed on the basis of an 

arbitration  clause  contained 

in  the 

lease  agreement.  The 

appellants  had  also sought  a direction to  respondents  No.2 to  5 

to  settle  the  dispute  arising  from  the  lease  agreement  in 

accordance with the arbitration clause contained therein.  

4. 

Respondents  No.2  to  5  contested  the  said  application  by 

filing  a  written  reply.  In  the  said  reply,  it  was inter-alia  pleaded 

that  the  learned  Rent  Controller  did  not  have  the  jurisdiction  to 

stay  the  proceedings  instituted  by  respondents  No.2  to  5.  Vide 

order  dated  23.01.2017,  the  learned  Rent  Controller  dismissed 

the appellants’ application under Section 34 of the 1940 Act. The 

learned  Rent  Controller  inter-alia  held  that  a  Rent  Controller, 

being  a persona designata  acts  in  a quasi judicial  capacity  and 

not as a Court, therefore, it had no authority to stay the eviction 

proceeding  under  Section  34  of  the  1940  Act.  Furthermore,  it 

was  held  that  the  incorporation  of  an  arbitration  clause  in  the 

lease  agreement  did  not  oust  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Rent 

Controller to proceed with the eviction petition.  

5. 

The  said  order  dated  23.01.2017,  was  challenged  by  the 

appellants  before  this  Court  in  W.P.No.302/2017.  Vide  judgment 

dated  10.04.2017,  the  said  writ  petition  was  dismissed  by  the 

learned Single Judge-in-Chambers. It was inter-alia held that the 

IRRO,  being  a  special  law,  regulates  the  relationship  between 

landlords  and  tenants  with  respect  to  rented  premises  to  the 

exclusion of any other law. The said judgment dated 10.04.2017, 

has  been  impugned  by  the  appellants  in  the  instant  Intra  Court 

Appeal.  

6. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  submitted  that  the 

concurrent  orders  passed  by  the  learned  Single  Judge-in-

Chambers  as  well  as  the  learned  Rent  Controller,  are  not  in 

accordance  with  the  law;  that  admittedly  the  lease  agreement 

 
3 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

dated  01.01.2006  contained  an  arbitration  clause  providing  for 

the  disputes  between  the  parties  to  the  said  agreement  to  be 

referred  to  Arbitration;  that  the  dispute  as  to  whether  the 

appellants  can  remain  in  occupation  of  the  rented  premises 

beyond  30.09.2016,  is  to  be  resolved  in  accordance  with  the 

dispute  resolution  mechanism  enshrined 

in  the  said 

lease 

agreement; that an application under Section 34 of the 1940 Act 

can  be  filed  to  stay  “any  legal  proceedings”  including  the 

proceedings  before  the  learned  Rent  Controller;  that  it  is  not 

necessary for an application under Section 34 of the 1940 Act, to 

be  filed  only  before  a  “Court”;  that  proceedings  before  a  quasi 

judicial tribunal can also be stayed under Section 34 of the 1940 

Act; that the appellants filed the application under Section 34 of 

the  1940  Act  before  filing  a  reply  to  the  eviction  petition,  and 

before  taking  any  “step  in  the  proceedings”;  that  the  lease 

agreement  dated  01.01.2006,  expressly  provides  that  the 

appellants were co-owners of the rented premises; that the mere 

fact that the lease agreement dated 01.01.2006, had expired did 

not  mean  that  the  disputes  between  the  parties  to  the  said 

agreement  arising  from  and  related  to  the  terms  of  the  said 

agreement,  could  not  be  resolved  in  accordance  with  the 

arbitration  clause  contained  in  the  said  lease  agreement;  and 

that the appellants had already filed an application under Section 

20  of  the  1940  Act,  praying  for  the  disputes  arising  from  and 

related to the said lease agreement to be referred to arbitration.  

7. 

In  support  of  his  contention  that  no  embargo  could  be 

placed on the learned Rent Controller from invoking and applying 

the  beneficial  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908, 

learned counsel for the appellants placed reliance on the law laid 

down  in  the  cases  of  Suhail  Printing  Press  VS  Aley  Eba  Zaidi 

(2005  SCMR  882),  Saeed  Pervaiz  VS  Masood  Hassan  (2008 

SCMR 568) and Arif Hayat VS Sher Muhammad (2015 CLC 1383). 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  prayed  for  the  impugned 

judgment  dated  10.04.2017  passed  by  this  Court,  as  well  as  the 

order  dated  23.01.2017,  passed  by  the  learned  Rent  Controller, 

 
4 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

to  be  set  aside.  In  making  his  submissions,  learned  counsel  for 

the appellants also placed reliance on the following case law:-  

(i) 

Muhammad Ibrahim VS Irshad Begum (PLD 2002 SC 720). 

In  this  case,  the  petitioner  had  filed  a  suit  for  specific 

performance of an agreement. The respondent, claiming to 

be  a  subsequent  vendee  of  the  suit  property,  filed  an 

application under the rent restriction law for the eviction of 

the petitioner. The learned Civil Court (also exercising the 

powers  of  Rent  Controller),  vide  consolidated  judgment 

and  decree  dismissed  the  petitioner’s  suit  and  passed  an 

order of his eviction. The petitioner preferred an appeal to 

the  Court  of  the  learned  District  Judge,  who  referred  the 

matter  to  the  Arbitrators.  The  respondent’s  objection 

petition  to  the  arbitration  awards  was  accepted  by  the 

learned  District  Judge,  whose  orders  were  maintained  by 

the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  and  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court.  

(ii)  Government  of  Sindh  VS  Delhi  Anglo  Arabic  College  and 

School  (2009  SCMR  315).  In  this  case,  the  Hon’ble  High 

Court  of  Sindh  had  decreed  the  respondents’  suit  for 

injunction, possession, compensation, recovery of arrears 

of rent etc. The petitioner assailed the decree inter alia on 

the  ground  that  the  lease  agreement  between  the  parties 

contained  an  arbitration  clause  providing  for  disputes 

between  the  parties  to  the  said  agreement  to  be  referred 

to  arbitration.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  observed  that 

the  petitioner  had  not  raised  an  objection 

to 

the 

maintainability  of  the  suit  on  the  ground  that  the  lease 

agreement  had  provided  for  disputes  between  the  parties 

to  the  said  agreement  to  be  referred  to  arbitration. 

Consequently,  the  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the 

Hon'ble High Court was upheld. 

(iii)  Nizam  Din  VS  Niamat  Bibi  (1985  CLC  98).  In  this  case,  it 

was  inter alia  held  that  no  legal  bar  existed  in  the  West 

Pakistan  Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959, against 

the parties to the eviction proceedings before the learned 

 
5 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

Rent Controller from agreeing to have the case decided on 

the  basis  of  a  statement  of  a  third  person  acting  as  a 

referee.  Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  an  agreement 

between a landlord and a tenant that the matter in dispute 

between  them  could  be  decided  in  accordance  with  the 

statement of a third person was in the nature of a contract, 

which  could  not  be  retracted  from  without  the  Court’s 

permission.  

(iv) 

Infologix  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  VS  Abdul  Aziz  Ghafoor  Khan  (2005 

MLD  1287).  In  this  case,  it  was  inter alia  held  by  the 

Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  that  proceedings  before  the 

Rent  Controller  could  not  be  stayed  under  Section  34  of 

the 1940 Act, since the rent deed, on the basis of which the 

ejectment proceedings were  instituted, did not contain an 

arbitration clause.  

(v) 

Yezdiar  Homi  Kaikobad  VS  Ferozsons  Limited    (2005  YLR 

783). In this case, the Hon'ble Lahore High Court set aside 

the  order  of  the  learned  Rent  Controller  referring  the 

matter to arbitration. The reason why the said order of the 

learned  Rent  Controller  was  set  aside  was  because  the 

respondent 

in  the  eviction  petition  had  not  filed  an 

application under Section 34 of the 1940 at the initial stage 

of  the  ejectment  proceedings  before  the  learned  Rent 

Controller.  

(vi)  Rashid Hussain VS Soofi Abdul Hameed (2008 MLD 1531). 

In  this  case,  the  tenancy  agreement  contained  an 

arbitration  clause.  Since  the  tenant  had  submitted  to  the 

jurisdiction  of  the  learned  Rent  Controller  by  filing  a 

written  reply  to  the  eviction  petition,  and  by  leading 

evidence,  he  was  held  to  have  lost  the  right  to  seek  a 

reference of the dispute to arbitration. 

(vii) 

Infospan  (private)  limited  VS  M/s  Telecom  Foundation 

(2017 CLC 131). In this case, the tenant in the proceedings 

before the learned Rent Controller had sought a number of 

adjournments  for  filing  a  written  reply  to  the  eviction 

petition  filed  by  the 

landlord.  The 

lease  agreement 

 
6 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

between  the  parties  contained  an  arbitration  clause.  This 

Court  upheld  the  order  passed  by  the  learned  Rent 

Controller  dismissing  the  tenant’s  application  under 

Section  34  of  the  1940  Act,  on  the  ground  that  the  same 

had  been  filed  after  the  proceedings  had  been  adjourned 

on six occasions for filing of a written statement. 

8. 

On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents No.2 to 

5 submitted that the appellants could be evicted from the rented 

premises  only 

through  proceedings 

instituted  under 

the 

provisions of the IRRO; that in terms of Section 4 of the IRRO, the 

provisions of the IRRO have an overriding effect notwithstanding 

anything  contained  in  any  other  law  (including  the  1940  Act)  or 

any 

instrument  or  document 

(including  an  arbitration 

agreement); that the Court of the learned Rent Controller has the 

exclusive  jurisdiction  to  entertain  petitions  for  the  eviction  of 

tenants  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  IRRO;  that  in 

terms of Section 17(1) of the IRRO, a tenant in possession of the 

rented  premises  cannot  be  evicted 

therefrom  except 

in 

accordance  with  Section  17    of  the  IRRO;  that  the  grounds  on 

which a tenant can be evicted from the rented premises  are set 

out  in  sub-sections  (2)  to  (9)  of  Section  17  of  the  IRRO;  that  a 

party  cannot  contract  out  of  the  protection  provided  by  the 

various  provisions  of  the  IRRO;  and  that  statutory  provisions 

cannot yield to provisions contained in a contract.  

9. 

Furthermore, it was submitted that in an intra court appeal 

against the order dated 10.04.2017, passed by the learned Single 

Judge-in-Chambers  was  not  maintainable,  because  an  order 

dismissing  an  application  under  Section  34  of  the  1940  Act,  is 

appealable  under  Section  39  of  the  1940  Act;  and  that  since  a 

remedy of an appeal against the order dated 23.01.2017, passed 

by  the  learned  Rent  Controller,  was  provided  by  law,  an  intra 

court appeal would be barred in terms of the proviso to Section 3 

of  the  Law  Reforms  Ordinance,  1973.  The  learned  counsel  for 

respondents No.2 to 5 prayed for the appeal to be dismissed.  In 

support of his contentions, learned counsel for respondents No.2 

to 5 placed reliance on the following case law:-  

 
7 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

(i) 

Commissioner of Income Tax VS Sakina Karim  (1979 CLC 

644). In this case, the Hon'ble Lahore High Court inter alia 

held as follows:- 

 “There is, thus, no manner of doubt that a tenant cannot 
be ejected except in accordance with the provisions of 
section 13, and since these provisions do not permit a 
Rent Controller to order or disallow ejectment of a tenant 
in terms of an award given in pursuance of an arbitration 
agreement, clause 12 of the agreement of tenancy relied 
upon by the appellant is of no consequence. Even if the 
respondent  had  referred  the  matter  in  dispute  to 
arbitration before it was brought before the learned Rent 
Controller and had obtained an award in his favour and 
also a decree in pursuance of the award, it would not have 
affected the ejectment proceedings taken out against him 
because, according to subsection (1) of section 13 of the 
Ordinance, a tenant cannot be evicted in terms of a 
decree whether passed before or after the coming into 
force  of  the  Ordinance.  By  incorporating  the  word 
‘otherwise’ in subsection (1) the framers of law made it 
amply clear that a tenant shall not be ejected in any 
manner except the one provided in section 13. In this view 
of the matter, the learned Rent Controller was not right in 
staying the ejectment proceedings on the basis of the 
arbitration clause relied upon by the he appellant.”        

(ii) 

Abdul  Wahid  VS  Ghulam  Muhammad  (1984  MLD  1198).  In 

this case, the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh inter alia held as 

follows:- 

 “The provisions of Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 
provide a procedure for ejectment of a tenant and do not 
recognize  ejectment  by  referring  the  dispute  to 
Arbitrators. Any award made granting ejectment cannot 
be enforced but it can be used as a corroborative piece of 
evidence. The relationship between the parties has been 
established and there being no substantial evidence to 
prove that the rent was regularly paid by the appellant he 
was rightly held to be a defaulter.”   

(iii)  Nuricon  Union  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  VS  Muhammad  Nasar  Sajjad 

(2005  CLC  882).  In  this  case,  the  order  passed  by  the 

learned  Rent  Controller  turning  down  the  petitioner’s 

application under Section 34 of the 1940 Act, was assailed 

in a writ petition before the Hon'ble Lahore High Court. The 

Hon'ble High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that 

the  Rent  Controller  acted  in  a quasi-judicial  capacity  and 

not  as  a  Civil  Court.  In  paragraph  4  of  the  said  report,  it 

was held as follows:  - 

 
 
 
 
 
8 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

 “4.  The admitted position on the record is that writ 
petitioner has not filed an application under section 34 of 
the Arbitration Act (X of 1940), in Civil Court but he has 
filed a petition before the learned Rent Controller which is 
not the Civil Court in the case of (1) Khadim Mohihuddin 
and (2) Mrs. S. Mehmood v. (1) Ch. Rehmat Ali Nagra and 
(2) Mst. Aziz Begum PLD 1965 SC 459 while interpreting 
the provisions of West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction 
Ordinance  (VI  of  1959)  it  has  been  ruled  that  Rent 
Controller acts in Quasi-Judicial Capacity and not as a 
Court  as  such  this  writ  petition  having  no  merits  is 
dismissed in limine.” 

(iv)  Muhammad  Khalid  VS  Muhammad  Naeem  (PLD  2012 

Lahore 490). In this case, the Hon'ble High Court upheld an 

order  passed  by  the  learned  Rent  Controller  refusing  to 

consolidate  proceedings  for  eviction  of  a  tenant,  and 

proceedings for making an arbitration award into a rule of 

Court.  In  paragraphs  10  and  11  of  the  said  report,  it  was 

held as follows:- 

 “10.  The proceedings under Arbitration Act, 1940 are to 
be taken up by Civil Court while ejectment petition is to be 
decided by the Rent Controller a persona designata under 
the provisions of West Pakistan Urban Rent restriction 
Ordinance,  1959. These two  jurisdictions  are entirely 
different. Pleadings, issues, evidence, and other material 
in both the matters being different ought to be decided 
independently and separately.  
11.  In  our  judicial  system,  a Civil  Judge  has  been 
assigned different jurisdictions e.g. the power of Rent 
Controller under the Rent Laws, to act a s Family Judge 
under the Family Laws, to act as Guardian Judge under 
the Guardians and Wards Act, to exercise powers as 
Magistrate under the provisions of Cr.P.C. etc. but that 
does  not  mean  that  while  he  is  exercising  different 
jurisdictions,  all  the  proceedings  before  him  can  be 
amalgamated. In the case in hand, although the Presiding 
Officer was the same who was acting as Rent Controller, 
as  also  the Civil  Judge  but  in  one  he  is  a  persona 
designata  and  exercising  quasi  judicial  jurisdiction 
whereas with regard to other one he was acting as a Civil 
Judge under the Code of Civil Procedure. Neither two 
jurisdictions  nor  the  proceedings  under  two  entirely 
different laws can be consolidated or amalgamated. In 
this case by now the tenant is succeeded in avoiding the 
verdict of Rent Controller in ejectment petition on a plea 
of consolidation of the proceedings of such ejectment 
petition with that of an arbitration proceeding which is not 
permissible and practicable under the law.” 

10.  We  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for 

the  contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their 

able  assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

appeal  are  set  out  in  sufficient  detail  in  paragraphs  No.2  to  5 

above and need not be recapitulated.    

11.  The  essential  question  that  needs  to  be  determined  is 

whether  the  learned  Rent  Controller  was  correct  in  dismissing 

the appellants’ application under Section 34 of the 1940 Act, and 

consequently refusing to stay the eviction proceedings instituted 

by  respondents  No.2  to  5 for the  eviction of  the  appellants  from 

the rented premises. The execution of the lease agreement dated 

01.01.2006 between the appellants and respondents No.2 to 5 is 

admitted. It is also admitted that after a lapse of ten years of the 

effective  date  of  the  said  lease  agreement,  a  fresh  lease 

agreement was not executed between the said parties. The lease 

agreement  dated  01.01.2006  contained  an  arbitration  clause 

providing 

for 

the  disputes  between 

the  appellants  and 

respondents No.2 to 5 to be settled by arbitration. It is also not in 

dispute  that  disputes  and  differences  arose  between  the 

appellants  and  respondents  No.2  to  5  resulting  in  filing  of  an 

eviction petition under Section 17 of the IRRO by the latter before 

the learned Rent Controller. 

12. 

In  order to  determine  whether  the  learned  Rent  Controller 

had exclusive jurisdiction to decide an eviction petition instituted 

by a landlord against a tenant, the scheme of the IRRO will have 

to be appreciated. The preamble of the IRRO provides that it was 

expedient  to  regulate  the  relations  between  the  landlords  and 

tenants  of  rented  premises  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

and  to  provide  of  matters  ancillary  thereto  or  connected 

therewith.  Section  4  of  the  IRRO  provides  that  the  provisions  of 

the IRRO shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in 

any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or 

document.  Section  7(1)  of  the  IRRO  obligates  the  Federal 

Government  to  appoint  one  or  more  Rent  Controllers  for  the 

urban area of the Islamabad Capital Territory. Section 7(3) of the 

IRRO  provides  that  an  application  under  the  IRRO  shall  be  filed 

before  the  Rent  Controller  having  jurisdiction  over  the  area 

where  the  building  or  rented  land,  in  respect  of  which  the 

application  is  made,  is  situated.  Although  there  is  no  express 

 
10 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

provision in the IRRO regarding ouster of jurisdiction of the Civil 

Court  or  a  domestic  forum,  Section  17(1)  of  the  IRRO  mandates 

that a tenant in possession of a building or rented land shall not 

be evicted therefrom except in accordance with Section 17 of the 

IRRO.  Section  17(2)  of  the  IRRO  inter-alia  provides  that  a 

landlord  who  seeks  to  evict  his  tenant  shall  apply  to  the  Rent 

Controller for a direction in that behalf.  

13.  Normally,  the  word  “shall”  prima  facie  ought  to  be 

considered  as  mandatory  but  the  Court  is  to  ascertain  the  real 

intention of the legislature by an examination of the whole scope 

of  the  statute,  the  purpose 

it  seeks  to  serve  and  the 

consequences  that  would  flow  from  the  construction  to  be 

placed thereon. Since Section 4 of the IRRO gives the provisions 

of  the  IRRO  (including  Section  17(2)  of  the  IRRO)  effect 

notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 

being in force, or in any instrument or document, the provisions 

of Section 17(2) of the IRRO can safely be termed as mandatory 

by  virtue  of  the  employment  of  the  word  “shall”  in  the  said 

provision. A non-obstante clause, like the one in Section 4 of the 

IRRO, is generally used in a statute with a view to give the statute 

an  overriding  effect  in  case  of  conflict  with  any  other  law. 

Sections  4,  7(3)  and  17(1)  and  (2)  of  the  IRRO,  read  conjointly, 

vest the Rent Controller with exclusive jurisdiction over petitions 

by  landlords  for  the  eviction  of  tenants  from  rented  premises 

within  the  territorial 

limits  of  the  Rent  Controller.  These 

provisions as well  as the other provisions  of the IRRO are a self 

contained  code,  regulating  the  relationships  of  landlords  and 

tenants, creating special rights and liabilities, and, providing for 

determination  of  such  rights  and  liabilities  by  a  special  tribunal 

i.e. the Rent Controller. The  clear and explicit intendment of the 

legislature  is  that  the  tribunals  constituted  under  the  IRRO 

should  decide  all  questions  relating  to  the  special  rights  and 

liabilities created by the IRRO. Consequently, there is an implied 

bar  on  the Civil  Court  or any  other  forum  to  assume  jurisdiction 

on  matters  pertaining  to  the  eviction  of  tenant  by  a  landlord. 

Since  a  Civil  Court  has  no  jurisdiction  to  try  an  eviction  petition 

 
11 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

by  operation  of  the  aforementioned  provisions  of  the  IRRO,  by 

analogy,  no  petition  for  eviction  can  be  maintained  before  the 

arbitrator also. 

14.  Parties  competent  to  execute  contracts  are  at  liberty  to 

enter  into  arbitration  agreements  for  the  resolution  of  their 

contractual  disputes.  But  when  there  is  a  special  statute  (such 

as  the  IRRO)  covering  the  field  of  a  particular  dispute  (such  as 

the  eviction  of  a  tenant),  the  provisions  of  the  special  statute 

alone  have  to  be  invoked  and  the  dispute  cannot  be  referred  to 

any other mode of adjudication. Rent Controller proceedings are 

special proceedings insofar as the eviction of a tenant, fixation of 

fair  rent  of  a  building  etc.,  are  concerned  and,  therefore,  the 

special statute (in this case, the IRRO) alone will apply.  

15.  Clause 8 of the said lease agreement is reproduced herein 

below:- 

 “8.  That in case of a dispute between both the parties shall 
depute one representative each as arbitrators to solve and 
settle the dispute.  In case of disagreement between arbitrators 
the  matter  shall  be  referred  to  referees,  (1)  Mr.  Mian 
Muhammad Arkam NIC No.61101-5150940-1, (2) Mr. Chaudhary 
Muhammad Arif NIC No.61101-1971453-1, or their alternatives. 
Both the parties will be bound to accept the decision of the 
referees.”   

16.  Even  though  clause  8  of  the  lease  agreement  dated 

01.01.2006 provides that “in case of a dispute between both the 

parties”, a dispute has to be understood as a dispute other than 

the one contemplated under the IRRO. Such a construction of the 

agreement  alone  would  advance  the  cause  of  justice  and  the 

intention  of  the  legislature.  Even  otherwise  the  parties  by  an 

agreement cannot be permitted to contract out of the legislative 

mandate  which  requires  certain  kinds  of  disputes  to  be  settled 

by  a  special  forum  created  under  the  provisions  of  the  IRRO. 

Therefore,  the  arbitration  agreement  in  clause  8  of  the  lease 

agreement, cannot be recognized to the extent of the agreement 

to  refer  eviction  disputes  to  arbitration.  Furthermore,  since  no 

tenant can be evicted from rented premises in the area to which 

the  provisions  of  IRRO  apply  or  extend,  except  in  accordance 

with Section 17 of the IRRO, no useful purpose would be served 

 
 
12 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

even  if  the  issue  of  eviction  is  agreed  to  be  referred  to 

arbitration. 

17.  Assuming  that  the  matter  regarding  appellant’s  eviction 

from the rented premises is referred to arbitration and an award 

is  rendered  by  the  arbitral  tribunal  for  the  appellant’s  eviction 

from the rented premises, the question that crops up in the mind 

is  whether  such  an  award  can  be  enforced  by  the  Rent 

Controller.  I  would  say  no.  Neither  can  an  arbitration  award  be 

filed before the Rent Controller under Section 14 of the 1940 Act, 

nor can the Rent Controller pass a judgment and decree in terms 

of the award under Section 17 of the 1940 Act. This is because a 

Rent Controller is not a “Court” as defined in Section 2 (c) of the 

1940  Act.  Section  23  of  the  IRRO  inter alia  provides  that  every 

order  made  under  Section  17  “shall  be  executed  by  the 

Controller”  as  if  it  were  a  decree  of  a  Civil  Court.  Therefore,  a 

Rent  Controller  can  enforce  an  eviction  order  passed  under 

Section 17 of the IRRO, but not an eviction order passed by any 

domestic forum.  

18. 

In addition to the case law cited by the learned counsel for 

respondents No.2 to 5, which is clearly applicable to the case at 

hand, reference may be made to the following case law:-  

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Hakim  VS  Tassadaq  Hussain  Shah  (PLD 

2007 Lahore 261), it has been held as follows:- 

 “7. In the first category of the express bar of the civil 
courts, reference can be made to section 172 of the Land 
Revenue Act, 1967 or section 25 of the Displaced Persons 
(Land Settlement) Act, 1958, which unambiguously and 
expressly command that the jurisdiction of the civil Courts 
is barred to take the cognizance of the matters, which 
under the above special laws, have been conferred upon 
the special forums. Para.27 of the M.L.R. No.64 also falls 
within the category of the express bar of the jurisdiction. 
However, if one has to look for the bar of jurisdiction of 
the Civil Court on the rule of "implication", the Punjab 
Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959 is an example, which 
does not contain any express provision for the ouster of 
jurisdiction,  but  under  this  special  law,  exclusive 
jurisdiction has been conferred upon the rent controller to 
decide the matters referred to in the law vis-a-vis the 
landlord and the tenant about the properties falling within 
the purview of the Ordinance. 
Thus, for applying the rule of implied bar, it has to be seen 
that where a special tribunal or a public body is created 
by or under the authority of an Act of the Legislature for 

 
 
 
13 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

the purpose of determining rights which are the creation 
of the Act, then the jurisdiction of that tribunal or of that 
body is exclusive and the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is 
barred.” 

The  learned  author  Judge  of  the  said  judgment  rose  to 

grace the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Therefore, the judgment is to 

be shown reverence and respect.  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Natraj  Studios  (P)  Ltd.  VS  Navrang  Studios 

(AIR 1981 SC 537), it has been held as follows:- 

 “17.  The Bombay Rent Act is a welfare legislation aimed 
at the definite social objective of protection of tenants 
against harassment by landlords in various ways. It is a 
matter of public policy. The scheme of the Act shows that 
the conferment of exclusive jurisdiction on certain Courts 
is pursuant to the social objective at which the legislation 
aims. Public policy requires that contracts to the contrary 
which nullify the rights conferred on tenants by the Act 
cannot be permitted. Therefore, public policy requires 
that parties cannot also be permitted to contract out of 
the legislative mandate which requires certain kind of 
disputes to be settled by special courts constituted by the 
Act.  It  follows  that  arbitration  agreements  between 
parties whose rights are regulated by the Bombay Rent 
Act cannot be recognised by a Court of law.” 
(Emphasis added) 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Booz Allen  and  Hamilton  Inc.  VS  SBI  Home 

Finance  Ltd.  (AIR  2011  SC  2507),  it  has  been  held  by  the 

Supreme Court of India, as follows:-  

 “22. Arbitral Tribunals are private fora chosen voluntarily 
by the parties to the dispute, to adjudicate their disputes 
in place of courts and tribunals which are public fora 
constituted under the laws of the country. Every civil or 
commercial  dispute,  either  contractual  or  non-
contractual, which  can be decided by a court, is in 
principle capable of being adjudicated and resolved by 
arbitration unless the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunals 
is excluded either expressly or by necessary implication. 
Adjudication of certain categories of proceedings are 
reserved by the legislature exclusively for public fora as a 
matter of public policy. Certain other categories of cases, 
though not expressly reserved for adjudication by a public 
fora (courts and tribunals), may by necessary implication 
stand  excluded  from  the  purview  of  private  fora. 
Consequently, where the cause/dispute is inarbitrable, 
the court where a suit is pending, will refuse to refer the 
parties to arbitration, under Section 8 of the Act, even if 
the parties might have agreed upon arbitration as the 
forum  for  settlement  of  such  disputes.  The  well 
recognized examples of non-arbitrable disputes are: (i) 
disputes relating to rights and liabilities which give rise to 
or arise out of criminal offences; (ii) matrimonial disputes 
relating  to  divorce,  judicial  separation,  restitution  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

conjugal rights, child custody; (iii) guardianship matters; 
(iv) insolvency and winding up matters; (v) testamentary 
matters (grant of probate, letters of administration and 
succession  certificate);  and  (vi)  eviction  or  tenancy 
matters governed by special statutes where the tenant 
enjoys statutory protection against eviction and only the 
specified  courts  are  conferred  jurisdiction  to  grant 
eviction or decide the disputes.” 
(Emphasis added) 

19.  The  principles  which  may  be  distilled  from  the  aforesaid 

judgments as well as the judgments cited by the learned counsel 

for respondents No.2 to 5, would be the following:- 

Insofar  as  the  question  of  eviction  of  a  tenant  from  the 

rented  premises  to  which  the  provisions  of  the  IRRO  apply,  is 

concerned,  the  Rent  Controller  alone  has  the  jurisdiction.  In 

arbitration proceedings, the question of eviction cannot be gone 

into. Even if there is an arbitration clause in the lease agreement, 

an  eviction  petition  seeking  the  eviction  of  the  tenant  from  the 

rented premises is maintainable. A clause in the lease agreement 

providing  for  a  reference  of  disputes  between  the  landlord  and 

the tenant to be referred to arbitration, is not valid insofar as the 

question  of  eviction 

is  concerned  and  to  that  extent  the 

agreement  will  not  be  valid.  Proceedings  before  a  Rent 

Controller  are  special  proceedings,  whereas  arbitration 

proceedings  have  been  termed  as  general  proceedings  and  in 

such  circumstances,  the  special  proceedings  will  prevail  over 

the general proceedings. 

20.  Therefore,  we  are  of  the  considered  view  that  the  learned 

Rent  Controller  has  correctly  exercised  his  jurisdiction  by 

holding,  in  effect,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Rent  Controller  is 

not  ousted  due  to  the  presence  of  an  arbitration  clause  in  the 

lease agreement between appellants and respondents No.2 to 5. 

We are also of the view that the respondents No.2 to 5 could not 

invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  any  other  forum  other  than  that  of  the 

Rent  Controller  for  filing  an  eviction  petition  against  the 

appellants.  Hence,  we  have  no  hesitation  in  upholding  the 

concurrent  orders  passed  by  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers 

and the learned Rent Controller. 

 
 
 
 
 
15 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

21.  The  case  law  relied  upon  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellants  does  not come to his  aid.  In  none  of  the cases  relied 

upon  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  did  the  Superior 

Courts  consider  the  issue  as  to  whether  an  application  under 

Section  34  of  the  1940  Act  seeking  stay  of  an  eviction  petition 

filed before a Rent Controller, was maintainable. 

22.  Yet  another  reason  why  we  feel  that  the  writ  petition 

instituted  by  the  appellants  merited  dismissal  is  because  the 

learned  Rent  Controller’s  order  dated  23.01.2017  impugned  by 

the appellants before this Court was an interlocutory order.  The 

said  order  is  not  appealable  under  the  provisions  of  the  IRRO. 

Section 21(1) of the IRRO provides that any party aggrieved by a 

final  order  of  the  Rent  Controller  may  prefer  an  appeal  to  the 

District  Judge  within  thirty  days  of  the  date  of  such  an  order. 

Section 21(2) of the IRRO explicitly provides that no appeal shall 

lie from an interlocutory order passed by the Rent Controller. It is 

perhaps for this reason that the appellants have instituted a writ 

petition 

to  challenge 

the  said 

interlocutory  order  dated 

23.01.2017.  In  the  case  of  Atiq-ur-Rehman  VS  Najma Tabassum 

(2016  CLC  1905),  this  Court  after  referring  to  the  law  laid  down 

by  the  Superior  Courts  in  the  cases  of  Saghir  Ahmad  Naqvi  VS 

Province  of  Sindh  (1996  SCMR  1168),  Muhammad  Taj  VS 

Muhammad  Younis  Khilji  (2008  CLC  1666),  Jehangir  Khan 

Jadoon  VS  Gul  Nigar  Manzoor  (2008  CLC  547),  Mian  Sher 

Bahadur  VS  Civil  Judge  Takht  Bhai  (2003  YLR  1722),  lqbal 

Ahmed  VS  Muhammad  Nasir  (2016  MLD  624),  Abdul  Farooque 

VS Maqsood Ahmed (2015 CLC 663), etc., has held as follows:- 

“13. As Section 21(2) of IRRO expressly bars a right of appeal 
from an interim order passed by a Rent Controller, the same 
cannot be circumvented by challenging such an interim order in 
the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court.  A  party 
aggrieved by such an interim order has to wait until a final order 
is passed by a Rent Controller and then to challenge it under 
Section 21(1) of the IRRO before the Court of the learned 
District Judge. The purpose behind barring an appeal against 
an interim order of the Rent Controller is to avoid delays in 
disposal of the cases by the Rent Controller. An interim order 
merges into the final verdict which is appealable under Section 
21(1) ibid. in an appeal against the final verdict, the interim 
order can also be subjected to challenge. However, it is my 
view  that  exceptional  circumstances  which  could  justify 

 
16 

I.C.A. No171/2017 

invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 199 of 
the Constitution would be when the order or action assailed 
was palpably without jurisdiction mala fide, void or coram non 
judice.” 

23.  Before parting with this judgment, it may be observed that 

an order passed under Section 34 of the 1940 Act is appealable 

under Section 39 of the 1940 Act. If the IRRO is to be treated as 

the law in question, an appeal against the final order of the Rent 

Controller can be filed under Section 21 of the IRRO. Since both 

the  1940  Act,  and  the  IRRO  provide  for  a  right  of  appeal,  this 

intra  court  appeal  would  not  be  maintainable  under  the  proviso 

to  Section  3  of  the  Law  Reforms  Ordinance,  1973.  However, 

since  the  learned  counsel  for  the  contesting  parties  made 

submissions at length, we decided this appeal on merits as well. 

24. 

In  view  of  the  foregoing  discussion,  the  appeal  is  found  to 

be  devoid  of  merit  and  not  maintainable  and  is  liable  to  be 

dismissed  and  is  dismissed,  but  in  the  facts  and  circumstances 

of the case, there will be no order as to costs. 

(AAMER FAROOQ)  

                       JUDGE  

     (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
        JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2017 

       (JUDGE)  

     (JUDGE) 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
