Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

I.C.A. No.527/2016 

Federal Government Employees Housing Foundation & another 

Appellant/FGEHA by 

VS

Ednan Syed & 10 others 

:  Mr Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC. 
Mr Muhammad Munir Paracha, Sr. ASC. 
Mr Muhammad Nazir Jawad, ASC. 
Mr Mansoor Ahmd, ASC. 
Malik Javaid Iqbal Wains, AHC. 
Hafiz Arfat Ahmed Chaudhry, ASC. 
Ms Kashifa Niaz Awan, AHC. 
Mr Tariq Zaman Ch., AHC. 
Ms Sitwat Jahangir, AHC. 

Petitioners by 

:  Mr Shah Khawar, ASC. 

Mr M. Ali Raza, ASC. 
Mr Taimoor Aslam Khan, AHC. 
Mr Asad Iqbal Siddique, AHC. 
Syed Mujtaba Haider Sherazi, ASC. 
Raja Zahoorul Hassan, AHC. 
Mr Yasir Rathore, AHC. 
Mr Shahid Mehmood Khokhar, ASC. 
Raja Muhammad Farooq, ASC. 
Mr Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, ASC. 
Ms Samina Khan, ASC. 
Mr Naseer AnjumAwan, ASC. 
Mr Shair Bahadur Khan, AHC. 
Sardar M. Ghazi, AHC. 
Ms Zainab Janjua, AHC. 
Mr Atif Khokhar, AHC. 

Federation by 

:  Mr Qasim Wadud, Additional Attorney General. 

Officials/representatives 
in attendance 

: 

Syed Muhammad Tayyab, Dy. Attorney General. 
Mr Imran Farooq, Assistant Attorney General. 

Dr Imran Zaib, Secretary, Ministry of Housing and 
Works. 
Mr Tariq Rasheed, Director General, FGEHA. 
Mr Muhammad Irfan Chaudhry, Director (Law), 
FGEHA. 
Dr Sataish Sharyar, Deputy Commissioner (LAC), 
FGEHA. 
Mr Kazim Abbas, Director (Estate), FGEHA. 
Mr Khan Zaib, Dy. Director (Law), FGEHA. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 2 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Mr Rehan Cheema, Dy. Director (Estate), FGEHA. 
Mr Mohsin Pasha, Asstt. Director (Legal), FGEHA. 

Dates of Hearings 

: 

13-09-2021, 14-10-2021, 22-11-2021. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  C.J.-      Through  this  consolidated 

judgment  we  will  decide  the  Intra  Court  Appeal  and  the  constitutional 

petitions listed in “Annexure-A,” attached hereto.  

2. 

The  Intra  Court  Appeal  was  preferred  by  the  Federal 

Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  “FGEHF”).  The  Federal  Government  has  also  been  arrayed  as  an 

appellant. However, there is nothing on record to show that the Federal 

Government  had  authorized  the  filing  of  the  Intra  Court  Appeal.  The 

constitutional  petitions  listed  in  Annexure  A  have  been  filed  by 

employees  of  the  Federal  Government  or  autonomous/constitutional 

entities.  Through  the  Intra  Court  Appeal,  FGEHF,  the  predecessor-in-

interest  of  FGEHA,  had  challenged  the  judgment,  dated  28-09-2016, 

passed  by  the  learned  single  judge  of  this  Court,  in  writ  petition 

no.2233/2016  titled  “Ednan  Syed  and  others  v.  Federal  Government 

Employees  Housing  Foundation  and  another”.  The  petitioners  in  the 

latter petition, who are also respondents in the Intra Court Appeal, had 

challenged  the  policy  adopted  by  the  FGEHF  and  the  Federal 

Government  regarding  allotment  of  plots  in  the  acquired  sectors  of  

F-14/F-15. The petitioners in the constitutional petitions before us have 

also challenged the same policy.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 3 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

A.    The Relevant Facts and the Dispute. 

3. 

The  facts  are  crucial  in  order  to  properly  appreciate  the 

dispute  that  has  been  brought  before  us  for  adjudication.  The 

controversy  was  regarding  the  policy  of  the  Federal  Government  and 

the FGEHF/FGEHA relating to allotment of plots in the scheme launched 

in sectors F-14/F-15.   

(i)  FGEHF 

The  FGEHF  was  incorporated  as  a  welfare  organization 

under section 42 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984. According to 

its  stance  before  the  learned  single  judge,  it  was  an  entity  that 

operated on a 'no profit no loss' basis. It was mandated to evolve 

housing  schemes  for  employees  of  the  Federal  Government  and 

those  of  certain  other  specified  groups.  Its  object  was  to  resolve 

the  problem  of  'shelterlessness'  of  the  eligible  employees.  At  the 

time  when  the  petition  was  argued  before  the  learned  single 

judge, according to the stance of the FGEHF, six housing schemes 

had  been  launched  and  the  latter  did  not  have  the  land  bank  to 

provide a plot to each and every eligible employee. Reliance was 

placed on the judgment of the august Supreme Court, reported as 

2008  SCMR  531  (Human  Rights  Case  No.5818  of  2006  in  Re: 

action  on  Press  Clipping),  in  support  of  the  contention  that  the 

Federal  Government  employees  do  not  have  a  right  to  claim  or 

get  a  plot.  It  was  further  stated  that  the  housing  schemes  were 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 4 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

established  on  self  finance/contributory  basis.  It  is  noted  that 

most  of  the  housing  schemes  established  by  the  FGEHF  were  on 

land  which  had  been  acquired  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  the 

most intrusive power of the State and a fundamental attribute of 

its  sovereignty;  the  inherent  power  of  'eminent  domain'.  In  not 

more  than  few  cases,  the  FGEHF  had  also  established  schemes 

through  the  purchase  of  land  from  its  owners  at  the  prevalent 

market  rate.  The  FGEHF  was  succeeded  by  the  FGEHA,  as  would 

be  discussed  later.  The  controversy  before  us  is  regarding  the 

policy  formulated  by  FGEHF  and  the  Federal  Government 

regarding the distribution of the available land bank amongst the 

members  of  the  FGEHF  and  now  its  successor  the  FGEHA.  The 

latter  has  changed  its  policy,  which  has  given  rise  to  the 

controversy involved in the appeal and the petitions in hand.      

(ii)  Membership Drive-I 

The FGEHF, through an advertisement published in a widely 

circulated  newspaper  on  30-09-2009,  invited  applications  from 

eligible  employees  for  registration  as  members.  The  membership 

drive  was  launched  to  register  eligible  employees  of  the  Federal 

Government  and  other  specified  groups  in  order  to  determine 

their  seniority  regarding  allotment  of  plots  in  the  schemes 

launched  by  FGEHF.  The  membership  drive  and 

the 

representations  made  to  induce  registration,  unambiguously 

contemplated  that  seniority  would  be  determined  on  the  date  of 

registration. The membership drive was based on the principle of 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 5 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

„first come first served‟. The  membership drive was for  allotment 

of plots or housing offered in all the schemes launched or likely to 

be launched by the FGEHF/FGEHA. The membership was definitely 

not  confined  to  a  particular  project  or  scheme  nor  was  such  a 

caveat  included  in  the  unequivocal  representations  (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  „Membership  Drive-I‟).  The  respondents  in  the 

Intra  Court  Appeal  and  the  petitioners  in  the  constitutional 

petitions in hand were amongst thousands of employees who had 

responded to the advertisement by getting themselves registered. 

They  had  fulfilled  the  requisite  conditions,  including  payment  of 

the  registration  fees  and  consequently  their  respective  seniority 

was  determined.  Perusal  of  the  summary  placed  before  the 

Federal  Cabinet  shows  that  35,932  members  were    registered  in 

the Membership Drive-1 out of which 7,074 were allotted plots in 

the  then  existing  land  bank  or  schemes  of  the  FGEHF  i.e  Green 

Enclave-I  and  Sky  Garden.  28,858  members  were  sent  offer 

letters,  out  of  which  11,182  gave  their  acceptance  and, 

simultaneously,  deposited  down  payments.  While  they  were 

awaiting  their  turn  to  be  offered  a  plot  in  the  next  scheme,  the 

policy was abruptly changed to their detriment upon the launching 

of  the  scheme  in  sectors  F-14/F-15.  It  is  noted  that  the  scheme 

launched  in  F-14/F-15  was  sought  after  because  of  its  higher 

value, location and the fact that land was acquired through them 

exercise of the power of eminent domain.   

 
 
 
 
 
-: 6 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

(iii)  Membership Drive-II 

In 2015, the then Prime Minister approved launching of the 

scheme  by  FGEHF  in  sectors  F-14/F-15.  Approval  was  also  given 

to acquire the land in the two sectors through the intrusive power 

of  the  State  of  eminent  domain  or  land  acquisition.  According  to 

the Master Plan of the Capital and the scheme of law governing its 

planning and development, both the sectors were to the acquired 

and developed by the Capital Development Authority (hereinafter 

referred to as 'CDA') and thereafter, offer the plots for sale to the 

general  public 

through  auction.  The  FGEHF, 

instead  of 

accommodating  the  already  awaiting  eligible  members  who  were 

registered  in  Membership  Drive-I  and  their  seniority  stood 

determined  on  the  principle  of  'first  come  first  serve',  revised  its 

policy. The revised policy approved for distribution of the acquired 

land  in  sectors  F-14/F-15  was  premised  on  fresh  registration  on 

the basis of  'age-wise  seniority'. The  employees who  had  applied 

for  registration  in  Membership  Drive  II  for  allotment  of  plots  in 

sectors F-14/F-15 had not responded to the earlier invitation and 

representations  made  to  induce  registration  in  Membership  

Drive-I. Those who had registered themselves in the Membership 

Drive-I and were awaiting their turn on the basis of the promised 

principle of  'first come  first serve' were ignored, rather, excluded 

from being considered for allotment of plots in sectors F-14/F-15. 

The  record,  particularly  minutes  of  the  meeting  of  the  Executive 

Committee of the FGEHF, shows that the object was to allot plots 

to senior officials of occupational groups and judges of the august 

 
 
 
-: 7 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Supreme Court.  The membership was launched in April, 2015 on 

the basis of age-wise seniority and length of service. (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  „Membership  Drive-II‟).  According  to  the 

summary  placed  before  the  Federal  Cabinet,  135,000  employees 

had  registered  themselves  in  Membership  Drive  II.  Only  8,363 

employees were selected for allotment of plots in sectors F-14/F-

15 and in another scheme established on Park Road. According to 

the  summary  placed  before  the  Federal  Cabinet,  126,637 

registered  members  could  not  be  accommodated  and  thus  they 

are  awaiting  to  be  considered  for  allotment  of  a  plot/housing. 

There is nothing on record to show how selection was made from 

amongst  135,000  registered  employees  for  the  purpose  of 

allotment  of  plots  in  sectors  F-14/F-15  nor  is  there  a  plausible 

lawful  justification  for  bypassing  thousands  of  members  who  had 

registered  themselves  in  the  Membership  Drive  I  pursuant  to 

unambiguous representations and promises made to them.     

(iv)  The  judgment,  dated  28-09-2016,  impugned  in  the 

Intra Court Appeal. 

The  respondents  in  the  Intra  Court  Appeal  were  registered 

in Membership Drive-1. They were awaiting their turn on the basis 

of  the  principle  of  'first  come  first  served'.  They  had  invoked  the 

constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  because  they  were 

aggrieved  on  account  of  the  allegedly  arbitrary,  non  transparent 

and illegal  decision  of the FGEHF and  the Federal Government to 

change  the  policy  regarding  distribution  of  the  acquired  land  in 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 8 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

sectors  F-14/F-15.  They  were  aggrieved  because,  according  to 

their  stance,  the  change  of  policy  was  to  the  detriment  of  their 

accrued  vested  rights  and  contrary 

to 

the  unambiguous 

representations made to them. The writ petition was allowed vide 

the  impugned  judgment,  dated  28-09-2016.  The  learned  single 

judge, after carefully perusing the record, has concluded that the 

most  significant  feature  of  the  Membership  Drive-I  was  that 

seniority  of  a  member  would  be  determined  from  the  date  of 

deposit  of  registration  fee.  The  undisputed  and  uncontroverted 

documents  placed  on  record  had  clearly  established  that  the 

FGEHF  had  unambiguously  represented  to  the  applicants  of 

Membership Drive-1 that seniority would be determined on a „first 

come first served‟ basis relatable to the date of deposit of fee for 

registration  in  the  relevant  category.  It  was  clearly  represented 

that  eligible  employees  would  not  apply  directly  to  the  FGEHF 

regarding  any  particular  scheme  launched  in  the  future.  It  was 

explicitly  decided  that  only  those  who  were  registered  in 

Membership  Drive-1  and  who  had  obtained  seniority  on  the 

principle of the 'first come first serve basis' will be considered for 

allotment of plots in the  schemes launched in the future because 

the  membership  was  not  confined  to  a  particular  scheme.  This 

fact  has  been  affirmed  and  acknowledged  by  the  Federal 

Government and the FGEHA in its recently approved policy, which 

will  be  discussed  in  detail  later.  The  learned  single  judge  has 

rightly  held  that  the  conditions  for  applying  the  doctrine  of 

promissory  estoppel  were  satisfied.  The  representations  and 

promises  made  by  the  FGEHF  through  the  advertisement  and 

 
 
-: 9 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

otherwise,  at  the  time  when  the  Membership  Drive-I  was 

launched  in  2009,  were  unambiguous  and  definitely  not  in 

violation  of  the  law.  The  launching  of  Membership  Drive-II  and 

confining  the  members  registered  under  Membership  Drive-I  to 

the  housing  scheme  in  Barakahu  was  in  violation  of  the  earlier 

representations  i.e.  seniority  of  members  would  be  based  on  the 

date  of  registration  and  plots  will  be  allotted  on  the  principle  of 

'first  come  first  served'  basis.  Moreover,  it  was  an  arbitrary  and 

gross  deviation 

from 

the  unequivocal  commitment  and 

representation  that  registered  employees  in  Membership  Drive-1 

would  be  considered  and  allotted  plots  in  the  future  schemes  as 

per 

their  determined  seniority.  Those  who  had  obtained 

registration  in  Membership  Drive-I  had  not  only  paid  the  fee  but 

many  had  also  deposited  down  payments.  The  FGEHF  had 

collected an enormous amount pursuant to representations made 

to  induce  eligible  applicants  to  get  themselves  registered  in 

Membership Drive-1.  

It was held by the learned single judge that those who had 

registered  themselves  under  Membership  Drive-I  and  had  placed 

themselves  in  a  queue,  with  the  legitimate  expectation  to  be 

considered  for  the  allotment  of  a  plot  in  one  of  the  housing 

schemes  launched  by  the  FGEHF,  could  not  have  been  ignored 

and bypassed arbitrarily. The learned single judge concluded that 

the  FGEHF  had  acted  unfairly,  unreasonably  and  illegally  by 

abandoning  the  criteria  of  „first  come  first  served‟  and  had 

arbitrarily  introduced  the  Membership  Drive-II.  It  has  been  held 

 
 
 
-: 10 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

that  the  launching  of  Membership  Drive-II  by  the  FGEHF  and 

reversion  to  age-wise  seniority  for  allotment  of  a  plot  could  not 

operate  retrospectively  and  thus  such  a  policy  could  only  have 

taken effect after exhausting the rights that had accrued in favor 

of  those  members  who  had  registered  themselves  in  the 

Membership Drive-I. Their rights could not have been taken away 

or destroyed arbitrarily and in violation of the representations and 

promises made to them. The registered members of  Membership 

Drive-I had the first and superior right to be offered a plot in the 

housing  schemes launched by  the FGEHF, which  in this case was 

the scheme in sectors F-14/F-15. It was, therefore, unequivocally 

held  by  the  learned  single  judge  that  plots  in  sectors  F-14/F-15 

could  not  have  been  lawfully  offered  to  those  who  had  obtained 

registration in the Membership Drive-II unless and until the rights 

accrued  in  favor  of  members  registered  in  Membership  Drive-I 

had been enforced. The learned single judge has also referred to 

the  stance  which  was  taken  by  the  Federal  Government  before 

the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament) 

i.e.  only 

the 

registered 

employees  in  Membership  Drive-I  were  entitled  to  be  considered 

and  entertained  for  allotment  of  plots  in  the  future  schemes.  On 

the basis of the admitted documents placed by the FGEHF on the 

record,  the  learned  single  judge  has  held  that  there  was  no 

justification,  nor  was  it  reasonable  and  fair  to  confine  the 

registered  employees  in  Membership  Drive-I  to  a  particular 

scheme  e.g  the  Barakahu  scheme.  As  noted  above,  those  who 

had  registered  themselves  in  the  Membership  Drive-II  had  not 

responded to the offer of the FGEHF when Membership Drive-Iwas 

 
 
-: 11 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

launched  and,  therefore,  they  had  virtually  jumped  the  long 

queue  of  already  registered  members  who  had  legitimately 

expected to be  dealt with  in accordance with the representations 

and promises made to them. 

The  FGEHF  has  preferred  the  Intra  Court  Appeal  in  hand, 

assailing  the  judgment  dated  28-09-2016.  The  Division  Bench, 

vide order dated 28-11-2016, had suspended the operation of the 

impugned  judgment,  dated  28-09-2016,  to  the  extent  of  the 

observations made in paragraph 36 thereof.  

(v)  FGEHA Judgment 

It  would  be  beneficial  for  the  adjudication  of  the  matter  in 

hand to refer to the distinct but relevant litigation brought before 

this  Court  by  the  land  owners  of  sectors  F-14/F-15  against  the 

acquisition of their properties for launching the scheme by FGEHF. 

The constitutional petition was allowed vide judgment reported as 

PLD  2018  Islamabad  68  titled  Malik  Bashir  Ahmed,  etc.  v.  The 

Federal  Government  of  Pakistan,  through  Secretary  Cabinet 

Division, Pak Secretariat, Islamabad, etc.” The said judgment was 

subsequently  upheld  by  a  learned  Division  Bench  vide  judgment, 

dated  25-09-2018, 

titled  “Federal  Government  Employees 

Housing  Foundation  v.  Malik  Bashir  Ahmed,  etc.”[ICA 

No.365/2017].The  aforementioned  judgments  were  challenged 

before the august Supreme Court and they were unanimously set 

aside  by  a  larger  Bench  consisting  of  four  Hon‟ble  Judges  vide 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 12 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

judgment 

titled 

“Federal  Government  Employees  Housing 

Foundation  (FGEHF),  Islamabad  and  others  v.  Malik  Ghulam 

Mustafa  and  others”[2021  SCMR  201]  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  “FGEHA  Judgment”].  The  august  Supreme  Court  has 

declared  that  land  acquired  for  developing  housing  schemes 

launched  by 

the  Federal  Government  Employees  Housing 

Authority  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “FGEHA”)was  for  a 

'public  purpose'.  The  Federal  Government  Employees  Housing 

Authority Act 2020 (hereinafter referred to as the “FGEHA Act”) 

was  promulgated  during  the  pendency  of  the  appeals.  The  apex 

Court examined its provisions and declared it to be intra vires the 

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  “Constitution”).  The  operative  part  of  the 

judgment is reproduced as follows.- 

“For  the  foregoing  reasons,  the  first  and 

second  question  regarding  the  jurisdiction  of  the 

CDA  to  acquire  land  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Land 

Acquisition  Act,  1894  has  been  answered  in  the 

negative  in  paragraph  62-63.  The  third  question 

regarding  the  acquisition  for  a  housing  scheme 

constituting  a  valid  public  purpose  has  been 

answered  in  the  affirmative  in  paragraphs  98-107. 

The  fourth  question  regarding  the  Acquisition  under 

the  LAA,  1894  becoming  a  State  Largesse  under 

Article  173  of  the  Constitution  have  been  answered 

in  the  negative  as  in  paragraph  75.  The  fifth 

question  regarding  the  constitutional  petitions  not 

being  maintainable,  was  not  argued  by  any  of  the 

parties, very fact that contentious matters has been 

argued  and  dilated  by  the  High  court  as  well 

 
 
 
 
-: 13 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

attended  to  by  this  Court,  we  do  not  deem 

appropriate to delve into such controversy and leave 

it 

to 

be 

addressed 

in 

some 

appropriate 

proceedings.” 

(vi)   Distribution of plots in sectors F-14/F-15. 

The FGEHA conducted a purported balloting on 17-08-2021 

for  allotting  plots  in  sectors  F-14/F15  amongst  already  selected 

members  registered  in  Membership  Drive-II.  The  members  who 

were registered in Membership Drive-I were not only ignored but, 

rather,  without  any  lawful  justification  they  were  excluded  from 

being  considered.  Even  the  selection  made  from  about  135,000 

registered members in Membership Drive-II lacked transparency. 

As  noted  above,  according  to  information  placed  by  the  FGEHA 

before  the  Federal  Cabinet,  out  of  135,000  employees  who  were 

registered 

in  Membership  Drive-II,  126,637  could  not  be 

accommodated.  There  is  nothing  on  record  to  show  how  the 

selection was made for allotment of plots to a few out of 135,000 

registered  members.  The  Federal  Government  and  the  FGEHA, 

though  aware  that  they  had  appealed  against  the  judgment, 

dated 28-09-2016, preferred to proceed with the allotments in the 

scheme  launched  in  sectors  F-14/F-15.  The  grievances  of  the 

registered  members  who  had  responded  to  the  Membership 

Drive-I  were  also  ignored.  Surprisingly,  the  list  of  successful 

beneficiaries  posted  on  the  web  site  included  senior  members  of 

the  bureaucracy  and  serving  and  retired  judges  of  the  superior 

judiciary.  Virtually  every  judge  of  the  District  Judiciary  of 

 
 
 
 
-: 14 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Islamabad  was  amongst  the  beneficiaries.  Ironically,  they 

included  judicial  officers  who  were  kept  under  observation  either 

for  incompetence  or  having  questionable  repute.  It  also  included 

those  judicial  officers  who  were  dismissed  from  service  pursuant 

to disciplinary proceedings or  who  had opted to resign. A  judicial 

officer  who  had  confessed  to  accepting  illegal  gratification  and 

was  dismissed  from  service  was  also  a  recipient  of  the  grace  of 

the  Federal  Government.  The  judicial  officer  who  had  been 

convicted  and  sentenced  by  this  Court  vide  judgment  titled  “The 

State  v.  Maheen  Zafar  and  another”  [2018  PCrLJ  [Islamabad] 

841]and  whose  guilt  was  later  upheld  by  the  august  Supreme 

Court, was also fortunate to have been named as a beneficiary. It 

had become obvious that the policy formulated by the FGEHA and 

the  Federal  Government,  rather  than  serving  the  public  interest, 

was in violation of the fundamental rights of the people at large. 

This appeared to be the tip of the iceberg.  

(vii)  Annulment  of  balloting  and  the  purported  allotment 

of plots in sectors F-14/F-15 

After  the  list  was  posted  on  the  website  of  the  FGEHA 

pursuant to the balloting, this Court was inundated with petitions 

challenging the policy approved for distribution of plots in sectors 

F-14/F-15. Most of the aggrieved petitioners were those who were 

registered  in  the  Membership  Drive-I.  In  one  of  the  petitions  i.e 

writ  petition  no.  3573/2021,  the  petitioners  had,  inter  alia, 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 15 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

challenged  the  decision  taken  in  the  16th  meeting  of  the 

Executive Board, whereby the latter had fixed a quota for its own 

members and, pursuant thereto, plots were also allotted to them 

in  sectors  F-14/F-15.  The  petitioners  have  challenged  the 

decision,  inter  alia,  on  the  ground  of  conflict  of  interest.  In  a 

nutshell,  all  the  aggrieved  petitioners  had  challenged  the  policy 

whereby  acquired  land  in  sectors  F-14/F-15  was  distributed 

amongst  registered  members  of  FGEHA.  The  grievances  and 

questions  of  law  were  similar  to  those  raised  in  the  Intra  Court 

Appeal  in  hand.  The  petitions  were,  therefore,  heard  along  with 

the Intra Court Appeal. After hearing the learned counsels for the 

parties, particularly the counsels for the FGEHA, we were not able 

to persuade ourselves that the impugned judgment, dated 28-09-

2016,  suffered  from  any  legal  infirmity.  It  also  appeared  to  us 

that,  prima  facie,  the  policy  relating  to  distribution  of  State 

acquired  land  was  in  derogation  of  the  fundamental  rights  of  the 

public at large and definitely did not serve the public interest. The 

inclusion  of  officials  who  were  dismissed  on  charges  of 

misconduct, corruption or convicted and sentenced by competent 

courts  was  sufficient  to  establish  that  the  policy  was  not  in  the 

public interest.  

We,  therefore,  recalled  the  injunctive  order,  dated  28-11-

2016,  vide  order  dated  13-09-2021.  Consequently,  the  balloting 

held by the FGEHA and the list of the purported allotments posted 

on the website became redundant and of no legal effect. Since the 

question  before  us  was  regarding  the  legality  of  the  policy 

 
 
 
-: 16 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

formulated  by  the  Federal  Government,  therefore,  we  deemed  it 

appropriate  to  exercise  restraint  and  refer  the  matter  to  the 

Federal  Cabinet  i.e  the  worthy  Prime  Minister  and  its  members. 

On 14-10-2021, a joint request was made on behalf of the FGEHA 

and  the  Federal  Government  to  adjourn  the  matter  so  as  to 

enable the Federal Cabinet to complete its proceedings.  

(viii)  The Approved "Revised Policy" 

When  the  Intra  Court  Appeal  and  the  connected  petitions 

were  taken  up  today,  Mr  Qasim  Wadud,  the  learned  Additional 

Attorney  General,  appeared  along  with  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of 

Housing  and  Works,  Government  of  Pakistan.  The  Director 

General  of  FGEHA  also  appeared  along  with  a  duly  authorized 

learned  counsel.  We  were  informed  that  a  revised  policy  was 

approved  by  the  Federal  Cabinet.  The  summary,  dated  29-10-

2021, placed before the Federal Cabinet was approved. Copies of 

the summary and the Cabinet's decision were submitted before us 

by  the  learned  Additional  Attorney  General  (hereinafter  referred 

to  as  the  "Revised  Policy").  The  Revised  Policy  has  been 

attached  with  this  judgment  as  “Annexure-B”  and  it  shall  be 

read  as  an  integral  part  thereof.  The  salient  features  of  the 

Revised Policy are as follows.- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 17 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

(a)  The primary policy for allotment will be age-wise 

seniority  instead  of  the  earlier  principle  of  „first 

come first served‟. 

(b)  20%  quota  on  age-wise  seniority  basis  was 

allocated for the retired employees.  

(c) 

It  was  unequivocally  decided  that  the  FGEHA 

will not acquire land under the Land Acquisition 

Act 1894 nor under any other law. Instead, the 

FGEHA will execute schemes under approved JV 

policy, land sharing and land purchasing. 

(d)  All  allotment  of  plots  will  be  made  through  the 

FGEHA  as  per  approved  laid  down  policy  and 

criteria followed by the Executive Board till such 

a policy is revised. 

(e)  No discretionary quota/powers will be  exercised 

for  the  allotment  of  plot,  apartment,  grey 

structure. 

(f) 

A  minimum  10  years‟  service  will  be  the 

eligibility criteria. 

(g)  The  policy  of  allotment  of  second  plot  to  BS-22 

officers  and 

superior 

judiciary 

shall  be 

discontinued  under 

the  Prime  Minister‟s 

Package. 

(h)  Nomination of Supreme Court judges/employees 

will  be  provided  by  the  Registrar  of  the  apex 

Court  after  approval  and  allotment  shall  be 

 
 
-: 18 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

made  as  per  approved  laid  down  criteria  of 

FGEHA on age-wise seniority basis.  

(i) 

Nomination 

of 

Islamabad 

High 

Court 

judges/employees  and  lower  judiciary  will  be 

provided by the Registrar of the Islamabad High 

Court  after  approval  and  allotment  shall  be 

made  as  per  approved  laid  down  criteria  of 

FGEHA on age-wise seniority basis. 

(j) 

An employee would not be eligible if disciplinary 

proceedings are pending. 

(k)  11,182  registered  members  of  membership 

Drive-II  who  had  deposited  down  payments 

shall  be  accommodated  in  schemes  other  than 

F-14/F-15.  3,300  registered  members  shall  be 

accommodated  in  G-12  and  F-12,  whereas  the 

remaining 7,982 will be accommodated through 

the merit list in other schemes. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  policy  of  allotting  a  second  plot  to 

Federal  secretaries  and  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  has  been 

recalled.  It  has  also  been  decided  that  land  bank  for  schemes  of 

the  FGEHA  will  not  be  created  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  the 

power of eminent domain. The proposal to constitute a committee 

to  examine  formulation  of  a  policy  'as  per  Army/Defence  model' 

was  also  approved  by  the  Federal  Government  but  there  is  no 

explanation regarding such a policy or its constitutionality. A plain 

reading of the summary shows that the FGEHA and the Ministry of 

 
 
 
 
-: 19 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Housing  Works  had  unambiguously  acknowledged  that  the 

members  registered  in  Membership  Drive-1  were  not  confined  to 

a  particular  scheme.  It  is  obvious  that  the  summary  did  not 

disclose to the Federal Cabinet the judgment, dated 28-09-2016, 

nor  the  fact  that  the  Intra  Court  Appeal  was  pending  and  the 

injunctive  order  had  been  vacated.  The  most  crucial  aspect  was 

that the Federal Cabinet chose to ignore the question of conflict of 

interest  and  its  duty  to  ensure  that  the  policy  served  public 

interest.  Surprisingly,  two  additional  prime  sectors  of  the 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  which  had  already  been  acquired  by 

the  CDA  under  the  Capital  Development  Authority  Ordinance, 

1960  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "CDA  Ordinance")  i.e 

sectors F-12 and G-12, were also allocated to the FGEHA in order 

to accommodate its members.  

Four  prime  sectors  of  the  Master  Plan  of  the  Capital  i.e  F-

12, G-12, F-14 and F-15 were, therefore, allocated exclusively for 

members of the FGEHA. It is noted that these four prime sectors 

were required to be developed and offered for sale to the general 

public  through  open  auction.  The  implications  of  allocating  the 

four  prime  sectors  for  the  propose  of  distribution  of  prime  land 

amongst  the  members  of  FGEHA  and  its  effect  vis  a  vis  the 

fundamental  rights  of  the  public  at  large  would  be  discussed  in 

more detail  later. The  notable aspect of the Revised Policy is  the 

exclusion  of  certain  categories  as  “specified  groups”,  such  as 

journalists and lawyers. Likewise, from amongst the judiciary, the 

grace of inclusion as one of the “specified groups” was confined to 

 
 
 
-: 20 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

judges and staff of the Supreme Court, Islamabad High Court and 

the  District  courts  of  Islamabad.  It  is  noted  that  the  FGEHA  is  a 

major  litigation  party  before  these  three  judicial  branches.  There 

is  no  explanation  why  the  Islamabad  High  Court  and  the  District 

courts of Islamabad have been included because no such request 

was  made  to  the  FGEHA  nor  the  Federal  Government  in  this 

regard.  It  is  implicit  from  the  Revised  Policy  that  the  real  estate 

development and distribution of the land bank of the FGEHA is not 

a  vested  right,  rather,  it  is  dependent  on  voluntary  registration 

and  membership  obtained  by  employees  of 

the  Federal 

Government  or  the  approved  specified  groups.  Only  those 

members  have  been  excluded  against  whom  disciplinary 

proceedings  are  pending.  As  a  corollary,  those  who  may  have 

been superseded on account of lack of performance or contributed 

to  decades  of  bad  governance  were  eligible  to  enrich  themselves 

at  the  State  expense.  Was  it  appropriate  for  the  Federal 

Government to have included this Court, the Supreme Court and 

the  District  courts  knowing  that  FGEHA  is  one  of  the  major 

litigation parties? Is the Revised Policy contrary to public interest 

and in derogation of the guaranteed rights of the people at large? 

These crucial questions will be discussed and answered later.      

B. 

Stance of the Federal Government and the FGEHA  

4. 

Dr  Imran  Zaib,  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Works, 

has appeared. He has explained that the Revised Policy was proposed to 

and  approved  by  the  Federal  Cabinet  pursuant  to  the  direction  of  this 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 21 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Court  and  the  grave  anomalies  highlighted  in  various  orders.  He  has 

informed  that  some  categories  such  as  journalists,  lawyers  etc  have 

been excluded from the 'specified groups' category. He was not able to 

give  a  plausible  explanation  for  excluding  the  registered  members  of 

Membership Drive I from allotment in sectors F-14/F-15. In response to 

our query, he candidly conceded that allotment of a plot was not one of 

the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  a  civil  servant  nor  of  any  other 

employee  of  autonomous  or  constitutional  entities.  He  was  asked 

regarding the loss to the exchequer on account of enforcing the Revised 

Policy.  He  could  not  give  any  justification  nor  explanation  for  the 

enormous  loss  to  the  exchequer  merely  to  benefit  a  few  members  of 

FGEHA.  It  is  also  not  the  case  of  the  FGEHA  nor  the  Federal 

Government  that  the  distribution  of  the  land  bank  of  the  FGEHA  is 

based  on  services  rendered  by  public  functionaries  beyond  the  call  of 

duty e.g sacrificing lives or suffering disabilities by officials and soldiers 

of the police, the Armed Forces or other state institutions. It is also not 

the stance of the Federal Government nor a fundamental criterion of the 

Revised  Policy  that  the  object 

is  to  address  the  question  of 

'sheterlessness'  of  Federal  Government  employees  or  employees  of 

other  specified  groups.  However,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  inclusion 

of  allotment  of  plot  as  one  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  has 

been proposed but not approved as yet by the Federal Cabinet.  

Mr  Muhammad  Akram  Sheikh,  Sr.  ASC,  has  appeared 

alongwithMr  Tariq  Rasheed,  Director  General,  FGEHA.  The  latter  has 

stated that the former would argue on behalf of the FGEHA. A power of 

attorney has also been submitted and placed on record. Mr Muhammad 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 22 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Akram  Sheikh,  learned  Sr.  ASC,  has  argued  that  the  august  Supreme 

Court has settled all the matters raised in the appeal and the petitions 

in  hand  in  the  FGEHA  Judgment.  He  has  argued  that  the  Court,  by 

raising unnecessary issues, was scandalizing the judiciary. However, he 

was not able to explain how the judiciary was likely to be scandalized on 

account of adjudication of grievances brought before this constitutional 

Court  by  several  aggrieved  persons.  The  learned  counsel  has  stressed 

that the questions raised are regarding policy formulated by the Federal 

Government  and  they  are  not  justiciable  while  exercising  jurisdiction 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  He  has  argued  that  the  Revised 

Policy  does  not  suffer  from  any  legal  infirmity  nor  could  the  learned 

single  judge  have  interfered  with  the  policy  formulated  by  the 

competent authority. He has argued that the Court, by questioning the 

allotments  made  pursuant  to  holding  balloting,  has  exercised  suomoto 

power.   

The  attention  of  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Housing  and 

Works  was  drawn  to  the  grievance  raised  in  one  of  the  petitions 

whereby  the  decision  of  the  Executive  Board  to  allot  plots  to  its  own 

members has been challenged on the ground of conflict of interest. He 

was asked whether the factor of  conflict of interest was not considered 

by  the  Federal  Cabinet.  He  explained  that  there  was  no  conflict  of 

interest  because  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  were  otherwise 

entitled as registered members of the FGEHA. He was of the view that 

there  was  no  illegality,  conflict  of  interest  or  impropriety  in  allotting 

plots  to  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  FGEHA  in  sectors  F-

14/F-15.  

 
 
 
 
 
-: 23 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

In a nutshell, the controversy is regarding the validity of the 

policies,  particularly  the  Revised  Policy  regarding  distribution  of 

acquired  land  amongst  registered  members  of  the  FGEHA.  The  Federal 

Government, by revising its earlier policy, has acknowledged that it was 

illegal.  

C.  Opinion of the Court 

5. 

The controversy before us is regarding the policy relating to 

creating the land bank and its distribution amongst the members of the 

FGEHA. The admitted facts are that allotment of a plot is not one of the 

terms and conditions of service of a civil servant nor that of employees 

of the Federal Government or the specified groups approved under the 

FGEHA Act. No civil servant, judge nor employees of other entities can 

claim,  as  of  right,  the  allotment  of  state  land  at  lower  than  the 

prevailing  market  price.  Most  of  the  land  bank  of  the  FGEHA  has  been 

acquired  through  the  exercise  of  the  most  intrusive  inherent  power  of 

the State, the 'eminent domain'. The scheme of the FGEHA, as would be 

discussed  in  more  detail  later,  is  in  the  nature  of  an  exclusive  club 

comprising of persons belonging to selected classes. They invest in the 

FGEHA for the purpose of establishing a housing or commercial scheme 

through the use of the power of the State. The benefits are restricted to 

such persons who voluntarily obtain membership offered by the FGEHA. 

It gives the members of the FGEHA an opportunity to enrich themselves 

instantly upon the allotment of a plot and to make windfall gains at the 

cost  of  enormous  loss  to  the  exchequer.  This  phenomenon  in  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 24 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

context  of  the  Revised  Policy  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  later.The 

august  Supreme  Court,  in  the  FGEHA  Judgment,  has  declared  that 

acquisition of land for schemes launched by the FGEHA through exercise 

of the state power of eminent domain was for a public purpose. But by 

no stretch of the imagination can the FGEHA Judgment be construed or 

interpreted in such a manner which would grant a license to the Federal 

Government to use the acquired land bank of the FGEHA in derogation 

of  public  interest  or  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  public  at  large.  The 

controversy  before  us,  raised  in  the  Intra  Court  Appeal  and  the 

connected petitions, was definitely not raised before nor adjudicated by 

the  apex  Court  in  the  FGEHA  Judgment.  The  Membership  Drive-1  and 

the representations made to induce registration and payment of fee and 

down  payments  are  not  disputed,  rather,  it  is  implicit  in  the  Revised 

Policy  that  the  rights  of  the  registered  members  were  not  confined  to 

any particular scheme launched by the FGEHA. The Membership Drive-

II  was  introduced  when  the  scheme  in  sectors  F-14/15  was  launched. 

The  registered  members  in  Membership  Drive-I  had  challenged  the 

change in policy and their petition was allowed through judgment, dated 

28-09-2016, against which  the  FGEHF/FGEHA had filed  the Intra Court 

Appeal in hand. In disregard to its own appeal, the FGEHA conducted a 

purported  balloting  amongst  preselected  members  who  had  registered 

themselves  in  the  Membership  Drive-II.  The  superior  rights  of  the 

members  who  were  registered  in  Membership  Drive-I,  the  non 

transparency  and  arbitrariness  while  conducting  balloting 

for 

distribution  of  state  acquired  land  in  sectors  F-14/-F15  and,  above  all, 

the  grave  violation  of  public  interest  had  raised  paramount  questions. 

The  controversy  and  grievances  were  regarding  the  policy  adopted  by 

 
 
-: 25 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

the  Federal  Government  and  the  FGEHA  to  distribute  state  acquired 

land amongst a few privileged classes.  

The  Federal  Cabinet,  rather  than  taking  into  consideration 

the  factors  highlighted  in  our  orders,  approved  the  summary  prepared 

by  the  employees  who  had  their  own  vested  interests.  The  questions 

required to be considered and adjudicated by us in order to decide the 

Intra  Court  Appeal  and  the  petitions  in  hand  are;  whether  the  scheme 

launched by the FGEHA and the policy for distribution of plots amongst 

its  members  was  fair,  legal,  equitable  and  in  accordance  with  law; 

whether  the  Revised  Policy  serves  public  interest;  whether  it  is 

susceptible  to  judicial  review  while  exercising  jurisdiction  under  Article 

199 of the Constitution; if the answer is in the affirmative then whether 

it  can  be  interfered  with;  whether  the  Revised  Policy  prejudices  and  is 

likely to operate detrimentally in the context of the interest of the public 

at  large  and  their  guaranteed  constitutional  rights;  whether  the 

question  of  conflict  of  interest  is  relevant  and,  if  so,  then  its  ensuing 

consequences;  whether  the  land  acquired  for  a  public  purpose  can  be 

subsequently put to use in a manner that adversely affects the interests 

and  rights  of  the  public  at  large;  whether  examining  the  legality  and 

constitutionality  of  the  policy  formulated  by  the  Federal  Government 

regarding  schemes  launched  by  the  FGEHA  amount  to  exercising  suo 

motu powers under Article 199 of the Constitution.    

The  facts  leading  to  approval  of  the  Revised  Policy  have 

already  been  discussed  above.  However,  in  order  to  answer  the 

aforementioned questions it would be beneficial to examine the statute 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 26 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

governing  the  FGEHA  and,  thereafter,  the  effect  and  consequences  of 

enforcing the Revised Policy.  

(i)  The FGEHA Act. 

The FGEHA Act was promulgated and notified in the official 

gazette  on  15-01-2020.  It  was  promulgated  with  the  object  to  

establish the FGEHA for the purpose of planning and developing of 

housing  schemes  for  serving  and  retired  Federal  Government 

employees  and  other  specified  groups  and  matters  connected 

therewith  and  ancillary  thereto.  The  expression  „specified  groups‟ 

has been defined in section 2(o) as meaning any group as decided 

by the Executive Board from time to time. The composition of the 

Executive Board has been described in section 4(1) as follows.- 

(a)  Minister  for  the  Division,  concerned 

Chairman 

with affairs of the Authority  

(b)  Secretary of the Division concerned 

Member 

(c)  Draftsman Law and Justice Division 

Member 

(d)  Additional  Secretary  of  the  Division, 

Member 

concerned  with  the  affairs  of  the 

Authority  

(e)  Managing  Director,  Pakistan  Housing 

Member 

Authority Foundation 

(f)  Director  General,  Pakistan  Public 

Member 

Works Department 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 27 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

(g)  Chief 

Commissioner, 

Islamabad 

Member 

Capital Territory 

(h)  Chairman, 

Capital 

Development 

Member 

Authority 

(i)  Joint  Secretary  Expenditure  Ministry 

Member 

of Finance 

(j)  Chief (Physical Planning and Housing) 

Member 

Planning Commission, Islamabad 

(k)  Chief Engineer of the Authority 

Member 

The powers and functions of the Executive Board have been 

enumerated  in  section  5.  Section  12  explicitly  provides  that 

acquisition of any land or any interest in land for the purposes of 

the  FGEHA  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  acquisition  for  public 

purpose within the meaning of the applicable Land Acquisition Act 

1894  or  any  other  prevailing  law  'as  per  policy'  of  the  Federal 

Government. Sections 13, 14, 15 and 16 describe the powers and 

manner for acquisition of land by the FGEHA.  Section 19 explicitly 

provides for a right of appeal and review to the Executive Board. 

Likewise,  section  25  provides  for  a  statutory  right  of  appeal 

against an order/decision of the Director General to the Executive 

Board.  The  FGEHA  was  the  successor  statutory  entity  of  the 

FGEHF.  The  land,  now  comprising  sectors  F-14  and  F-15,  were 

acquired  by  the  FGEHF  through  the  Land  Acquisition  Collector  in 

exercise of powers conferred under the Land Acquisition Act1894. 

However,  the  land  for  developing  sectors  G-12  and  F-12  was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 28 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

acquired  by  the  CDA  in  exercise  of  powers  conferred  under  the 

CDA  Ordinance.  The  awards  relating  to  acquisition  of  land  for 

establishing sectors G-12 and F-12 were announced in 1985.  

The FGEHA Act is a self-contained comprehensive statute. A 

plain reading of the statute as a whole shows that the FGEHA has 

been  established  for  the  specific  purposes  of  planning  and 

developing  housing  schemes  for  serving  and  retired  Federal 

Government  employees  and  other  specified  groups.  Its  existence 

and  jurisdiction  is  confined  to  establishing  housing  schemes 

primarily  for  Federal  Government  employees.  Its  functions  are 

obviously subject to compliance with the Master Plan prepared for 

developing and planning of the Islamabad Capital Territory as the 

Capital  of  the  Islamic  Republic  Pakistan.  It  is  noted  that  the 

Master  Plan  has  a  statutory  backing  under  the  CDA  Ordinance. 

The  expression  'scheme'  has  been  defined  in  section  2(m).  The 

said  expression  does  not  describe  the  nature  of  the  undertaking 

except that it is restricted to Federal Government employees and 

the  specified  groups  approved  under  the  FGEHA  Act.  The  FGEHA 

is  empowered  to  acquire  land  for  its  schemes  through  the 

inherent  power  of  the  state  i.e  eminent  domain.  Section  5(2)(c) 

and  section  12,  when  read  together,  unambiguously  shows  that 

forcible acquisition of land and its use are subject to an approved 

policy of the Federal Government.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 29 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

The  legislature  obviously  could  not  have  intended  to 

empower the FGEHA nor the Federal Government to exercise the 

power  of forcible acquisition of land and thereafter  give a license 

for  its  use  contrary  to  public  interest.  It  has  been  held  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court 

in  the  FGEHA 

judgment  that  the 

acquisition  of  land  by  the  FGEHA  for  a  scheme  was  for  a  public 

purpose.  The  apex  Court  judgment  cannot  be  interpreted  by  the 

FGEHA  in  order  to  arrogate  to  itself  the  authority  and  power  to 

use  the  scheme  established  on  acquired  land  in  derogation  of 

public purpose or to violate public interest. The allotment and use 

of  acquired  land  to  benefit  incompetent,  corrupt  or  convicted 

employees  of  the  Federal  Government  or  the  specified  groups  at 

the  expense  of  the  national  exchequer  would  definitely  not  be 

legal,  constitutionally  permissible  nor  serve  any  public  purpose. 

As an illustration, the initial distribution of state acquired land and 

its  use  in  sectors  of  F-14/F-15,  pursuant  to  the  balloting,  was  in 

breach  of  and  did  not  serve  public  interest.  No  doubt  that  the 

legislature  is  empowered  to  enact  laws  and  to  determine  what  is 

best for the public good. It is the duty of the Court to discover the 

legislative 

intent  and 

interpret 

laws  promulgated  by  the 

legislature.  It  is  settled  law  that  while  interpreting  a  statute  or 

discovering the legislative intent, it is presumed by the Court that 

mistake  or  absurdity  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  Majlis-e-Shoora 

(Parliament).  

 
 
 
 
-: 30 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

No  legislation  can  be  interpreted  in  such  a  manner  which 

has the effect of defeating public interest or protects the personal 

interests of a few in disregard or derogation of the interests of the 

public at large. The FGEHA Act, therefore, can only be interpreted 

to advance the interests of the public at large. Any interpretation 

against public interest and for the benefit of a few will amount to 

attributing  mistake  or  absurdity  to  the  legislature.  It  would  be 

unconstitutional  and  contrary  to  the  principles  of  interpretation. 

As  already  noted,  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  FGEHA 

judgment  has  held  that  land  could  be  acquired  for  a  scheme  of 

the FGEHA for a valid public purpose. It is obvious, therefore, that 

the use of such a scheme also has to meet the threshold of public 

purpose  and  serve  public  interest.  As  an  illustration,  a  scheme 

launched  for  the  benefit  of  family  members  of  police  officials  or 

Armed  Forces  personnel  who  lay  down  their  lives  in  the  line  of 

duty or to encourage and reward Federal Government employees, 

declared  through  a  transparent  selection  process,  to  have 

performed  extraordinarily  and  acted  beyond  the  call  of  duty, 

would definitely advance public interest. But the legislature could 

never have intended that the schemes launched under the FGEHA 

Act  could  be  used  to  promote  or  reward 

incompetence, 

contribution  to  bad  governance,  injustice,  average  performances 

or  corruption  and  corrupt  practices,  nor  to  provide  opportunities 

to  individuals  to  enrich  themselves  at  the  expense  of  the 

exchequer. The FGEHA Act, therefore, can only be interpreted and 

construed  by  declaring  that  the  legislature  had  unambiguously 

intended that the policy formulated regarding a scheme launched 

 
 
-: 31 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

by FGEHA and distribution of the acquired land can withstand the 

test  of  legality  and  constitutionality  if  it  was  not  in  derogation  of 

public  interest  nor  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  of  the 

public  at  large.  It  is  settled  law  that  the  interest  of  the  public  at 

large  always  prevails  over  the  interests  of  a  class  or  few 

individuals.  Any  other  interpretation  of  the  FGEHA  Act  would  be 

violative of the Constitution. Every policy and action of the State, 

the  Federal  Government  and  public  functionaries  can  solely  be 

tested  on  the  threshold  of  public  interest.  The  policy  formulated 

under  the  FGEHA  Act  by  the  Federal  Government  or  the  FGEHA, 

as the case may be. if found to operate against public interest or 

detrimental  to  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  of  the 

citizens, would definitely be void, illegal, unconstitutional and thus 

without lawful authority and jurisdiction.        

As  already  noted  above,  a  Federal  Government  employee 

does not have any vested right to claim allotment of a plot nor to 

compel  the  FGEHA  to  maintain  its  land  bank  so  as  to  provide 

benefits  to  each  registered  member.  Allotment  of  a  plot  is, 

admittedly,  not  a  term  or  condition  of  service  of  any  employee 

and  definitely  not  a  right.  The  statute  does  not  create  an 

independent  right  or  entitlement  in  favour  of  the  registered 

members of the FGEHA to claim allotment of a plot at the expense 

of the interest of the public at large. The basis of allotment under 

the FGEHA Act is membership of the FGEHA on a voluntary basis 

while  acquisition  of  land,  launching  a  scheme  and  distribution  of 

the  acquired  land  are  solely  governed  and  regulated  under  an 

 
 
 
-: 32 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

approved  policy  of  the  Federal  Government.  Such  a  policy 

inevitably has to meet the threshold of public purpose and has to 

serve and be in conformity with public interest. It cannot operate 

in derogation of the fundamental rights of the public at large.  

There  is  another  crucial  aspect  of  the  FGEHA  Act.  Its 

primary  beneficiaries  are  the  Federal  Government  employees. 

However,  other  specified  groups  can  also  be  included  as 

beneficiaries  of  the  scheme.  The  expression  'specified  group'  has 

been defined in section 2(o) as meaning any group as decided by 

the  Executive  Board.  It  is,  therefore,  within  the  power  and 

jurisdiction  of  the  latter  to  decide  which  entity  or  constitutional 

body may be declared as a specified group for the purposes of the 

FGEHA  Act.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  other  than  Federal 

Government  employees,  public  office  holders  or  employees  of 

entities and constitutional bodies have to be declared as 'specified 

groups'  to  become  eligible  for  membership  or  benefits  in  a 

scheme  launched  under  the  FGEHA  Act.  As  a  corollary,  members 

and employees of other entities and constitutional bodies have no 

vested  right  nor  are  they  entitled  to  benefit  from  a  scheme 

launched  by  the  FGEHA  unless  explicitly  included  amongst  the 

specified  groups.  The  FGEHA  and  the  Federal  Government, 

through the Revised Policy, has declared judges and employees of 

the Supreme Court, Islamabad High Court and District judiciary of 

the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  as  specified  groups.  The  other 

specified  groups  such  as  journalists, 

lawyers, 

judges  and 

employees  of  other  High  Courts,  Federal  Shariat  Court  etc  have 

 
 
 
-: 33 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

now  been  excluded,  as  is  evident  from  the  "Revised  Policy".  The 

power  to  include  or  exclude  a  specified  group  for  the  purpose  of 

benefiting  from  the  schemes  launched  under  the  FGEHA  Act 

exclusively vests in the Federal Government and FGEHA.  

D. 

The  legal  status  of  the  policies,  particularly  the  "Revised 

Policy";  Do  they  serve  the  public  interest,  or  are  in 

derogation  thereof  and  violative  of  the  guaranteed 

fundamental rights of the public at large?                                                  

6. 

As  we  have  already  discussed  and  declared  above  that  an 

approved policy regarding the execution of a scheme under the FGEHA 

Act  can  only  be  sustainable  if  it  is  not  in  derogation  of  the  public 

interest nor violates the constitutionally guaranteed rights of the public 

at  large.  The  policy  regarding  the  scheme  relating  to  sectors  F-14  and 

F-15 was challenged and the constitutional petition was allowed by the 

learned  single  judge  and  the  learned  FGHEA  counsels  could  not                    

persuade  us  that  the  reasoning  and  findings  suffered  from  any  legal 

infirmity. We had highlighted the gross anomalies observed in the policy 

vide  our  order,  dated  13-09-2021,  because  they  appeared  to  be 

contrary  to  the  public  interest.  The  question  of  conflict  of  interest  was 

also involved. We had also pointed out that the execution of the policy 

was  likely  to  cause  enormous  loss  to  the  exchequer.  The  policy  also 

indicated  that  the  decision  regarding  the  development  and  planning  of 

the capital was based on the model of 'elite capture' and  that it was in 

disregard to the principle of providing equal opportunity to all citizens to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 34 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

benefit  from  state  assets.  We  had  exercised  restraint  by  referring  the 

matter  to  the  Federal  Cabinet  i.e  the  worthy  Prime  Minister  and  its 

members  for  reconsideration.  We  were  expecting  that,  as  chosen 

representatives  of  the  people,  they  would  approve  a  policy  that  would 

serve  the  public  interest  rather  than  providing  an  opportunity  to  a  few 

of the  powerful elite to instantly enrich themselves  and  simultaneously 

cause enormous loss to the exchequer.  

We  have  carefully  perused  the  'Revised  Policy';  regrettably  it 

serves the interests of a few elites selected through a  non transparent 

process.  It  enables  a  few  individuals  to  make  windfall  gains  in 

derogation  to  public  interest  and  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights 

of the public at large. The Revised Policy is in violation of the legislative 

intent behind the promulgation of the FGEHA Act, as has been discussed 

earlier.  How  the  Revised  Policy  fails  to  meet  the  threshold  of  public 

interest  and  public  policy  and  why  it  cannot  sustain  the  constitutional 

scrutiny  would  become  obvious  from  the  discussion  that  follows.  The 

salient  features  of  the  Revised  Policy  have  been  reproduced  above. 

Before  discussing  the  reasons  that  render  the  "Revised  Policy"  illegal 

and  unconstitutional,  it  would  be  beneficial  to  define  the  expression 

'Public Interest': 

(i)  Public Interest  

Lord Denning M.R, in the case titled 'London Artists Limited 

VSLittler  (1969) 2 All ER 193, explained the expression as a 

matter  of  such  nature  which  affects  people  at  large.  The  Black's 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 35 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Law  Dictionary,  Sixth  Edition  has  described  the  expression  as 

something in which the public, the community at large, has some 

pecuniary  interest  by  which  their  legal  right  or  liabilities  are 

affected. Moreover, it does not mean anything so narrow as mere 

curiosity.  Interest  shared  by  citizens  generally  in  affairs  of  local, 

state  or  national  government.  Acting  in  public  interest  is  a 

constitutional  duty  of  every  institution,  public  office  holder  and 

public  functionary.  The  existence  of  the  government  and  its 

institutions  is  for  the  people  and  to  protect  their  rights.  Their 

creation and the obligation of the public office holders is to serve 

the actual stakeholders of the governance system i.e the citizens. 

The expressions public good, common interest and public interest 

are synonymous. It refers to a decision or determination that is in 

the best interest of the well being and welfare of the community, 

society or the public. It is an antitheses of private interest or the 

interest  of  a  few.  It  is,  therefore,  a  constitutional  duty  of  every 

institution, holder of public office and public functionaries to solely 

serve the people for whom they exist. The august Supreme Court, 

in the case titled “Province of Sindh through Chief Secretary and 8 

others v. Syed Kabir Bokhari” [2016 SCMR 101], has held that it 

is  the  obligation  of  the  government  and  its  departments  to  act 

justly  and  fairly  towards  the  citizens  and  if  the  latter  suffers  any 

loss  or  injury  on  account  of  illegal  and  unlawful  conduct  then 

there  is  a  constitutional  duty  to  compensate  the  citizen.  In  the 

case  titled  “Habibullah  Energy  Limited  and  another  v.  WAPDA 

through  Chairman  and  others”  [PLD  2014  SC  47]  it  has  been 

observed  that  the  basis  of  discretionary  power  of  State 

 
 
-: 36 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

functionaries is the delegation of authority by the principal i.e. the 

people  of  Pakistan.  It  has  been  further  observed  that  the  legal 

authority  is  derived  from  such  fiduciary  relationship  and  when 

such  fiduciary  duty  is  breached,  the  authority  of  the  State  to 

administer and enforce the law is eroded. The State functionaries 

and  instrumentalities  stand  in  a  fiduciary  relationship  to  the 

people.  In  the  case  titled  “Muhammad  Yasin  v.  Federation  of 

Pakistan  and  others”  [PLD  2012  SC  132]  it  has  been  observed 

that  public  functionaries  are  first  and  foremost  fiduciaries  and 

trustees  for  the  people  of  Pakistan  and,  while  performing  the 

functions of their office, they can have no interest other than the 

interest  of  the  people  of  Pakistan.  This  fiduciary  obligation  and 

duty is breached when public functionaries abuse their power and 

exercise  discretion  in  an  arbitrary  manner.  Public  interest  is  not 

served  and  the  fiduciary  duty  towards  the  citizens  is  gravely 

breached  when 

institutions  and  public 

functionaries  give 

preference  to  their  own  interests,  rather  than  performing  their 

delegated functions in the best interest of the people at large. The 

Revised  Policy  regrettably  demonstrates  a  disregard  of  the 

interests  of  the  people  and  giving  preference  to  the  private 

interests of a few.  

(ii)  The effect of the Revised Policy and how it operates in 

       derogation to public interest. 

The  initial  policy  was  not  in  the  public  interest  and, 

therefore, after its review the Revised Policy was approved by the 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 37 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Federal  Cabinet.    As  already  noted,  the  summary  was  prepared 

and placed before the cabinet by those officials who had personal 

pecuniary 

interests.  It  appears  that  the  grave  anomalies 

highlighted by the Court were not brought to the attention of the 

worthy  Prime  Minister  and  members  of  the  cabinet.  It  appears 

from the record that the policy was changed when the scheme for 

developing  a  housing  scheme  in  sectors  F-14  and  F-15  was 

launched.  It  also  appears  that  the  object  was  to  benefit  senior 

officers  of  occupational  groups  and  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court 

and  other  courts.  The  vested  rights  of  those  members  who  had 

responded  and  were  registered  in  Membership  Drive  I  could  not 

have  been  destroyed.  The  FGEHA  could  not  controvert  the 

reasoning and findings of the learned single judge recorded in the 

judgment,  dated  28-09-2016.  The  FGEHA  and  the  Federal 

Government  had  implicitly  acknowledged  in  the  Revised  Policy 

that  the  registered  members  in  Membership  Drive  I  were  not 

confined  to  a  particular  scheme.  In  order  to  accommodate  some 

of them, two additional sectors from the Master Plan, prepared for 

planning  and  developing  the  capital,  were  allocated  for  the 

exclusive use of the FGEHA. This had grave consequences for the 

exchequer  and  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  of  the 

people  at  large.  The  change  of  policy  and  giving  preference  to 

members  who  got  themselves  registered  in  Membership  Drive  II 

was illegal, arbitrary and without lawful authority.  

 
 
 
 
 
-: 38 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Object  of  the  Revised  Policy;  Did  it  serve  the  public        

interest 

Without  prejudice  to  the  above,  the  membership  in 

Membership Drive-II was on the basis of the changed policy 

i.e age wise seniority. The object of the policy was not to 

provide shelter to the shelter less nor to support families of 

employees or officials who laid down their lives. It was also 

not  to  support  the  employees  who  are  injured  or  disabled 

while performing their duties. It was certainly not the object 

of  the  policy  to  encourage  or  reward  such  employees  who 

may  have  acted  or  performed  functions  beyond  the  call  of 

duty,  nor  to  encourage  those  who  may  have  demonstrably 

contributed to good governance. The sole object appears to 

have  been  to  extend  extraordinary  pecuniary  benefits  to  a 

few selected senior bureaucrats and judges of the Supreme 

Court,  Islamabad  High  Court  and  the  District  courts  of  the 

Islamabad  Capital  territory.  The  membership  is  open 

regardless of performance, contribution to good governance 

or  dispensation  of 

justice.  Even 

low  performing  or 

incompetent  employees  or  judges  are  eligible  to  avail  the 

extraordinary  benefits.  The  object  of  the  scheme  was, 

therefore,  not  to  advance  public  interest.  There  were  no 

clearly  defined  objective  or  purpose  of  approving  the 

Revised Policy except to benefit a few.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 39 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

It  appears  from  the  record  that  the  object  of  the 

Revised  Policy  was  to  benefit  a  newly  created  club  of 

senior  bureaucrats  registered  through  the  launching  of 

Membership  Drive  II  and  serving/retired  judges  and  Chief 

Justices  of  the  Supreme  Court,  judges  of  the  Islamabad 

High Court and District Courts Islamabad.  

Enrichment  of  a  few  at  the  expense  of  loss  to  the 

exchequer and the people at large  

The registered members, after paying the registration 

fee  and  the  determined  cost,  are  eligible  upon  selection  by 

the  FGEHA  to  allotment  of  a  plot  having  a  significantly 

higher market price. The allotment provides an allottee with 

an  instant  opportunity  of  substantial  financial  enrichment. 

The  land  vests  in  the  state  since  it  has  been  acquired 

through  the  intrusive  inherent  power  of  forcible  land 

acquisition.  A  plot  measuring  500  sq  yds.  costs  a  member 

less  than  Rs  5  million  while  its  estimated  market  value  is 

more than Rs 50 million. The difference should be earned by 

the  exchequer  but  in  this  case  it  goes  into  the  pockets  of 

those with no vested right. 

According  to  the  Revised  Policy,  the  preselected 

members who got themselves registered in the Membership 

Drive-II are entitled to be allocated plots in the most prized 

sectors of the Master Plan of the Capital i.e sectors F-14 and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 40 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

F-15.  More  than  140,000  members  registered  in  the  two 

membership  drives  have  yet  to  be  accommodated.  The 

Federal  Government,  through  the  Revised  Policy,  has  also 

approved  the  allocation  of  two  additional  prime  sectors  i.e 

sectors  G-12  and  F-12  in  order  to  accommodate  some  of 

the  registered  members.  It  is  noted  that  the  CDA  had 

initiated 

the  acquisition  proceedings  under 

the  CDA 

Ordinance and awards were announced in April and June of 

1985  respectively  regarding  both  these  sectors.  They  were 

to be developed by the CDA and offered for sale as plots to 

the general public through auction. We have been informed 

that,  after  deduction  of  the  cost  of  acquisition  of  land  and 

development,  the  exchequer  earns  an  estimated  revenue 

between  Rs  250  to  300  billion  per  sector  if  the  residential 

and commercial plots are sold to the general public through 

auction.  It  is  mandatory  under  the  CDA  Ordinance  and  the 

applicable  regulations  to  offer  plots  for  sale  to  the  general 

public  through  public  auction.  The  enormous  profit  earned 

goes to the exchequer and is then spent on the welfare and 

well  being  of  the  general  public.  The  four  prime  sectors, 

according  to  the  Master  Plan  and  the  scheme  of  the  CDA 

Ordinance, were required to be developed and sold through 

auction  to  the  general  public.  The  allocation  of  the 

aforementioned 

four  prime  sectors 

for  the  exclusive 

distribution  amongst  a 

few  bureaucrats, 

judges  and 

members of other specified groups for less than the market 

price has profound consequences for the actual stakeholders 

 
 
-: 41 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

i.e the people of Pakistan. It is estimated that it is likely to 

cause  a  loss  of  more  than  rupees  one  trillion  to  the 

exchequer.  This  loss  to  the  exchequer  is  the  personal 

enrichment and windfall gain of the few beneficiaries of the 

FGEHA.  The  general  public  will  be  forced  to  purchase  plots 

from  the  beneficiaries  of  the  FGEHA  at  market  prices.  The 

policy  and  the  scheme  of  FGEHA,  therefore,  causes 

enormous loss to the exchequer and the people of Pakistan 

and  is  obviously  in  derogation  of  public  interest.  Moreover, 

the  state  has  no  commitment  with  the  members  of  the 

FGEHA  to  provide  a  plot  or  to  extend  an  opportunity  of 

financial  enrichment  or  of  making  windfall  gains.  When  we 

asked the Secretary of Housing and Works and the Director 

General  of  the  FGEHA  to  justify  the  enormous  loss  to  the 

exchequer  and  the  resultant  personal  enrichment  of  a  few 

beneficiaries, they had no plausible explanation.  

It  is  noted  that,  according  to  credible  official  sources 

and  reports,  the  total  debt  and  liabilities  in  September  last 

year were Rs 50.5 trillion while the external debt was US $ 

127  billion.  The  additional  debt  that  is  added  per  day  is  Rs 

17  billion.  The  debt  and  liabilities  per  capita  is  Rs  227,000 

per  citizen.  The  percentage  of  population  living  below  the 

poverty  line  is  estimated  to  be  40  %  which  is  about  90 

million citizens. The population exposed to food insecurity is 

38%.  The  percentage  of  stunted  children  under  five  is  

38%. 32 % i.e 22.8 million children aged between 5 and 16 

 
 
 
 
-: 42 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

years are out of school. Health facilities are not available to 

a  large  section  of  the  population.  In  such  circumstances, 

can an enormous loss to the exchequer and the enrichment 

of a few powerful elite, through the execution of the Revised 

Policy,  be  justified  or  permitted  constitutionally?  We  are 

afraid that the answer is an emphatic no. The Revised Policy 

and the scheme, as conceived from its inception, amounted 

to usurpation of the constitutionally guaranteed rights of the 

people,  particularly  those  who  are  compelled  to  suffer  the 

most because of  bad governance and flawed policies of the 

state.  The  scheme  and  the  Revised  Policy  is,  therefore,  in 

gross  violation  of  the  public  interest  and,  thus,  ultra  vires 

the  FGEHA  Act  and  unconstitutional.  The  preamble  of  the 

Constitution  promises  each  citizen  that  fundamental  rights 

shall  be  guaranteed, 

including  equal  status,  equal 

opportunity  and  equality  before  the  law.  It  also  promises 

social and economic justice. Article 3 commits that the State 

shall  ensure  elimination  of  exploitation  and  the  gradual 

fulfillment of the fundamental principle, from each according 

to  his/her  ability  to  each  according  to  work.  Article  38 

explicitly  provides  that  the  State  shall  secure  the  wellbeing 

of the people by preventing the concentration of wealth and 

distribution in the hands of a few. The assets made through 

exercising  the  power  of  forcible  acquisition  belong  to  the 

people  and  they  cannot  be  deprived  of  their  benefits 

through elite capture.      

 
 
-: 43 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Elite Capture  

The policy governing the scheme and the decisions of 

the Federal Cabinet appear to be in the nature of advancing 

elite capture and in disregard to the wellbeing and welfare 

of  the  people  at  large  and  their  constitutionally  guaranteed 

rights.  The  expression  'elite'  has  been  defined  in  the 

literature  of  the  World  Bank  as 

'actors  who  have 

disproportionate  influence  in  the  development  process  as  a 

result of their superior, social, political or economic status'. 

Likewise  'elite  capture'  has  been  defined  as  referring  'to  a 

situation  where  elites  shape  development  processes 

according  to  their  own  priorities  and/or  appropriate 

development 

resources 

for  private  gain".  Exercising 

disproportionate  control  over  policy  decisions  at  the 

expense of the interests of the public at large is an essential 

attribute  of 

the  phenomenon  of  elite  capture.  The 

phenomenon  deprives  the  people  at  large  from  equitable 

distribution  of  state  assets  and,  consequently,  a  few  elite 

enrich  themselves  at  the  expense  of  the  welfare  and 

wellbeing  of  the  citizens.  The  scheme  of  FGEHA,  its 

beneficiaries, the Revised Policy and the likely consequences 

of  its  execution  have  all  the  attributes  of  an  elite  capture. 

The  other  astonishing  aspect  of  the  Revised  Policy  is  the 

approval  given  by  the  Federal  Cabinet  to  evolve  a  system 

 
 
 
 
-: 44 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

similar to the Army/Defence model. There is no explanation 

regarding that model and how it is permissible in the light of 

the  mandate  of  the  Constitution.  The  manner  in  which  the 

FGEHA Act is being enforced through the Revised Policy and 

the  resultant  scheme  is  a  classic  example  of  elite  capture 

and is thus unconstitutional and illegal. 

Conflict of Interest  

The  next  question  raised  in  one  of  the  petitions  is 

regarding  conflict  of  interest.  The  Executive  Board  has 

approved the eligibility of its members and pursuant thereto 

they  were  also  allotted  plots  in  the  scheme  launched  in 

sectors  F-14  and  F-15.  The  expression  „conflict  of  interest‟ 

has  been  defined  in  the  Black‟s  Law  Dictionary,  Eighth 

Edition as follows.- 

“Conflict  of 

interest.  1.  A  real  or  seeming 

incompatibility  between  one’s  private  interests  and 

one’s  public  or  fiduciary  duties.  2.  A  real  or  seeming 

incompatibility  between  the  interests  of  two  of  a 

lawyer’s  clients,  such  that  the  lawyer  is  disqualified 

from 

representing  both 

clients 

if 

the  dual 

representation  adversely  affects  either  client  or  if  the 

clients  do  not  consent.  See  Model  Rules  of  Prof’1 

Conduct 1.7(a). [Cases: Attorney and Client – 20.1.]” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 45 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

It  would  also  be  instructive  to  quote  from  the  book 

„Conflict  of  Interest  in  the  Professions',  edited  by  Michael 

Davis  and  Andrew  Stark  (New  York:  Oxford  University 

Press, 2001). The relevant portions are as follows.- 

“A  conflict  of  interest  is  a  situation  in  which  some 

person  P  (whether  an  individual  or  corporate  body) 

stands  in  a  certain  relation  to  one  or  more  decisions. 

On  the  standard  view,  P  has  a  conflict  of  interest  if, 

and  only  if,  (1)  P  is  in  a  relationship  with  another 

requiring P to exercise judgment in the other’s behalf 

and (2) P has a (special) interest tending to interfere 

with  the  proper  exercise  of 

judgment 

in  that 

relationship.  The  crucial  terms  in  the  standard  view 

are  “relationship,”  “judgment,”  “Interest,”  and  proper 

exercise.”..............................................................

.............“The relationship required must, however, be 

fiduciary;  that  is,  it  must  involve  one  person  trusting 

(or,  at  least,  being  entitled  to  trust)  another  to  do 

something for her – exercise judgment in her service.” 

“On  the  standard  view,  an  interest  is  any  influence, 

loyalty,  concern,  emotion,  or  other  feature  of  a 

situation  tending  to  make  P’s  judgment  (in  that 

situation)  less  reliable  than  it  would  normally  be, 

without tendering P incompetent.” 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 46 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

It  is  obvious  from  the  definition  of  the  expression 

„conflict  of  interest‟  that  the  existence  of  actual  pecuniary 

gain  or  pecuniary  loss  is  not  essential,  nor  actual  proof  in 

this  regard  would  be  required.  It  refers  to  a  principle 

envisaging the prevention of a present or future or potential 

situation  which  may  lead  to  extending  a  benefit  to  oneself 

or  to  another  person.  As  has  been  explained  above,  the 

Revised  Policy  and  the  execution  of  the  scheme  offers 

enormous  financial  enrichment  to  the  beneficiaries.  This 

pecuniary  interest  disqualifies  a  person  from  becoming  a 

beneficiary  because  of  the  existence  of  conflict  of  interest. 

Such a conflict of interest is obvious, particularly in the case 

of  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  because  of  their 

pivotal decision making power and status under the FGEHA 

Act.  The  Executive  Board  is  also  the  appellate  forum  under 

the  FGEHA  Act.  As  will  be  discussed  later,  the  issue  of 

conflict of interest is not confined to the Executive Board.   

Independence  and 

impartiality  of  the 

judiciary;  

         Has it been undermined? 

The learned counsel for FGEHA, Mr Mohammad Akram 

Sheikh,  Sr  ASC,  has  laid  great  stress  on  the  need  for  the 

Court  to  exercise  restraint.  He  was  of  the  opinion  that  by 

adjudicating  the  matter  in  hand,  the  Court  was  likely  to 

scandalize the judiciary. We are afraid that this argument is 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 47 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

fallacious and misconceived.  

The FGHEA is one of the major litigation parties before 

this  Court  and  the  District  courts  of  the  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory.  Its  status  as  a  litigation  party  before  the  august 

Supreme Court is also not denied. The nature of litigation by 

or  against  it  is  varied  and,  inter  alia,  involves  disputes 

relating to the acquisition of land or grievances of registered 

members, contractors etc. It may be a coincidence that the 

Supreme  Court,  Islamabad  High  Court  and  the  District 

Courts of Islamabad have been expressly included as one of 

the specified groups for the purposes of availing the benefits 

of a scheme under the FGEHA Act. But, as noted, the latter 

is  one  of  the  major  litigation  parties  before  these  three 

categories  of  courts  and  it  is  likely  to  create  a  perception, 

though  it  may  not  be  true,  that  inclusion  of  these  three 

categories of courts as specified groups may not have been 

for  bonafide  reasons.  Justice  should  not  only  be  done  but 

should  manifestly  appear  to  have  been  done.  Like  Federal 

Government  servants  or  other  employees,  judges  of  the 

superior  courts  have  no  vested  right  to  claim  a  plot  in  a 

scheme  launched  by  the  FGEHA  because  no  such  privilege 

or entitlement has been included in the Presidential Orders. 

The most grave violations of fundamental rights have been 

committed  by  public  functionaries  during  land  acquisition 

proceedings  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  They  have 

been  highlighted  by  this  Court  in  the  judgment,  dated  14-

 
 
 
-: 48 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

06-2021, passed in Writ Petition No.244/2018 titled “Noman 

Ahmad  and  14  others  v.  Capital  Development  Authority, 

etc.”.  The  FGEHA  is  a  major  litigation  party  in  land 

acquisition  cases.  The  cases  are  dealt  with  by  the 

aforementioned  three  categories  of  Courts.  The  pecuniary 

benefit and windfall gains of the beneficiaries of a scheme of 

the  FGEHA  and  the  loss  caused  to  the  exchequer  has 

already  been  discussed.  All  these  factors  raise  questions 

regarding  conflict  of  interest  for  the  judges  and  the  courts 

when  they  accept  becoming  part  of  the  exclusive  club  for 

enjoying  the  benefits  of  a  scheme  launched  by  the  FGEHA. 

It  has  profound  consequences  in  the  context  of  the 

confidence of the people in the administration of justice and 

its impartiality.                     

The  privileges  and  entitlements  of  judges  of  the 

Supreme  Court  and  High  Courts  are  described  in  the 

relevant  Presidential  Order.  Like  a  civil  servant  or  other 

Federal  Government  employee,  a  judge  of  the  Supreme 

Court  or  High  Court  has  no  right  nor  entitlement  to  a  plot 

costing less than its  market value. The FGEHA Act does not 

entitle  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  or  a  High  Court  to 

become  a  beneficiary  in  a  scheme  unless  the  said 

constitutional bodies are declared and notified as one of the 

'specified  groups'  by  the  Executive  Board  or  the  Federal 

Government.  

 
 
 
 
-: 49 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

A person holding the office of a judge, whether in the 

Supreme Court, High Court or even District courts, enjoys a 

very  exalted  status.  The  expectation  of  the  people  from 

them is much more than from any other office holder. They 

are  not  Federal  Government  employees  nor  employees  of 

autonomous  bodies.  They  cannot  put  themselves  in  a 

position of adversarial nature against the citizens. They hold 

an  exalted  office  to  serve  the  people.  The  FGEHA  and  the 

Federal  Government,  by  including  the  three  categories  as 

specified  groups,  has  relegated  them  to  the  status  of 

members  for  claiming  benefits  as  per  the  decisions  of  the 

Executive  Board.  They  have  been  treated  as  registered 

members  of  Membership  Drive-II.  The  registered  members 

of  Membership  Drive-I  are  at  loggerheads  and  litigating  for 

their  rights  and,  resultantly,  judges  have  also  become  a 

party 

to 

the 

litigation.  The  extraordinary 

treatment 

extended to the  Supreme Court, Islamabad High Court and 

the District Courts of Islamabad as specified groups in itself 

raises questions.  

Article  10  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human 

Rights describes  that everyone is entitled in full equality to 

a  fair  and  public  hearing  by  an  independent  and  impartial 

tribunal. The International Covenant on Civil Political Rights 

declares that everyone shall be entitled to a fair and public 

hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal. 

In order to maintain impartiality and independence, a judge 

 
 
 
 
-: 50 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

must  not  only  be  able  but  must  also  be  seen  to  be  acting 

without any restriction, influence, pressure, or interference, 

direct or indirect. Constitutional courts are guardians of the 

rights  of  the  people.  The  confidence  of  the  people  in  the 

independence and impartiality of the judges is of paramount 

importance.  In  the  words  of  Lord  Denning  M.R,  "Justice  is 

rooted  in  confidence,  and  confidence  is  destroyed  when 

right  minded  people  go  away  thinking,  the  Judge  was 

biased". Two most important principles are firmly embedded 

in  our  jurisprudence  i.e  no  one  can  be  a  judge  in  his  own 

cause  and  that  justice  should  not  only  be  done  but  should 

manifestly  and  undoubtedly  appear  to  have  been  done. 

These  principles  are  the  cornerstones  of  impartiality  and 

independence  of 

the  courts. 

It 

is  even  otherwise 

inappropriate  for  the  executive  organ  of  the  State  to  lower 

the exalted status of the office of a judge by subjecting it to 

regulations of a housing scheme merely for its membership 

and  the  resultant  benefits.  Moreover,  a  judge  or  a  Court 

cannot  become  part  of  any  scheme  that  has  profound 

consequences  for  the  exchequer  and  is  contrary  to  the 

public 

interest. 

It  undermines 

the 

impartiality  and 

independence of judges and the courts.  

We  are,  therefore,  of  the  opinion  that  in  the  light  of 

the  above  discussion,  participation  of  a  Court  or  its  judges 

in  any  scheme  of  the  FGEHA  or  accepting  its  benefits  are 

contrary  to  the  public  interest  and  not  in  conformity  with 

 
 
 
-: 51 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

the  impartiality  and  independence  of  the  judiciary  as  an 

institution.  The  inclusion  of  the  aforementioned  courts  and 

its  judges  by  the  FGEHA,  and  that  too  in  the  absence  of  a 

full  court  decision,  was  inappropriate  and  not  in  conformity 

with the constitutional status of these exalted courts. It was 

definitely not permissible under the Constitution for a judge 

or a court to be seen as usurping the fundamental rights of 

the  people  at  large  and  become  complacent  to  a  policy 

formulated in breach of public interest.                                                                 

E.  Does  judicial  review  of  the  Revised  Policy  amount  to  suo 

motu proceedings ?    

7.             Mr Mohammad Akram Sheikh, Sr ASC, has argued that by 

questioning  the  legality  and  constitutionality  of  the  policies  and  the 

Revised  Policy,  we  have  transgressed  our  jurisdiction  by  acting  suo 

motu.  As  already  discussed,  the  sole  question  involved  in  the  Intra 

Court Appeal and the petitions in hand was regarding the legality of the 

policy  governing  the  scheme  launched  by  the  FGEHA  in  sectors  F-14 

and  F-15.  The  Revised  Policy  implicitly  acknowledged  that  the  earlier 

policy  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  public  interest.  The 

policy  was  challenged  before  us  and,  therefore,  as  a  Constitutional 

Court we could not have turned a blind eye to the serious violations of 

constitutionally guaranteed rights of the public at large. The exercise of 

the  power  of  judicial  review  was  confined  to  examining  the  policy 

related  to  the  proceedings  before  us.  Moreover,  as  a  Constitutional 

Court we are not barred from moulding the relief in appropriate cases. 

 
 
 
 
-: 52 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

We are sure that the learned counsel did not mean to suggest that, as a 

Constitutional  Court,  we  ought  to  have  turned  a  blind  eye  to  gross 

violations of constitutional rights of the public at large and derogation of 

public  interest  when  it  had  become  obvious  during  the  proceedings 

before us. The 40% population which lives below the poverty line  does 

not  have  access  to  the  courts.  They  suffer  without  recourse  to  a 

remedy.  When  their  rights  are  involved  in  a  matter  before  a 

constitutional court, it becomes the latter‟s duty to protect them.     

F. 

Is  the  policy  of  the  executive  justiciable  while  exercising 

jurisdiction under the Constitution? 

8. 

As  noted  above,  the  controversy  is  solely  regarding  the 

policy relating to the launching of a scheme under the FGEHA Act and, 

pursuant  thereto,  the  distribution  of  plots  amongst  the  registered 

members of the FGEHA. We have already discussed the policy in great 

detail and have concluded that, rather than serving the public interest, 

its  execution  will  lead  to  grave  violations  of  the  fundamental  rights  of 

the  public  at  large.  It  will  enrich  a  few  members  of  the  powerful  and 

privileged  classes  at  the  expense  of  enormous  loss  to  the  people  and 

the exchequer. There is no cavil to the proposition that it is settled law 

that courts exercise restraint relating to policies of the executive except 

when  it  can  be  shown  that  fundamental  rights  have  been  violated. 

Policy making is definitely within the exclusive domain of the executive 

and interference in such domain is generally not the function of a Court.  

In  the  case  titled  “Punjab  Public  Service  Commission  and  another  v. 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 53 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Mst.  Aisha Nawaz and others” [2011 SCMR 1602] the august Supreme 

Court has held that the policy of the executive cannot be interfered with 

unless  it  is  shown  that  such  policy  was  violative  of  the  fundamental 

rights. In the case titled “Abdul Karim Nausherwani and another v. The 

State  through  Chief  Ehtesab  Commissioner”  [2015  SCMR  397]  it  has 

been observed and held as follows.-  

“True that elected governments are required to follow 

the policy once  formulated by it for the benefit of  public  at 

large  but  policy  cannot  be  placed  on  high  pedestal  than  a 

binding  law  more  so,  such  policies  are  framed  and 

formulated so that the public at large get the benefit of the 

same.  If  at  any  point  of  time  the  policy  becomes  neck 

breaker  or  absolute  hurdle  to  manage  the  crises  like 

situation where public at large is the victim of the policy in a 

newly emerged situation, then such government has a right 

and privilege to make a departure from the policy and even 

to suitably amend the same. ” 

It is observed and held by the apex Court in the case titled 

“OGRA through Secretary v. Messrs Midway II, CNG Station and others” 

[2014 SCMR 220] that the courts exercise judicial restraint in matters of 

Government policy except where fundamental rights are violated. In the 

case  titled  “Watan  Party  and  another  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and 

others” [PLD 3012 SC 167] the apex Court has reiterated that a policy 

is  not  justiciable  unless  shown  to  be  malafide  or  in  violation  of  the 

fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution to the citizens of 

the  country.  In  the  case  titled  “Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa 

through  Secy.  Agriculture  and  others  v.  Adnanullah”  [2017  PLC  (CS) 

307] the august Supreme Court has observed that the executive cannot 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 54 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

adopt  a  policy  of  cherry  picking.  In  the  case  titled  “Dr.  Akhtar  Hassan 

Khan  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others”  [2012  SCMR 

455]  the  august  Supreme  Court  has  observed  and  held  that  courts 

ordinarily  exercise  restraint  from  interfering  with  the  policy  making 

domain of the executive unless it smacks from arbitrariness, favouritism 

and in total disregard of the mandate of law. In the case titled “Shahid 

Pervaiz  v.  Ejaz  Ahmad  and  others”  [2017  SCMR  206]  the  apex  Court 

has  affirmed  the  earlier  judgments  wherein  it  was  held  that  policy 

making is the domain of the executive and that the courts normally do 

not  interfere  in  such  matters  but,  when  the  policy  is  violative  of  the 

fundamental  rights  of  individuals,  the  courts  are  obliged  to  examine 

such policy in judicial review. The judgments in the cases titled “Ghulam 

Rasool  v.  Government  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Establishment 

Division  Islamabad  and  others”[PLD  2015  SC  6],  “Dossani  Travels  Pvt. 

Ltd. and others v. Messrs Travels Shop (Pvt) Ltd and others” [PLD 2014 

SC 1], “OGRA through Secretary v. Messrs Midway II, CNG Station and 

others” [2014 PTD 243], “OGRA through Secretary v. Messrs Midway II, 

CNG  Station  and  others”  [2014  SCMR  220],“Executive  District  Officer 

(Revenue),  District  Khushab  at  Jauharabad  and  others  v.  Ijaz  Hussain 

and  others”  [2011  SCMR  1864],“Messrs  Al-Raham  Travels  and  Tours 

(Pvt.)  Ltd.  and  others  v.  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs,  Hajj,  Zakat  and 

Ushr  through  Secretary  and  others”  [2011  SCMR  1621],  “Suo  Motu 

Case  No.  10  of  2007”  [PLD  2008  SC  673]  and  “Wattan  Party  through 

President  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Cabinet  Committee  of 

Privatization,  Islamabad  and  others”  [PLD  2006  SC  697]  were  referred 

to.  It  is,  therefore,  obvious  that  a  policy  can  be  examined  while 

 
 
-: 55 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

exercising judicial review and interfered with if it is found to be violative 

of fundamental rights or in derogation of public interest. 

G. 

Conclusion; 

9. 

The above discussion has made it obvious that the policies, 

particularly  the  Revised  Policy  and  the  nature  of  the  scheme  launched 

by the FGEHA,  instead of serving the public interest, is violative of the 

constitutionally guaranteed rights of the public at large. The institutions 

and  persons  who  are  the  intended  beneficiaries,  whether  Federal 

Government  employees  or  the  judges,  exist  and  hold  offices  solely  to 

serve  the  actual  stake  holders  i.e  the  people  of  Pakistan.  They  owe  a 

fiduciary duty towards the people to serve them solely in their interest. 

Public  office  holders  cannot  create  any  interest  in  their  own  favour  in 

derogation to the welfare and wellbeing of the people. Regrettably, the 

scheme discussed above and the Revised Policy governing it is contrary 

to  the  public  interest  and  grossly  in  violation  of  the  constitutionally 

guaranteed rights of the people at large. The attributes of elite capture 

and  conflict  of  interest  are  obvious.  The  enrichment  of  a  few  powerful 

elite  at  the  cost  of  enormous  loss  to  the  exchequer  and  the  people  of 

Pakistan  is  unimaginable  in  a  society  governed  under  the  Constitution. 

The Prime Minister and his cabinet appear to have been kept in the dark 

regarding the profound consequences highlighted above. As elected and 

chosen  representatives  they  are  only  empowered  to  frame  and 

formulate policies in the best interest of the people at large and in the 

public  interest,  rather  than  providing  opportunities  to  a  few  powerful 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 56 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

elite to make windfall gains in derogation to public interest. The scheme 

of  the  FGEHA,  the  Revised  Policy  and  the  consequences,  if  executed, 

are unconstitutional and bereft of jurisdiction. The executive authorities 

are  not  vested  with  jurisdiction  to  formulate  or  frame  a  policy  that  is 

contrary to public interest.  

10. 

We, therefore, hold and declare as follows; 

(i).  The FGEHA nor the Federal Government is vested with 

power or jurisdiction under the FGEHA Act or the CDA 

Ordinance, as the case may be, to launch a scheme or 

frame a policy which is contrary to the public interest 

and  violative  of  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights 

of the people at large.  

(ii).  A  scheme  launched  by  the  FGEHA,  pursuant  to  a 

policy 

framed  by  the  Federal  Government,  will 

withstand  Constitutional  scrutiny  if  it  benefits  the 

people at large rather than benefiting and enriching a 

few powerful classes.  

(iii).  The assets of the State acquired through the inherent 

intrusive  power  of  eminent  domain  can  only  be  used 

for the benefit of the people at large and in the public 

interest.  

 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 57 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

(iv).  The  Revised  Policy  and  the  scheme  pursuant  thereto, 

intended  to  be  launched  in  sectors  F-12,  G-12,  F-14 

and  F-15,  are  in  derogation  of  public  interest  and 

violative  of  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  of 

the  people  at 

large.  Thus 

they  are 

illegal, 

unconstitutional, void and without jurisdiction.  

(v).  The  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Works  shall 

place this judgment before the Federal Cabinet i.e the 

worthy  Prime  Minister  and  its  members  within  two 

weeks.  They  are  expected  to  formulate  and  frame 

policies  in  future  in  the  context  of  schemes  launched 

under  the  FGEHA  Act  or  the  CDA  Ordinance,  as  the 

case may be, having regard to the observations made 

herein. 

(vi).  The Federal Government is expected to formulate and 

frame policies for development of sectors F-12, G-12, 

F-14  and  F-15  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  general 

public  and  in  public  interest,  rather  than  enriching  a 

few elites at the expense of the exchequer.  

(vii).  This  judgment  shall  not  in  any  manner  prejudice, 

interfere with or disturb the rights accrued in favour of 

property owners who were affected on account of the 

acquisition proceedings relating to sectors G-12, F-12, 

F-14 and F-15. 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 58 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

11. 

In the  light of the  above declarations, granting  the prayers 

and writs sought in the Intra Court Appeal, petitions in hand as well as 

the  petition  of  the  respondents  in  the  Intra  Court  Appeal,  would  be 

contrary to public interest, unconstitutional and violative of the rights of 

the public at large. Consequently, the Intra Court Appeal, petition filed 

by  respondents  arrayed  therein  and  the  petitions  in  hand  are 

accordingly dismissed.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

     JUDGE 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Announced in the open Court on 03-02-2022. 

    JUDGE 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Approved for reporting.  

Luqman Khan/* 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 59 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Annexure-A 

Sr. No. 

Case No. and title 

1.   

2.   

3.   

4.   

5.   

6.   

7.   

8.   

9.   

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

ICA  No.527/2016  “Federal  Government  Employees 
Housing  Foundation  &  another  v.  Ednan  Syed  and 
others” 

W.P.  No.3573/2021  “Fazal  Subhan  &  46  others  v. 
Federation of Pakistan and another” 

W.P.  No.3427/2021  “Umar  Farooq  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan and another” 

W.P. No.3428/2021 “Najeeb Ur Rehman v. Federation 
of Pakistan & another” 

W.P. No.3421/2021 “Naem Ullah Bhatti v. Federation 
of Pakistan and others” 

W.P.  No.3222/2021  “Muhammad  Abdul  Basir  v. 
Federation of Pakistan & another”  

W.P.  No.3145/2021 
Federation of Pakistan and another” 

“Shahid  Anwar  Khan  v. 

W.P.  No.  3237/2021  “Muhammad  Tarik  Saeed  Hijazi 
and others v. Federation of Pakistan and another” 

W.P.  No.3254/2021  “Mian  Shabbir  Anwer  and 
another v. Federation of Pakistan and another”  

 W.P.  No.3893/2021  “Muhammad  Aslam  v.  Executive 
Board and others” 

 W.P.  No.3647/2021 
Federation of Pakistan and another”  

“Shair  Bahadur  Khan  v. 

 W.P.  No.3756/2021  “Muhammad  Siddique  Sajid  and 
another v. Federation of Pakistan and another”   

 W.P.  No.3422/2021  “Mst  Razia  Sultana  Taher  v. 
Federation of Pakistan and another” 

*_*_*_*_*_*_*_* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 60 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

Annexure-B 

 
 
 
-: 61 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 62 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

 
 
 
-: 63 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 64 :- 
ICANo.527/2016 

 
 
 
