Judsment Sheet

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAD

Crl. Mlsc. N0.682-8 of 2O11

Aftaz Mehmood

VS

The State etc.

Petitioner  bg:
State by:

Respondent  No.2 bg:
Date of decbion:

Mr. Sqhah Mohgntddtn Khan, Adrncate
KhdutaJa  Jqted lqbal, standlng counsel
Janted Tanoli, ASI uttth record.
Mr. Artf Mehmood, Adtncate
30-77-2077

SHAUKAT  AZIZ SIDDIOUI' J: Petitioner  Afraz Mehmood

seeks bail after arrest in Case FIR No.215, dated.25.07.2011,

offence  under  section 302/LOg PPC, registered  at Police Station

Bahrakahu,  District, Islamabad.
2. 

Briefly,  the prosecution story as gleans out from the

FIR is that complainant, Ashiq Hussain through an application

addressed to SHO, stated  that he is resident of Azad  Kashmir

and his real brother namely, Maqsood Khan, (deceased)  aged

about 36 years was married, having two sons and three
daughters,  was doing his job in the Holy Family Hospital,

Rawalpindi.  He further stated that, Ifraheem, slo Muhammad

Hussain (real brother of the present petitioner)  is their relative

who is residing in "Nai Abadi, Bahrakah".  That on 23.04.2011,  he

brought brother of the complainant  Maqsood Khan to Nai Abadi,

Bahrakahu  and in the morning of 24.04.20tt he received

information  from the Holy Family Hospital that his brother

Maqsood Khan had died. On this information he reached  at Holy

2 CrI. ltitisc. No.682-B  of 2O11.

Family Hospital from where he acquired knowledge  that dead

body of his brother  had been taken to PIMS Hospital by the

Police of Bahrakahu,  Police Station. He further  states that Doctor

of the Holy Family  Hospital showed suspicion about the torture

inflicted upon the body of his brother as his brother was not

suffering  from any ailment.  He fufther mentioned that he got

conducted the postmortem and made the statement that he

would make his statement  after the postmortem  examination.

The complainant  however,  explains that on receipt  of the report

of the Chemical  Examiner he came to know that death of his

brother was due to result of poisoning.  He alleges  that Ifraheen

in connivance  with his brothers  Afraz (present  petitioner)  and
Naeem  administered  poison to his brother.  Motive of the

occurrence advanced by the complainant  is that his brother,

Shakir  gave an amount of Rs:2,10,000/-  for taking him abroad

but after three  months, he was sent back to Pakistan. Deceased

used to demand  that amount from Ifraheem.
3. 

The petitioner applied for bail after arrest before the

learned  Sessions Judge,  Islamabad  who entrusted the same  to

Additional Sessions judge. The request  of the bail was declined

by the learned ASJ vide impugned order dated.31.10.2011.
4. 
that from the contents of the FIR, the death of the deceased

The learned  counsel for the petitioner  has argued

appears to be shrouded  in mystery.  The complainant himself was

not certain  about the cause of death, therefore,  h€ 
deferred  the statement  till the conduct of postmortem  and

firstly

thereafter waited till receipt of the report of Chemical  Examiner.

The learned counse!  submits that no Source whatsoever,  has

been mentioned by the complainant with regard to acquiring any

J Crl. Misc.  Ii[o. 82-B of 2O11.

knowledge  about the occurrence  and about the mannerism in

which it has taken place. The learned counsel  for the petitioner

fufther  submits that even if the prosecution  story is taken  as

gospel truth, even then no specific role has been ascribed  to the

present  petitioner  except of abatement  which  makes  the case of

the petitioner one of further  enquiry and probe and makes  him

entitle to the concession of bail as envisaged under Section 497

(2) Cr. P.C. The learned  counsel for the petitioner placed reliance

on the following  case law, Ibrahim  and others VS The State,

2009 SCMR 407, Muhammad  lamil VS Shaukat Ali, 1996  SCMR

1685, 2002 MLD 1151, Malik Muhammad Ishaq VS The State

and others,2011 SCMR  1350,  Maulana  Abdul AzizYs. The State,

2009 SCMR L2t0, Ghulam  Sarwar and others VS Sajid Ullah and

others, 2005 SCMR  1054, Abaid-ur-Rehman VS The State,  1989

MLD 4188  (Lahore) and Mehar Din VS Nazar Hussain and 03

others, 1979 SCMR  351.
5.  Conversely, the learned  counsel for the complainant
assisted by the Iearned standing counsel submits  that although

no direct evidence  or material is available on the file to connect

the petitioner  with the commission  of the alleged  offence, except

the statement  of the complainant  but since the offence  falls with

the prohibitory clause of 497 Cr. P.C, therefore,  the concession

of bai! may be withheld more  particularly when challan has

already been submitted before the Court. He further  submits

that the co-accused of the present petitioner  who are his real

brother  are absconding, therefore,  the petitioner  is not entitled

to the concession  of the bail.
6. 

I  have heard the arguments of learned counsels  and

perused the record.

4 Crl. Misc. I{o.682-B of 2O11,,

7.  There is inordinate delay of three months in Iodging  the

FIR which has not been reasonably explained.  On the contrdrY,

the conduct of the complainant  and local police is not only

dubious but enigmatic  as well. The record reveals  that petitioner

remained on physical remand  spreading  over ten days  and

during this period  nothing incriminating was recovered from the

person of the petitioner, to connect  him with the commission of

the alleged  offence,  even prima-facie.  By mentioning  the name

of any accused  after due deliberations  spread  over a period of

three months, prima-facie,  makes the case of the prosecution

highly doubtful and it is well settled Iaw with the mandate of the

dictums of the superior courts of the country that benefit of

doubt even at bail stage has to be extended  to the accused. It is

also a well settled  law by now, that abscontion  of any member of

the family cannot be made  basis  of withholding  the concession of

bail when case of any accused  clearly falls within the ambit of

Section  497 (2) Cr. P.C. It has been held time and again by the

Superior Courts  that commencement  of trail does not come in

the way of exercising discretion,  to grant  bail when any accused

person successfully  been able to bring his case within  the ambit

of further enquiry. Reliance in this regard is being placed on the

case of Muhammad  Ismail VS Muhammad  Rafiq  and another,

reported  as PLD 1989 SC, 585. The question of the liberty of the

citizens has been jealously  safeguarded  by the Superior  Courts
of the Country, therefore, instant petition is allowed. The
petitioner  is admitted to bail subject to furnishing of bail bonds

to the tune of Rs:2,00,000/-  with one surety in the like amount

to the satisfaction of the trial court.

5 CrI. Mi*c.  1,Io.682-B  of 2O11.

(>' u

B. 

Before parting with the judgment, I may add that

courts of District are expected to be dynamic in their approach

while administering justice instead of causal appreciation and by
acting in a  mechanical fashion. The justification for the
curtailment of the liberty of any accused/citizen  must be

convincing,  indoctrinate,  logical, suborn and in consonance  with

the law laid down by the Superior  Courts of the Country, rather

than travelling on conjecture,  suppositions, surmises  and feigned

reasoning.

(SH

AZtZ STDDTQUT)

Judge

Approv ed for Reporfin  g.

"Wadar  Ahmed" 
qlu suPadil

.

Form No: HCJDIC'LZL.

ORDER SHEET

1*O

TNI T!.{

EI

qI

AVIAEIAN  HIGIJ  (^NI IPT TEI AMAEIAN
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

Cr!. Misc. No. 682-8 of 2011.

Afraz  Mehmood
VS
The State etc.

S. No. of
orderl
proceedings

Date of
orderl
oroceedinqs

Order with signature of Judge  and that of
parties or counsel  where necessary.

o1)

22-11-2011.  Mr. Sabah Mohyuddin  Khan, Advocate

for the Petitioner.

Waqar  Ahmed.

02) 

29-11-2011.

Notice to the state as well as

complainant of the case i.e respondent

No.2.

(sHAU

AZIZ STDDTQUT)
DGE

JU

Mr. Sabah Mohyuddin  Khan, Advocate
for the petitioner.
Mr. Arif Mehmood, Advocate on bd'sq  Dl
complainant/resPondent  No. 2.
Mr. laved Tanoli, S.I.

Mr. Arif Mehmood, Advocate  while

appearing on behalf of the complainant
of the case has filed his Power of
attorney with a request that a short

adjournment  may be granted enabling

him to prepare his brief.

Crl. Misc. No.  682-8 of 2011.

2

I

The learned counsel  for the petitioner

has seriously  opposed  this adjournment, however,

in the interest of justice the matter  is adjourned  for

tomorrow i.e 30-1L-20t1.  The petition may be put

for hearing  soon after the hearing of urgent as well

as old cases

(sHA

T 
JUDGE

STDDTQUT)

Waqar  Ahmad.

