Form No: HCJD/C-121. 

ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

Shafqat Hussain. 
VS 
The President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, etc. 

PETITIONER  BY   

:   Mr. Tariq Hassan & Syed Buland Sohail, Advocates. 

RESPONDENTS BY      

:   Mian Abdul Rauf, Advocate General ,Islamabad. 
                                       Mr. Muhammad Waqar Rana & Mr. Afnan Karim  
                                       Kundi, Additional Attorney General. 
                                     Mr. Muhammad Shafaqat Jan & Syed Hasnain  
                                     Ibrahim Kazmi, Deputy Attorney General.  
                                     Mr. Muhammad Javaid Iqbal, Standing Counsel. 
                                     Mr. Abdul Sattar Khokar, JS, M/O Interior.  
                                     Syed Safeer Hussain Shah, D.S, M/O Interior.  
                                     Sh. Ijaz Ahmed, AD, FIA. 

DATE OF HEARING 

:  08-05-2015. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  J:-    Shafqat  Hussain  S/o  Shah  Zaman 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Petitioner”),  who  is  imprisoned  at  the 

Central Jail Karachi, is awaiting the execution of his sentence. The petitioner 

was arrested in a criminal case registered as FIR No.136/2004 dated 21-05-

2004, at Police Station Gulshan-e-Iqbal Town, Karachi (hereinafter referred to 

as the “FIR”).  

2.   

The  events,  narrated  in  the  FIR,  relate  to  the  kidnapping  for 

ransom  of  the  seven  year  old  son  of  the  complainant.  According  to  the 

prosecution,  after  the  registration  of  the  FIR  and  during  investigations,  the 

petitioner  had  confessed  and  thereafter  led  the  investigators  to  the  place 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

where  the  body  of  the  victim  had  been  dumped.  The  body  of  the  deceased 

victim, a pair of  footwear he was wearing at the time of disappearance and 

the  hammer  which  caused  his  death  were  also  recovered  from  places 

identified  by  the  petitioner.  His  confessional  statement  was  recorded  by  a 

competent  Judicial  Magistrate,  who  had  also  appeared  as  a  witness  during 

the trial. The trial of the accused was conducted by a competent Court. The 

petitioner engaged the professional services of an experienced counsel, who 

conducted the trial on his behalf. It is evident from the judgment of the trial 

court that the prosecution produced six witnesses and the relevant evidence 

was  exhibited.  Court  witnesses  were  also  examined,  and  the  petitioner 

preferred  to  record  his  statement  under  Section  342  (1)  of  the  Criminal 

Procedure  Code,  1898  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Cr.P.C”)  rather  than 

being  examined  under  oath.  The  said  statement  of  the  petitioner  was 

recorded  on  26-08-2004  by  the  learned  trial  court,  in  the  presence  of  his 

counsel,  and  unequivocally  his  age  has  been  recorded  as  '23  years'.  The 

learned  Trial  Court,  after  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  evidence,  convicted 

the  accused  and  awarded  him  the  death  sentence,  inter  alia,  under  Section 

302  (b)  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code  1860  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

“PPC”).  The  learned  Trial  Court  forwarded  the  reference  to  the  Sindh  High 

Court.  An  appeal  was  also  preferred  by  the  petitioner.  The  High  Court  of 

Sindh  confirmed  the  death  sentence  vide  judgment  dated  05-05-2006.  The 

petitioner filed a Criminal Appeal No.146 of 2007 before the august Supreme 

Court, which was heard and dismissed by a Bench consisting of four Hon’ble 

Judges  vide  order  dated  08-10-2007.  The  petitioner  was  represented  by  a 

counsel. A review was sought, mainly on the ground that the petitioner was 

less than 16 years of age at the time of  the commission of the offence, and 

the  said  review  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  08-01-2008.  The  relevant 

portion of the order is as follows:-  

“The review of the judgment is being sought 

mainly on the ground that petitioner was less 16 

 
 
3 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

years of age at the time of occurrence which aspect 

of the case was not considered in true prospects. The 

question of age was not raised at any stage and the 

same cannot be agitated in review. The perusal of 

record would not suggest any valid ground for review. 

This petition is accordingly rejected”. 

3.   

The  mercy  petition  filed  by  the  petitioner  was  dismissed  by  the 

President  of  Pakistan  on  03-07-2012.  The  petitioner  did  not  challenge  the 

dismissal  of  his  mercy  petition.  According  to  the  learned  law  officers 

appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Federation,  the  execution  of  the  death  sentence 

was suspended on the directions of the respondent no. 3, after some sections 

of  society  raised  their  concerns  regarding  the  case  of  the  petitioner.  It  is 

stated that initially the issue was raised in an article published in the foreign 

press. A copy of the article is attached, with the comments filed on behalf of 

the  Federation.  Pursuant  to  the  direction  of  the  Federal  Minister  of  Interior 

i.e. respondent No. 3, the Federal Investigation Agency conducted an inquiry 

to  verify  the  claims  made  on  behalf  of  the  petitioner.  It  appears  from  the 

documents  placed  on  record,  by  both  the  petitioner  as  well  as  the 

respondents, that the Executive Director of  the Justice Project Pakistan was 

pursuing the case on behalf of the petitioner during the course of the inquiry 

conducted  by  the  Federal  Investigation  Agency.  The  petitioner  approached 

the High Court of Sindh, by invoking the jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter referred to 

as  the  “Constitution”).  The  Constitutional  Petition  No.D-561  of  2014  was 

dismissed by the High Court of Sindh vide order dated 23-12-2014. The order 

was not assailed by the petitioner, and instead the instant petition has been 

filed by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court, seeking the following relief to:- 

 
 
   
 
4 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

a.  Declare that the age of the Petitioner shall only 

be determined by a duly constituted judicial 

inquiry, as mandated in law; 

b.  Direct the Respondent No.1 and Respondent 

No.2  to  duly  confirm  the  constitution  and 

membership of the Respondent No.9; 

c.  Direct  the  Respondent  No.9  to  initiate  an 

inquiry  to  determine  all  the  human  rights 

violations of the Petitioner, as contained in the 

complaint  submitted  to  Respondent  No.9, 

mercy petitions submitted to Respondent No.1 

and all other supporting claims/documents that 

may  be  filed  in  relation  to  such  inquiry 

including inter alia determination of age of the 

petitioner; 

d.  Declare  that  the  enquiry  committee  of 

Respondent  No.3  and  Respondent  No.4  is 

unlawful and direct said Respondent to submit 

before  this  Hon’ble  Court  all  record, 

documents, statements, affidavits, information, 

noting,  minutes 

and 

supporting 

information/documents in relation to the said 

enquiry with respect to the Petitioner, and 

declare the same as null and void and of no 

legal effect; 

e. 

Permanently  restrain  the  Respondent  No.3 

from  carrying  out  any  further  investigation 

under the impugned enquiry and submit all 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

findings/reports  or  any 

information 

gathered/correspondence  had  in  relation 

thereto before this Hon’ble Court; 

f. 

Permanently  restrain  the  Respondent  No.3 

from  carrying  out  any  further  investigation 

under the impugned enquiry and submit all 

findings/reports  or  any 

information 

gathered/correspondence  had  in  relation 

thereto before this Hon’ble Court; 

g.  Directed that the Respondents be restrained 

from taking any adverse action detrimental or 

prejudicial  to  the  Petitioner  during  the 

pendency of the instant Writ Petition or until a 

final decision of the same; and grant any other 

relief that this Hon’ble Court deems fit and 

proper”. 

4.   

Dr.  Tariq  Hassan,  Advocate  Supreme  Court,  argued  on  behalf  of 

the petitioner and contended that;  the petitioner does not in any way assail 

the judgments and orders passed by the Supreme Court, High Court of Sindh 

or the Trial Court; the petitioner merely seeks the judicial determination of his 

age  for  the  limited  purpose  of  seeking  a  remedy  under  Article  45  of  the 

Constitution;  the  purpose  of  the  petition  is  not  to  set-aside  the  conviction, 

rather it is to seek the enforcement of the constitutional right under Article 45 

of the Constitution; the executive inquiry conducted by the respondent No.4 

on  the  direction  of  the  respondent  No.3  is  unlawful  and  improper,  and  as 

such void; two mercy petitions before the President of Pakistan are pending; 

the  Supreme  Court  has  not  made  any  determination  of  the  age  of  the 

petitioner, and that the review petition was dismissed in limine; the order of 

 
 
 
 
 
    
6 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

the Supreme Court does not preclude the right of the petitioner to have his 

age  determined    for  the  purposes  of  Article  45  of  the  Constitution;  the 

purpose of having the petitioner’s age determined is to ensure that he does 

not  become  a  victim  of  a  miscarriage  of  justice;  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to 

due process under Article 10-A, which extends to the stage of the exercise of 

Presidential powers under Article 45 of the Constitution; despite having been 

convicted,  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  assert  his  fundamental  rights 

guaranteed  by  the  Constitution;  the  petition  relates  to  a  matter  of  life  and 

death of the petitioner; the petitioner is an aggrieved person in the context of 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution;  he  has  no  other  adequate  remedy 

under  the  law;  nether  the  respondent  No.3  nor  the  respondent  No.4  are 

legally empowered to determine the age of the petitioner; remedy by way of 

determination  of  age  under  Section  7  of  the  Juvenile  Justice  System 

Ordinance, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the “Ordinance of 2000) is no 

longer  available  to  the  petitioner;  relying  on  the  case  of  “Ziaullah  VS

Najeebullah and others”, P L D 2003 SC 656, it has been argued that the 

determination of age is to be made by a judicial forum; the execution of the 

sentence  is  in  violation  of  the  Convention  against  Torture  and  other  Cruel, 

Inhuman  or  Degrading  Treatment  or  Punishment,  1984;  Article  9  of  the 

Constitution  guarantees  the  right  to  life,  and  in  support  reliance  has  been 

placed on “Shehla Zia” case P L D 1994 SC 693; Article 45 vests the powers 

in the President to grant pardon or commute the sentence, for which reliance 

is  placed  on  “Nazar  Hussain  VS  The  State,  P L D 2010 Supreme Court 

1021;    reliance  was  placed  on  “Satrughan  Chauhan  VS  Union  of  India  & 

Others”, (2014) 3 SCC 1; reliance has been placed on the “UN Declaration 

of  Human  Rights”,  particularly  Article  25,  25-A,  26,  35,  37  thereof; 

exceptional treatment is to be given to children; determination of the age and 

issuance of a birth certificate is the obligation of the State; there is a right to 

be  protected  against  double  punishment;  reliance  has  been  placed  on 

judgments  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  i.e.  “Schulp  vs  Delo”, 

 
 
7 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

513 U.S 298, 317 (1995), “Roper VS Simmons”, 543 U.S 551 (2005) in 

support  of  the  contention  that  a  habeas  corpus  petition  can  be  filed  raising 

the  question  of  juvenile  status;  reference  has  been  made  to  “Bhai  Khan  VS 

The State”, P L D 1992 SC 14 in support of the argument that the President 

is to exercise power under Article 45 to afford relief against undue harshness, 

or  serious  mistake  or  miscarriage  of  the  judicial  process;  reference  has  also 

been  made  to  “Abdul  Malik  VS  The  State”,  P L D 2006 SC 365,  “Nazar 

Hussain  VS  The  State”,  P L D 2010 SC 1021.  The  learned  counsel 

submitted written arguments in addition to arguing the case at the Bar. 

5.   

Mr.  Muhammad  Waqar  Rana,  Additional  Attorney  General,  has 

argued that; the petition is not maintainable in the light of Article 248 of the 

Constitution;  the  petition  is  also  not  maintainable  under  Article  174  of  the 

Constitution; the question regarding the conviction and sentence has attained 

finality; the question of age was not raised by the petitioner at any stage till 

the  review  was  filed;  the  review  order  unambiguously  referred  to  the 

question of age and dismissed the petition; the High Court is not vested with 

the  power  to  reopen,  or  in  any  manner  review  a  final  order  passed  by  the 

apex Court; the petitioner had concealed from this Court that the Sindh High 

Court, vide order dated 23-12-2014, had dismissed the petition; no matter is 

pending before the President under Article 45 of the Constitution, nor has any 

prayer  been  made  by  the  petitioner  with  regard  to  seeking  a  writ  in  the 

context  of  the  said  provision;  the  inquiry  was  initiated  by  the  Minister  of 

Interior merely to satisfy himself regarding the veracity of the publication of 

an article in the foreign press; the article published in the foreign press was 

merely intended to stall the execution, and  was based on factually incorrect 

assertions;  no  right  vests  in  the  petitioner,  nor  has  any  fundamental  right 

been violated; the law laid down by the august Supreme Court in the Ziaullah 

case, supra, is not applicable in the instant case, since neither has any order 

been  passed  by  the  President  under  Article  45  of  the  Constitution,  nor  has 

 
 
      
 
 
8 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

any  Court  of  competent  jurisdiction    passed  a  direction;  reliance  has  been 

placed  on  “Muhammad  Jamil  VS  The  State  and  3  others”,  2004 SCMR 

1871, “Sarfraz alias Shaffa VS The State and 3 others”, 2007 S C M R 758; 

disputed  questions  of  fact  have  been  raised,  and  the  same  cannot  be 

adjudicated while exercising powers under Article 199 of the Constitution. 

6.   

Mian  Abdul  Rauf,  learned  Advocate  General  Islamabad  has 

contended that; the petition is misconceived and not maintainable; the mercy 

petition  of  the  petitioner  has  been  dismissed;  the  intent  and  purpose  of  the 

inquiry  conducted  by  the  Federal  Investigation  Agency,  pursuant  to  the 

direction of the Ministry of the Interior, was not to determine the age of the 

petitioner, rather it was only to the extent of examining the veracity of some 

claims made by a civil society organization; it is evident from the photographs 

and  the  record  that  the  petitioner  was  not  a  juvenile  at  the  time  of  the 

commission of offence; the petitioner had never raised this issue till the time 

when the august Supreme Court was hearing the review. 

7.   

The learned counsels have been heard and the written submissions 

and the record perused.  

8.   

It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  question  of  age  was  for  the  first  time 

raised  by  the  petitioner  during  the  review  proceedings  before  the  august 

Supreme Court. The plea of the petitioner was that he was less than 16 years 

old at the time of occurrence. It is also not in dispute that no miscarriage of 

justice  was  caused  on  account  of  denying  a  fair  trial  to  the  petitioner.  The 

arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner and the record 

unambiguously  establishes  that  the  petitioner  was  duly  represented  by  a 

competent  counsel  engaged  by  him.  There  is  no  allegation  whatsoever,  nor 

any assertion by the petitioner that either he was denied a fair trial, or that 

there was a violation  of due process at any stage  of the trial,  or  before the 

hierarchy of the appellate forums. His full and proper participation in the trial 

 
 
 
 
 
9 

W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

proceedings,  ensuring  that  his  right  to  defense  and  fair  trial  were 

safeguarded,  are  not  only  evident  from  the  record,  but  admitted  by  him 

through his assertions in the petition, as well as the unambiguous statement 

made at the Bar by his learned counsel, in response to a query of this Court 

as to whether the petitioner had any doubt that he may not have had a fair 

trial. The answer was emphatically in the negative. It is also an admitted fact 

that  his  confessional  statement  was  recorded  by  a  Judicial  Magistrate,  who 

appeared  as  a  witness,  and  the  counsel  of  the  petitioner    was  afforded  an 

opportunity  to  cross  examine  her  in  the  witness  box.  The  relevant  portion 

relating  to  the  testimony  of  Ms  Shaista  Hamid,  learned  Judicial  Magistrate, 

discussed in the judgment of the trial Court is as follows:- 

“Pw-3 Shaista Hamid, Judicial Magistrate who 

recorded  confessional  statement  of  the  accused 

deposed that on 29-05-2004 Mazhar Hussain SIP had 

filed  application  before  her  praying  therein  for 

recording of confessional statement of the accused. 

She therefore took the custody of the accused and 

removed his handcuffs and sent the police and her 

staff from her chamber and then introduced to the 

accused that she is Magistrate and he has been 

produced before her for the purpose of recording of 

his confessional statement for which he is not bound 

and in case, if he make such statement, it should be 

reduced in writing and may be used against him as 

evidence. She also appraised to him that in case, he 

makes the said confessional statement or not, he 

should not be handed over to the police and shall be 

remanded to J.C. She also enquired from the accused 

as to whether he has been threatened or induced or 

 
 
 
10  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

he  is  sustaining  any  pressure  to  make  such 

confessional  statement,  to  which  he  replied  in 

negative. She also enquired from him as to whether 

he has been tortured or maltreated by the police to 

record  such  confessional  statement  to  which  he 

replied in negative. She therefore inspected the body 

of the accused through her reader and found no mark 

of violence on him. She also enquired from the 

accused as to whether any member of his family has 

been arrested or detained by the police to compel him 

to record such confessional statement to which he 

again replied in negative. She also enquired from him 

as to why he volunteered to make such confessional 

statement to which he replied that because of his 

conscious  he  is  recording  such  confessional 

statement. She then allowed three hours time to him 

to ponder over his making confessional statement 

from 11.30 a.m. to 2.30 p.m. After the end of 

reflection  period  she  again  reiterated  the  similar 

warnings to the accused but he was inclined to record 

his confessional statement as such she was satisfied 

that  he  is  recording  his  statement  freely  and 

voluntary as per his own choice as such she recorded 

his  confessional  statement  in  verbatim  on  his 

narration in her own handwriting. After completion of 

the confessional statement she read over its contents 

to the accused which he admitted to be correct and 

she obtained his thumb impression and signature on 

it and she also signed and appended the requisite 

certificate on the bottom of it.  

 
 
11  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

In cross examination she stated that from the 

conduct of the accused she was satisfied that he 

without any undue fear, advantage and pressure was 

inclined to record his confessional statement. The 

accused was also satisfied and was not confused for 

recording of his confessional statement.  

A perusal of testimony of Pw-3 Shaista Hamid, 

Judicial Magistrate shows that she observed all the 

legal  formalities  and  requirements  which  are 

obligatory for recording of confessional statement of 

the accused and when she was satisfied that the 

accused voluntarily and freely is inclined to record his 

confessional  statement  then  she  recorded  the 

confessional statement of the accused on his own 

narration. No material has been fished out from her in 

cross examination to reflect on her recording of 

confessional statement or to render the confessional 

statement  out  of  consideration.  Her  evidence  is 

therefore supporting the recording of confessional 

statement  of  the  accused  which  is  true  and 

voluntary”.    

9.   

Neither  did  the  learned  Judge  of  the  trial  court,  nor  the  learned 

Judicial  Magistrate,  or  for  that  matter  the  investigators,  have  any  reason 

whatsoever to deny a fair trial to the petitioner.  The petitioner’s statement, 

recorded by the trial court under section 342 of the Cr.P.C, in the presence of 

his counsel, is admitted. The said statement of the petitioner confirms his age 

as  23  years.  It  has  never  been  disputed,  nor  has  this  aspect  of  the 

petitioner's  statement,  recorded  in  the  presence  of  his  counsel,  ever  been 

challenged. The finality of the conviction and sentence is also admitted. It is 

 
 
 
12  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

also  not  in  dispute  that  the  mercy  petition  filed  by  the  petitioner  was 

dismissed by the President of Pakistan  on 03-07-2012, and the decision has 

never  been  challenged.  The  fact  that  the  execution  of  the  sentence  was 

suspended, and an inquiry undertaken on the direction of the respondent No. 

3  is  also  not  denied.  From  the  record  placed  before  this  Court,  and  the 

arguments made on behalf of the Federation, it is obvious that the latter felt 

that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  dispel  the  concerns  raised  by  a  section  of  

society  relating  to  the  age  of  the  petitioner.  It  was  argued  on  behalf  of  the 

Federation that an inquiry had become essential so as to put such suspicions 

to rest. The correspondence between Barrister Sarah Bilal, Executive Director 

of Justice Project Pakistan, holding herself out as representing the petitioner, 

and  various  officers  of  the  Federal  Government,  including  the  committee 

constituted by the respondent no. 3,  has also been placed on record by the 

parties.  Perusal  of  the  said  record  reveals  that  the  representative  of  the 

petitioner  was  pressing  for  the  inquiry,  and  had  also  forwarded  some 

information  and  affidavits  of  family  members  of  the  petitioner.  The 

Committee also appears to have been requesting for evidence. A copy of the 

article  published  in  the  daily  'The  Independent'  by  Clive  Stafford  Smith, 

Director,  Human  Rights  Charity  Reprieve,  has  also  been  placed  on  file.  The 

perusal of the contents show that the scribe was obviously not aware of the 

actual facts of the case. The contents are factually incorrect, not only in the 

light of the record placed on record, but are also unequivocally contradicted 

by the stance of the petitioner taken before this Court.  

10.  

As  this  Court  understands,  that  notwithstanding  the  above 

established  facts,  the  petitioner  is  seeking  relief  on  the  basis  of  material 

placed  on  record  on  his  behalf.  It  is  obvious  that  resting  their  case  on  the 

documents  and  information  available  with  the  learned  counsels  for  the 

petitioner,  they  are  seeking  a  writ  for  constituting  a  commission  for  the 

determination  of  his  age  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  i.e.  in  2004.  It  has 

 
 
 
13  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

been  strenuously  argued  that  it  is  to  make  out  a  case  for  the  President  to 

exercise his powers under Article 45 of the Constitution. The questions before 

this court are, firstly,  whether a case is made out for the issuance of a writ 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution;  secondly,  whether  this  Court  has  the 

jurisdiction in respect of the powers of the President under Article 45 of the 

Constitution and, thirdly, whether according to the facts and circumstances of 

the  case  this  Court  can  issue  an  appropriate  writ  after  the  dismissal  of  the 

review petition by the Supreme Court.  

11.  

The learned counsel for the petitioner has laid immense stress on a 

judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the case of ‘Shatrughan Chauhan’ 

supra, which relates to the scope of powers of the President under Article 72 

of the Constitution of India for  granting pardons etc. The analogous powers 

are vested in the President of Pakistan under Article 45 of the Constitution of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  There is no cavil to the proposition that 

the  power  of  pardon,  reprieve  or  commuting  a  sentence  is  vested  in  the 

President under Article 72 of the Indian Constitution and also under Article 45 

of  the  Constitution  of  Pakistan.  However,  in  both  the  jurisdictions  the 

respective Supreme Courts have held that the scope of judicial review in the 

case of powers vested in the President is of a limited nature. In Shatrughan 

case, supra, the Indian Supreme Court held as under; 

"Nevertheless,  this  Court  has  been  of  the 

consistent  view  that  the  executive  orders  under 

Article  72  should  be  subjected  to  limited  judicial 

review  based  on  the  rational  that  the  power  under 

Article 72 is per se above the judicial review but the 

manner  of  exercise  of  power  is  certainly  subject  to 

judicial review. Accordingly, there is no dispute as to 

 
 
 
 
14  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

the settled legal proposition that the power exercised 

could be the subject matter of limited judicial review"  

12.  

The  Supreme  Court  of  India  was  also  mindful  of  its  limitations  in 

subjecting  the  power  of  the  President  to  guidelines  framed  by  the  Court. 

Moreover, the facts and circumstances before the Indian Supreme Court were 

altogether  different  and,  therefore,  reliance  on  the  judgment,  rather  than 

being  of  help  to  the  petitioner,  renders  the  prayer  as  not  being  within  the 

power and jurisdiction of this Court. 

13.  

Likewise, a Full Bench of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan in 

Nazar  Hussain  VS the  State,  PLD  2010  SC  1021,  though  they  did  not 

dilate upon the issue since it was a not a moot point before it, nevertheless 

referred  to  the  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  and  observed  as 

follows; 

"The question whether being a public power, could it 

be  subjected  to  judicial  review,  was  considered  by 

the  Indian  Supreme  Court  and  it  held  that  it  was 

reviewable  though  on  limited  grounds.  Reference  is 

made  to  Epuru  Sudhakar  v  Government  of  A.P  (AIR 

2006  SC  3385)  and  State  of  Bihar  v  Madan  Lal  Jain 

(AIR 1982 SC 774)” 

14.  

This  limited  judicial  review  has  been  exercised  in  the  cases  of 

Hakim  Khan  VS Government  of  Pakistan  and  others  PLD  1992  SC  595, 

Ziaullah VSNajeebullah PLD 2003 SC 656.        

15.  

In  the  light  of  the  above  law,  the  powers  of  the  President  under 

Article 45 of the Constitution are unfettered, and subject to a limited power of 

judicial  review  by  the  Courts.  A  writ  cannot  be  issued  compelling  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
15  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

President  to  exercise  discretion  under  Article  45  of  the  Constitution.  This 

discretion has been exclusively vested in the President by the framers of the 

Constitution.  In  the  instant  case,  admittedly,  the  mercy  petition  of  the 

petitioner was dismissed, as communicated to the petitioner vide letter dated 

11-07-2012, also referred to in his second mercy application, a copy of which 

is  attached  with  the  petition  at  page  59  as Annex  G-1.  The  dismissal  of  the 

mercy  petition  was  obviously  accepted  as  he  never  challenged,  nor  has  any 

prayer  been  sought  with  regard  thereto  in  the  instant  petition.  The  inquiry 

conducted on the direction of respondent no. 3 was also not in pursuance of 

the powers vested in the President under Article 45 of the Constitution, and 

as  a  consequence  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of 

Ziaullah  VS Najeebullah  supra  is  not  attracted  in  the  facts  and 

circumstances of the instant case. It is also settled law that what cannot be 

done directly can also not be done indirectly. Thus the arguments advanced 

by the learned counsel for the petitioner in the context of Article 45 have no 

relevance, nor does this Court have any jurisdiction to compel the President 

to  exercise  discretion  there  under.  Needless  to  mention  that  no  prayer  has 

been  made  in  the  petition  in  this  regard.    Even  otherwise,  it  is    settled  law 

that  this  Court  cannot  exercise  suo  moto  powers  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution.  Reliance  is  placed  on  “Dr.  Imran  Khatak  and  another  VS  Ms. 

Sofia Waqar Khattak, PSO to Chief Justice and others”, 2014 SCMR 122. 

16.  

It is settled law that the principle enshrined in the maxim "Interest 

Reipublicae Ut Sit Finis Litium",   meaning  “  in  the  interest  of  society  as  a 

whole, litigation must come to an end” is imbedded in and an integral part of  

the rule of law. The august Supreme Court in “Abul Hossain Sana VS Suwalal 

Agarwala and another”, P L D 1962 Supreme Court 242 has held that the 

general  principle  that  there  has  to  be  an  end  to  litigation  is  applicable 

essentially to proceedings of any kind in a Court. This Court is further fortified 

by the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of “Rehmat Ullah alias 

 
 
 
 
16  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

Raja VS Home Secretary Punjab and others”, 2004 SCMR 1861.  The facts 

of  the  latter  case  are  similar  to  those  of  the  instant  case.  The  age  of  the 

accused was mentioned in the statement recorded under section 342 Cr. P. C, 

which was confirmed by the Trial Court and appellate courts as well. The plea 

of  juvenility  was  raised  for  the  first  time  after  the  dismissal  of  the  mercy 

petition. The Supreme Court held that no room was left for a further probe. 

The  rule  known  as  'double  jeopardy'  is  also  embedded  in  the  doctrine  of 

finality  of  proceedings.  In  the  instant  case,  any  order  passed  by  this  Court 

granting the relief sought, will tantamount to interference with the dismissal 

of the review petition by the august Supreme Court. This is neither within the 

scope of the powers of this Court, nor is it vested with such jurisdiction under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  It  is  settled  law  that  once  proceedings  have 

attained finality by exhausting all the remedies available, that adjudication is 

final, whether it takes the form of an acquittal or a conviction.  

17.  

Next,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  relied  on  two 

judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.  The  first  is  Lloyd 

Schlup VSPaul K Delo, 513 U.S 298 (1995) and it was argued that even 

after  the  proceedings  had  attained  finality,  yet  the  petitioner  would  be 

entitled  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court.  This  argument  is 

misconceived,  and  I  am  afraid  the  judgment  has  not  been  properly 

appreciated.  Schulp  had  claimed  'actual  innocence'.  The  Supreme  Court  of 

the  United  States  was  considering  the  'narrow  class'  of  'rare'  and 

'extraordinary'  cases  which  requires  a  convicted  person    to  show  that  he  or 

she  is  'actually  innocent'.  Unlike  the  Schulp  case,  in  the  instant  case  a  fair 

trial  is  admitted,  and  no  plea  has  been  raised  of  a  'constitutional  error  at 

trial'.  The  judgment  has  obviously  no  relevance  with  the  instant  case.  The 

second  case  is  Donald.  R.  Roper  VS Christopher  Simmons,  543  U.S 

551(2005).  In  a  majority  judgment  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States 

over 

ruled 

its  earlier 

judgment  and  held  capital  punishment  as 

 
 
  
17  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

unconstitutional  for  crimes  committed  by  persons  who  are  under  the  age  of 

18  years.  This  judgment  also  has  no  relevance  whatsoever  in  the  present 

case.       

 18. 

Lastly,  is  there  any  material  placed  before  this  Court  which  would 

entitle  the  petitioner  to  the  relief  as  claimed?  The  petitioner  has  indeed  not 

challenged the trial proceedings, nor has any complaint with regard thereto. 

The  trial  and  proceedings  before  the  appellate  forums  being  in  accordance 

with his right to a fair trial is admitted. He was represented by counsels of his 

choice. The trial record shows that besides his confessional statement before 

a  Judicial  Magistrate,  the  prosecution  had  established  its  case  beyond  a 

reasonable  doubt.  The  evidence  was  far  more  than  the  confessional 

statement.  The  well  reasoned  exhaustive  judgment  of  the  trial  court  is 

sufficient to place a heavy burden on the petitioner to make out at least an 

arguable case for consideration of the relief sought. The copies of the articles 

published in the foreign press contain assertions which have no basis at all, 

rather  they  are  factually  incorrect  in  the  light  of  the  record  of  the  trial 

proceedings,  and  the  arguments  advanced  or  record  produced  on  behalf  of 

the petitioner. The correspondence between the Executive Director of Justice 

Project  Pakistan,  representing  the  petitioner,  and  various  officials  of  the 

Federal  Government  and  its  agencies,  does  not  disclose  any  material  which 

would  show  that  any  of  the  fundamental  right  of  the  petitioner  has  been 

violated. Nothing has been placed before this Court which would indicate any 

miscarriage  of  justice  or  a  need  for  a  probe.  Conjectures,  surmises, 

unsubstantiated  assertions,  assumptions  without  any  cogent  or  material 

record,  cannot  vest  jurisdiction  in  this  Court  to  exercise  its  powers  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  In  the  circumstances  the  relief  sought 

becomes  a  pursuit  in  the  nature  of  seeking  a  roving  inquiry  or  a  desire  to 

embark  on  a  fishing  expedition.  On  the  one  hand  the  right  to  a  fair  trial, 

passing  through  all  the  filtration  process  till  the  dismissal  of  the  review 

 
 
 
18  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

petition  by  the  Supreme  Court,  is  not  denied,  while  on  the  other  an  inquiry 

into  the  age  of  the  petitioner  is  being  sought  without  placing  any  material 

that would even remotely show that  any fundamental right of  the petitioner 

has been violated so as to require interference by this Court. Such litigation, 

besides  being  not  maintainable,  falls  within  the  realm  of  being  frivolous.  It 

tantamount  to  abuse  of  the  process  of  the  Court.  Most  importantly,  such 

petitions and undeserved hype, without first verifying the facts and examining 

the record, is likely to be seen as being aimed at eroding public confidence in 

the criminal justice system. In the circumstances if proceedings, which have 

attained  finality,  are  made  subject  to  reassessments,  the  role  of  the  judicial 

system,  the  effectiveness  of  criminal  justice  system  will  be  undermined  and 

eroded  inevitably  leading  to  chaos  in  society.  Simultaneously,  the  victims  of 

crime  will  also  suffer.  It  is  noted  that  the  right  to  a  fair  trial  is  equally 

extended  to  and  applies  in  the  case  of  a  victim.  Such  roving  inquiry  as  is 

being  sought  by  the  petitioner  cannot  be  allowed  in  any  criminal  justice 

system.             

19.  

For  what  has  been  stated  above,  the  petition  is  not  maintainable 

and is accordingly dismissed. 

20.  

Before parting with this judgment it would be pertinent to note that 

our  criminal  justice  system  is  designed  to  ensure  that  there  is  no  risk  of 

injustice  or  error.  However,  no  system  can  ever  be  perfect  as  humans  are 

fallible. The system is based on the foundation of presumption of innocence 

of an accused and the stringent principles of evidence and criminal procedure 

are  meant  to  ensure  a  fair  trial.  The  right  to  fair  trial,  particularly  by  taking 

abundant  care  in  case  of  those  who  claim  to  be  juveniles  is  a  forte  of  our 

criminal judicial system. The record produced in the instant case reveals that 

at  the time of the  trial of the  petitioner in 2004, almost 1400 accused were 

treated  as  juveniles  in  courts  in  the  city  of  Karachi  alone.  During  the 

 
 
 
 
19  W.P No. 1096 of 2015 

proceedings  in  the  instant  case  it  has  been  noticed  that  some  scribes  and 

activists in their exuberance raised an undeserved alarm without verifying the 

facts  or  examining  the  record.  Raising  of  concerns  without  exercising  care 

and before verifying the facts in itself may lead to miscarriages of justice. It is 

expected  that  utmost  care  would  be  exercised  lest  it  may  prejudice  the 

interests  of  the  society  by  undermining  public  confidence  in  the  system.                                   

(ATHAR MINALLAH)             

           JUDGE 

Announced in the open court on 11-05-2015 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting.  

Asif Mughal/*    

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
  
                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
