ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Criminal Misc. No. 960-B/ 2020 
Sumera Bibi 
VS
The State etc 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

17.09.2020 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties 
or counsel where necessary.  

Ms. Bushra Saleem, Advocate for petitioner, 
Syed Shahbaz Shah, State Counsel,  
Hafiz  Munawar  Iqbal  and  Syed  Pervaiz  Zahoor, 
Advocates for complainant,  
Rana Tasneem ASI/CIA with record.  

          This 

is  post-arrest  bail  petition  by 

accused-petitioner  (Sumera  Bibi)  in  F.I.R  No. 

334,  dated  07.10.2019,  under  Section  381,  411, 

337-J  &  109  PPC,  Police  Station  Lohi  Bhair, 

Islamabad.  

2.   

Briefly,  the  allegations  set-forth  in  the 

F.I.R, are that on 05.10.2019, at about 08:15 am,  

within  the  area  of  Jinnah  Garden,  Lohi  Bhair, 

Islamabad,  petitioner,  who  was  employed  as  a 

maid,  committed  theft 

in  the  house  of  the 

complainant  and  took  away  cash  Rs.100,000/-, 

prize  bonds  valuing  Rs.300,000/-  besides    gold 

ornaments 

worth 

Rs.12,00,000/-, 

after 

administering 

intoxicant  to  the 

inmates  that 

includes  parents,  wife  and  daughter  of  the 

complainant.   

3.   

Learned  counsel 

for 

the  petitioner 

contends  that  there is  delay  in lodging  the F.I.R; 

that co-accused  Sana has been discharged   by 

the police; that challan has been submitted in the 

court;  that  petitioner  is  no  more  required    for 

further  investigation;  that  mere  involvement  in 

other  cases  of  like    nature  without  conviction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 
 
Criminal Misc. No. 960-B/ 2020 

                                                  -2- 

cannot  be  considered    an  impediment  when  the 

case otherwise calls  for  further inquiry and  that 

she has  a  suckling baby of about six months old,  

which,  otherwise,  entitles  her  to  the  concession 

of bail.  

4.           On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for 

the  complainant  argued  that  petitioner 

is  a 

habitual  offender;  she  is  an  active  member  of 

dacoits gang; involved in  eleven other  cases  of  

like  nature; that evidence in the shape  of CCTV 

footage,  MLR  and  recovery  of  gold  bangles, 

finger  ring,  bracelet  and  prize    bonds    which 

were  duly  identified  by  the  complainant,  prima 

facie,    connects  her    with  the  commission  of 

alleged  offence;  that  during  the  occurrence  

petitioner  also  administered  intoxicant  to  father 

of  the  complainant,  aged  about  70  years, 

therefore,  she  is  not  entitled  to    the  concession 

of  bail  as  in  case  of  her    release  there  is  

apprehension of repetition of offence.  

5.   

Learned  State  counsel  reaffirmed  that 

the  challan  has  been  submitted  in  the  Court  on 

17.12.2019  and  that  the  petitioner  has  a  child  of 

about six months age. The I.O. confirmed that the 

petitioner  has  given birth  to  a child  in  jail  who is 

now aged about six months. 

6.           Arguments heard, record perused.  

7.           The 

last  submission  of 

the 

learned 

counsel qua release of the petitioner on bail due 

to having suckling baby, warrants instantaneous 

response,  therefore,  without  dilating  upon  other 

merits of the case, lest it may cause prejudice to 

the  case  of  either  side.  The  question  before  the 

Court  is  that  a  minor  child  is  in  jail,  who  has  not 

committed  any  offence.  This  Court  beseeches 

 
 
 
Criminal Misc. No. 960-B/ 2020 

                                                  -3- 

guidance  on  the  subject  from  the  judgment  i.e. 

Mst.Nusrat  V.  The  State  (1996  SCMR  973), 

wherein  the  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan 

has  graciously  held  that  “a suckling child of the 

petitioner cannot be kept in jail.  The concept of 

welfare of minor is incompatible in jail life.  The 

detention of an infant child in jail for the crime 

committed by his/her  mother would  not be in the 

interest of justice as well as in the welfare of the  

minor.”   

        The  Hon‟ble  Apex  Court  has  graciously 

relied  upon  famous  case  of  “Ghamidiyyah”, 

where  The  Holy  Prophet  (Peace  Be  Upon  Him) 

suspended the sentence of pregnant woman  not 

only till delivery of child but also postponed it till 

suckling  period  i.e.    two  years.    While  granting 

concession  of  bail  to  the  lady  petitioner,  the 

Hon‟ble  Apex  Court  laid  emphasis  that  "the 

golden  principle  of  administration  of  justice 

enunciated by The Holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon 

Him) must be strictly observed and followed in 

our country.”  

8.   

Thereafter,  relying  upon  the  judgment 

(Supra), the Hon‟ble Lahore High Court in case of  

Mst. Nasreen  V.  The State (1998 MLD 1350) had 

granted  concession  of  post  arrest  bail  to  a  lady 

accused    of murder case on the  ground  that  the 

“welfare of the suckling child so demands that 

the child should not be made to suffer in jail for 

the murder,  allegedly committed by his  mother.”  

9.   

The 

same 

view  was 

reiterated 

subsequently  by  the  Hon‟ble  Lahore  High  Court 

in the case of Nasim Bibi V. The State (2019 MLD 

1157),  where  too,  lady,  accused  of  a  murder 

 
 
 
Criminal Misc. No. 960-B/ 2020 

                                                  -4- 

case  was  granted  the  concession  of  post  arrest 

bail due to having suckling baby.   

10. 

Another precedent  on  the  subject  is  the 

case  of  Mst.  Nazima  Bibi  V.  The  State  and 

another  (PLD  2018  Peshawar  138)  wherein  the 

Hon‟ble  Peshawar  High  Court  in  a  murder    case 

extended  concession  of  bail alone on this score  

that the accused/petitioner had  given birth to a 

male child  in the jail premises.  It  was  held  that 

the  law  of  the  land  is  that  the  child  should  not  

suffer for an offence which he had not committed 

and  while  keeping  in  view  the  leading  judgment 

of 

the  Hon‟ble  Apex  Court 

in  Mst.Nusrat 

case(supra)  the lady accused was allowed bail. 

11. 

The  Hon‟ble  Peshawar  High  Court  in 

case  of  Mst. Haseena V. The State  (2019  MLD 

176) by following the wisdom from the precedent 

of  “Ghamidiyyah”,  allowed  post  arrest  bail  to  a 

lady,  accused  of  having  in  her  possession  huge 

quantity  of  heroin 

i.e.  3.330  Kg,  although 

amounts  offence  against  society  i.e.  public  at 

large and entails death punishment.  

12. 

It  is common in our society that parents 

are  beneficial  and  useful  for  their  children  and 

law  of 

the 

land  also 

imposes  certain 

responsibilities  upon  the  parents  in  respect    of 

maintenance  of  the  children  but  oftenly,  it  also 

happens  that  the  kids  become  a  survivor    for 

their parents,  although very often but it happens 

some way. 

      The  case  in  hand  is  a  good  example 

wherein a minor child has become a source of 

convenience,  comfort,  rescue,  blessing  and 

reward for an accused mother. A suckling baby, 

although, is not in a position to help out his 

 
 
 
  
Criminal Misc. No. 960-B/ 2020 

                                                  -5- 

accused mother by physical means but only his 

entity/existence has become a blessing for the 

mother. She should be thankful to her suckling 

baby in her lap who has become a gift for her 

release.  

13.          The  child  has  become  a  source  for  the 

release  of  her  mother,  while  the  entity  of  the 

suckling child  has  become a factor for the court 

to extend the concession of bail to the petitioner 

(mother).  Now  it  is  up  to  the  mother,  how  she 

treats  this  relief/opportunity,  however  the  Court 

expects  that  she  should  always  remain  thankful 

to  her  suckling  baby  and  should  refrain  herself 

from indulging in nefarious activities.   

14. 

The  release  of  the  accused/petitioner 

does  not    means  that    she  has  been  exonerated 

of the offence, because the ultimate outcome  of 

the case is the decision on merits by the court of 

competent  jurisdiction.    Furthermore,  the  grant 

of  bail  does  not  amount  to  acquittal  of  accused 

as  only  the  custody  of  accused  is  shifted  from 

judicial  lock  up  to  the  hands  of  the  surety,  who 

made responsible to produce the accused before 

the Court as and when required. 

15. 

This  Court  is  conscious  of  the  fact  that 

the  petitioner  is  subject  of  an  „offence against 

society‟  which  cannot  be 

taken 

lightly 

particularly  when  the  offender  appears  to  be  a 

repeater  but  at  the  same  time  the  welfare  of  a 

suckling  child  is  also  to  be  kept  in  view  as  the 

child, being subject of the society, should not be 

made  to  suffer  in  jail  for  an  offence,  allegedly 

committed by his/her mother.  The society has to 

provide  congenial  atmosphere  to  its  infants  for 

becoming good citizens. If early years of a child, 

 
 
 
Criminal Misc. No. 960-B/ 2020 

                                                  -6- 

when  his/her  mental  growth  retains  immense 

importance,  are  spent  in  jail  environment,  that 

would not only be harmful for himself/herself but 

for the society at large as well because ultimately 

he  has  to  become  subject  of  society  where  he 

has to perform his role.    Thus it is inevitable for 

the  survival  of  the  child  that  the  mother  be 

released  on  bail  so  the  child  can  prosper  in  a 

healthy  environment  at  home  which,  otherwise, 

could not be provided in the jail enclosures. 

16. 

In view of above, the instant bail petition 

is accepted, petitioner (Sumera Bibi)  is admitted 

to  post-arrest  bail  subject  to  furnishing  bail 

bonds  in  the  sum  of  Rs.100,000/-  (Rupees One 

Lakh)  with  one  surety  in  the  like  amount  to  the 

satisfaction of the learned Trial Court.  

17. 

Needless  to  mention  that  above  is  only 

tentative  assessment  for  the  purpose  of  instant  

bail  petition  only  and  shall  not  effect/influence 

trial of the case in any manner. 

 Imran 

         (FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN) 

                        JUDGE       

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
