JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

W.P. No. 3308/2019. 

Prince Salman Ali Khan, etc. 

VS

Mst. Hina Durrani, etc. 

Petitioners  by: 

Mr. Habib Ahmed Bhatti, Advocate. 

Respondent  No.1 by: 

Mr. Adnan Iqbal, Advocate. 

Date of Decision: 

17.02.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI, J:  Through  this  Writ  Petition,  the 

petitioners  have  assailed  the  order  dated  16.07.2019, passed  by  learned 

Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad, whereby appeal filed by petitioner 

has been dismissed. 

2. 

Brief facts referred in the instant case are that respondent Hina Durrani 

married to petitioner No.1 and during subsistence of their marriage petitioners 

No.2  &  3  were  born.  Petitioner No.2 is  approximately 13-1/2  years  of  age 

whereas petitioner No.3 is 10-1/2 years of age and parties are litigating against 

each other, however, in the previous round of proceedings in W.P No.3355/2017 

titled Mst.  Hina  Durrani  VS  Prince Salman  Ali Khan,  etc. filed for recovery of 

minors, during  the  proceedings of  said  petition  a  compromise was  effected 

between the parties vide agreement dated 12.10.2017 referred as Mark' A' and 

parties were  bound  to  comply with  the  terms  of compromise agreement and 

order dated 12.10.2017 was passed. The agreement contain the details of terms of 

visitation,  however,  custody  remained  with  father/petitioner  No.1.  The 

respondent  mother  again  filed  criminal  original  No.386/2018, which  was 

disposed of vide  order  dated  22.11.2018, whereby respondent was  directed to 

approach the Guardian Court for redressal of her grievance for enforcement of 

W.P.  No.3308/2019 

2 

visitation schedule if so  advised.  Respondent has  filed  application before the 

learned  Family/ Guardian  Court  for  enforcement/ implementation  of terms  of 

agreement dated 12.10.2017, which was contested by petitioner No.1 and learned 

Guardian Court  has adjudicated upon  the  matter vide  order  dated  29.05.2019, 

feeling aggrieved  with  the  said  order  petitioner  has  filed  appeal  before the 

learned Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad, which  was  decided vide 

judgment dated 16.07.2019 with the observation that learned Guardian Court has 

to adjudicate upon the matter accordingly. Hence, this writ petition. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that learned Appellate Court 

as well as learned trial Court without hearing the case on merit by determining 

the  question  of welfare  of  minors is  not  empowered  to  adjudicate upon  the 

question on the  basis of compromise dated  10.12.2017 as facts recorded in the 

compromise as well as in order of this Court have been changed and respondent 

No.1 has entered into second marriage with a stranger and it is not possible for 

petitioner No.1 to send her real daughter to respondent No.1 for the purpose of 

visitation in the house of stranger and this question requires proper adjudication; 

that the Executing Court as well as Appellate Court have not considered the legal 

question despite the fact that minors are not willing to visit respondent/ mother 

under the changed circumstances and they have refused to visit, even they have 

recorded their statements in this regard. 

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent  No.1 contends that whether 

respondent No.1 has entered into second marriage or not but it is right of real 

mother to visit the minors as per compromise agreement and learned Guardian 

Court shall comply with the said terms accordingly without any objection; that 

learned Guardian Judge is supposed to hand  over the custody of minors by all 

means and if petitioner No.1 considers that it is not in the welfare of the minors, 

he  may  approach  the  Guardian  Court  and  can  get  changed  the  terms  of 

compromise settled in the agreement if a decree would be passed in his favour. 

W.P.  No.3308/2019 

3 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that respondent No.1  filed an application before 

5. 

6. 

the  Executing  Court  for  implementation  of  decision  of  this  Court  dated 

10.12.2017, passed  on the  basis of compromise in  W.P No.3355/2017. Learned 

Executing  Court  passed 

the  order  accordingly  on  29.05.2019 for  the 

implementation of visitation schedule but  petitioner No.l  father of the minors 

has challenged the same in appeal, which was dismissed by the Appellate Court. 

The main ground raised by petitioner No.l before the learned Executing Court is 

the change of circumstances which require due appreciation whereby respondent 

No.1  has  entered  into  second  marriage  with  a  stranger  and  in  these 

circumstances minors are not comfortable for visitation in company of a stranger. 

7. 

I  have  gone through  the  record, whereby respondent  No.l  mother has 

filed a petition before this Court through W.P No.3355/2017 for recovery and 

production  of  the  minors  which  were  removed  by  petitioner  No.l  father.  In 

compliance of order of this Court petitioner No.l  put appearance and submitted 

a  settlement/ compromise deed  dated  12.10.2017 to  regulate  the  visitation of 

minors, this Court on the joint statement of both the parties disposed of the writ 

petition vide  order  dated  12.10.2017, whereby parties were directed to comply 

with  the  terms  of  compromise agreement, however,  respondent  No.1 again 

approached this Court through Crl. Original No.386/2018 for non-compliance of 

visitation schedule which was disposed of vide order dated 22.11.2018, whereby 

respondent No.l  approached the learned Guardian Court for implementation of 

order of this Court as a result whereof learned Guardian Court passed the order 

dated 29.05.2019 in the following manner:- 

Under  the  law  embodied  in  Guardian  and  Wards  Act  the focus  point 

always  is  welfare  of  minors.  While  keeping  in  view  the  facts  and 

circumstances  portrayed  hereinabove I  consider  the  visitation  of minors 

with  the  petitioner  in  their  welfare  as  well,  therefore,  the  parties  are 

directed  to  strictly  adhere to  the  terms  of compromise  reached between 

them  on  12.10.2017  which  has  been reproduced in  para No.  10  of this 

W.P.  No.3308/2019 

4 

order.  The  learned  counsel also  requested  that since  tomorrow is  birthday 

of  minor  Aamaya  Aatiqah  Khan  therefore  the  respondent  may  also  be 

directed  to handover minor  to  the petitioner between 07:30 p.m.  till 08:30 

p.m.  The  learned  counsel for  respondent did  not  object  over  this  request 

rather conceded and  committed  that his  client  would  handover minor for 

one  hour  during  07:30  p.m.  to  08:30  p.m. 

to  the  petitioner,  hence 

respondent  is  directed  .to  handover  custody  of  minor  daughter  to  the 

petitioner from  07:30 p.m.  to 08:30 p.m. on 30.05.2019. 

The  learned  counsel for  petitioner further  requested  that  since  summer 

vacations  are  due  shortly  therefore  the  respondent  may  be  directed  to 

handover  custody  of  the  minors  to  petitioner  during  first  spell  of  the 

summer  vacations.  However,  learned  counsel for  respondent  stated  that 

the  respondent  would  like  to  retain  custody  of  minors  during  first  spell 

because  he  has  already  chalked  out  a  plan for  recreation.  On  request  of 

learned counsel for  respondent,  he  is allowed to  retain  the custody  during 

first  spell of summer  vacations but he  shall be  bound  to  handover custody 

of  minors  to  the  petitioner  during  second  spell  of  summer  vacations 

without fail. 

However,  the  Appellate  Court  has  maintained  the  above  mentioned  order 

mainly on the ground that petitioner No.l  has assailed the order of this Court 

dated 12.10.2017, passed in W. P No.3355/2017 in ICA No.529/2018, whereby it 

has specifically been held that "respondent's  remarriage does not render the said 

agreement a dead letter". 

8. 

Keeping in view the above position and the findings of the Courts below 

there  is  nothing  left  in  favour  of  petitioner  who  is  delaying  the  matter  of 

visitation on  one pretext or  the  other, therefore, question of second marriage 

does not  come in  way  of visitation as  respondent  mother  is  not  seeking the 

custody rather she is seeking only enforcement of visitation schedule agreed by 

petitioner No.1 himself in  the  compromise agreement. However, if petitioner 

No.1 thinks that  second marriage of respondent No.l  is against the welfare of 

minor he may approach the learned Guardian Court to prove contrary view and 

get judgment in his favour, whereby viries of compromise agreement should be 

challenged by the judgment of Guardian Court, however, till then compromise 

W.P.  No.3308/2019 

5 

deed is considered to be final and no exception could be taken in this regard. The 

second important question raised in this case is as to whether minors could be 

compelled for visitation schedule as both the minors are 13-1/2 & 10-1/2 years of 

age and can fully understand  the nature of dispute of their parents and as such 

Executing Court  is  not  is  position  to  handover  minors  by  compelling them 

through  orders  for  visitation to  their  mother, therefore, it  is  appropriate  that 

terms of agreement should be enforced in letter & sprit by calling the minors on 

each and  every  occasion as  per  agreed  terms before the  Guardian  Court  and 

statements of minors should be recorded on each and  every visitation schedule 

as to whether minors intend to visit their mother/respondent No.1 or not, such 

statement could  only be  recorded when  both  the  parties  (father &  mother  of 

minors) are  present  before the Court so  that  compromise agreement could be 

implemented in a proper manner, however, if the minors will record their stance 

for  not  visiting their  mother  they  should  not  be  compelled by  the  Guardian 

Court. In such situation respondent No.1/mother be given ample opportunity to 

sit with the minors separately in the visitation room for at-least two (02)  hours 

and  if  she will  able to  convince the  minors for  visitation, they  be  allowed to 

proceed with the visitation schedule accordingly. 

9. 

For what  has been discussed, instant writ  petition stands disposed  of in 

above terms. 

Zthid 

(MOHSTN'AKHTAR  Kft Y ANI) 
JUDGE 

