JUDGMENT 

Before Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, J 

KAREEM KHAN---Petitioner 

VS

INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE ICT ISLAMABAD and 3 others---Respondents 

Writ Petition No.1584-Q of 2015, decided on 15th January, 2018. 

SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI,  J.---Petitioner invoked the constitutional  jurisdiction of 

this Court by way of filing instant writ petition with the following prayer:- 

"In light of the above stated facts and circumstances it is prayed that the following orders 
may kindly be passed: 

(i)  

An order declaring that the decision of transferring the FIR No. 91 dated 29.04.2015 
from  Islamabad  to  FATA  made  by  the  Respondent  Chief  Commissioner  ICT, 
Islamabad in connivance with the other Respondents is devoid of any legal force 
and is, therefore, set aside; 

(ii)   An appropriate order to the Respondent Police Authorities to incorporate the name 
of other accused John A. Rizzo in the said FIR as per application of the Petitioner 
dated 19 July, 2011; 

(iii)   An order directing the Respondent Police Authorities to investigate the subject case 

in accordance with the law of land; 

(iv)   Any such order as may be just and equitable in the given facts and circumstances 

of the case.". 

2. 
Brief facts involved in the matter are that Petitioner is resident of House No. 47-B, Street 
38, F-10/4, Islamabad, whereas, his permanent address is village Achi Khel, Tehsil Mirali, North 
Waziristan Agency (NWA) Pakistan. On the night of December 31st, 2009, approximately around 
2100  hrs,  Petitioner's  ancestral  house  situated  at  North  Waziristan  Agency  (NWA)  was  hit  by 
Drone attack, believed to be operated by the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), as a 
result whereof Petitioners' son and brother named Zahinullah Khan and Asif Iqbal died. Petitioner 
on December 14, 2010 submitted application to the SHO, Police Station Secretariat, Islamabad, 
for registration of FIR against Jonathan Banks, the then Station Chief of the Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA) who was residing and functioning in the territorial jurisdiction of the said police 
station in Islamabad, Respondent No.3 received the said application but did not proceed to register 
the case as prayed for. Being aggrieved of the said inaction, Petitioner moved application under 
section 22-A, Cr.P.C. before the learned Ex-officio Justice of Peace on 11.02.2012, which was 
dismissed, vide order dated 02.12.2013, on the ground that the offence had been  committed in 

 
 
 
 
Federally  Administered  Tribal  Area  (FATA),  hence,  neither  P.P.C.  nor  Cr.P.C  was  applicable. 
Petitioner challenged the said order through W.P. No.4700/2013 which was allowed by this Court, 
vide order dated 11.02.2014, earlier order of the learned ex-officio Justice of Peace was set aside 
and the learned judicial officer was directed to rehear the Petitioner's application under section 22-
A, Cr.P.C. in the light of relevant provisions of Cr,P.C and Police Rules. However, Learned Justice 
of Peace once again dismissed the Petitioner's application, vide order dated 11.04.2014, against 
which  W  P.  No.2157/2014  was  filed  in  this  Court  which  was  accepted,  vide  order  dated 
05.06.2014, whereby, Respondent No.3 was directed to register a criminal case in accordance with 
law but, again no steps towards registration of FIR were taken by the Police and Petitioner was 
made to approach this Court through contempt petition No. 417/2014, during which proceedings 
Inspector General of Police, ICT was also summoned and finally, vide order dated 07.04.2015, 
I.G. Police was directed to immediately register a criminal case against the accused person and 
also to submit compliance report through Registrar of this Court. Contempt petition was disposed 
of with said direction. After lapse of almost 22 days of the final order of this Hon'ble Court FIR 
No.91 dated 29.04.2015 was registered by the Respondent No.3 with a note at its bottom that since, 
the offence had allegedly been committed in North Waziristan, therefore, after further proceedings 
under  Rule  25-8(3)  of  Police  Rules  1934,  original  documents  would  be  transferred  through 
Secretary FATA to the concerned Police Station in North Waziristan for registration of case and 
its investigation. Moreover, said FIR was lodged against one accused namely Jonathan Banks only 
and with mala fide intentions name of another accused John A. Rizzo, General Counsel of the CIA, 
against whom an application for registration of FIR was submitted by the Petitioner on July, 19, 
2011 and who remained part of  all the litigations before the learned Sessions Judge as well as 
Hon'ble High Court during the last three years. 

3. 
Learned counsel for Petitioner, inter alia, contended that the act of transferring the case 
from Islamabad to FATA on the excuse that the alleged occurrence took place in North Waziristan 
is  illegal,  unwarranted  and  unjustifiable  as  under  Chapter  25  of  the  Police  Rules,  1934 
investigation should be carried out at a District where it can more efficiently be carried out and 
transfer of a case can only be made to other District on this score coupled with keeping in view 
the public convenience, whereas, in the present case it is not so, as in FATA there is no organized 
force just like the police force exists and investigation in the matter cannot be carried out more 
efficiently  than  in  Islamabad.  Moreover,  the  Petitioner  is  also  unable  to  join  any  type  of 
proceedings in FATA as he is currently living along with his family in Islamabad rather witnesses 
in the present case also cannot join any proceedings carried out at FATA. Learned Counsel further 
stated that if during the investigation arrest of the proposed accused is to be carried out same can 
be  effected  through  Interpol  and  for  that  purpose  assistance  of  Federal  Government  shall  be 
required  so  as  to  get  International  Warrants  against  the  accused  person.  Moreover,  in  case  of 
extradition of the accused person is sought same can only be availed through the help of Federal 
government.  Learned  Counsel  contended  that  Respondent  No.3  also  overstepped  his  authority 
while dropping the name of another accused John A. Rizzo as he was not authorized to pick and 
choose rather under obligation to act in accordance with Court order dated 07.04.2015, passed in 
Crl. Original No. 417/2014. Learned Counsel lastly contended that the Respondents are treating 
the Petitioner in a manner violative of his fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan and norms of justice, therefore, impugned acts which actually are 
speaking volumes about mala fide on the part of Respondents are to be set aside as such. 

4. 

On the other hand, SSP Police submitted report in writing stating therein that all the dead 

 
 
bodies are buried in the North Waziristan and the crime spot as well as witnesses are resident of 
said area, hence, there is no jurisdiction under which Islamabad Police can investigate the matter. 
Moreover, in a similar matter Hon'ble Peshawar High Court, Peshawar has issued certain directions 
to the Government of Pakistan to take up the matter with the Security Council of the UNO and to 
file a proper complaint giving complete details  of the losses sustained by the Pakistani civilian 
citizens both to life and properties due to drone strike to the UN Secretary General to constitute an 
independent War Crime Tribunal. The Petitioner was further directed to approach the concerned 
authority of government of Pakistan for redressal of his grievance. 

5. 
Learned Counsel for Petitioner submitted objections in writing on the reply filed by the 
Respondents  and  while  reiterating  the  same  during  arguments  termed  it  just  an  eye  wash  as 
procedure prescribed in Rules 25 and 26 of the Police Rules has not been followed while making 
transfer of the case to FATA which is quite evident from the fact that the FIR was registered on 
29.04.2015, and the media reported on the same day with reference to the statement of Respondent 
No.3  that  case  has  been  transferred  to  FATA  Secretariat  regarding  which  news  reports  of 
30.04.2015  are  also  available,  however,  said  fact  was  also  confirmed  by  the  Respondent  No.3 
when legal representatives of the Petitioner inquired from him on 30.04.2015. Thus it is impossible 
that the procedure mandatory for transfer of case as mentioned in the rules ibid could have been 
followed and it is established that no legal requirement has been fulfilled before transferring the 
case to FATA rather impugned act has been done in a hasty and unlawful manner while exercising 
the  authority  in  a  colorful  manner.  Learned  Counsel  while  referring  Rule  3  of  the  Chaper  26 
Volume III of the Rules and orders of the High Court submitted that when Police Rule 25.8 is read 
together with the above said High Court rule ordinarily a case should be investigated in the same 
jurisdiction where it was first lodged, however, if the District Magistrate considers it necessary to 
transfer the same then he can do so by giving a reasoned order amply demonstrating the ingredient 
of public convenience in it, whereas, in the present case neither any of the witnesses nor Petitioner 
can join the investigation in FATA as most of the witnesses are either foreigner or locals based in 
the major metropolitan areas of Pakistan due to ongoing military operation and frequent terrorist 
attacks in FATA. 

Learned  DAG  also  supported  the  stance  taken  by  the  ICT  Police  and  supported  the 

6. 
impugned order of transfer of investigation while terming it just and lawful. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  Counsel  for  Petitioner  as  well  as  learned  DAG  and  have  also 

7. 
perused the report submitted by the Police. 

8. 
Basic controversy involved in the present petition is regarding the transfer of investigation 
of case FIR No. 91/2015 under section 302 registered against the Jonathan Banks, Ex-State Chief 
of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) for committing murder of Petitioner's brother and son 
through  a  drone  attack.  The  sole  plea  which  the  Respondents  have  taken  as  justification  of 
impugned act is that the incident took place in FATA, where the witnesses of the incident are also 
present, whereas, on the contrary Petitioner termed the said act as arbitrary, based on mala fide 
intentions and aimed to sabotage the whole investigation process as well as violative of the relevant 
rules.  In  order  to  resolve  the  controversy  Chapter  25  of  the  Police  Rules,  1934  is  of  pivitol 
importance as it deals with the transfer of different criminal cases from one district to another and 
for ready reference same is reproduced hereunder:- 

 
 
"25.8---Cases which may be lawfully investigated in more local areas than one: (1) If the 
case is one which the officer-in-charge of the police station may lawfully investigate, but 
which also be lawfully and more successfully investigated in another police station, such 
officer while continuing his investigation, shall refer the matter to the Superintendent, who 
shall transfer the case or not as he sees fit; 

(2)  

If  it  is  desired  to  transfer  the  case  to  a  police  station  in  another  district,  the 
Superintendent shall refer the matter to the District Magistrate and move him to act 
according to the order contained in Chapter 26 Volume III, of the Rules and Orders 
of the High Court; 

(3)   When an investigation has been transferred from one district to another the files 
with the original first information report shall be forwarded to the Superintendent 
of the district to which the transfer is made.". 

For taking a decision regarding transfer of a case from one district/police station to another sub-
rule (1) ibid has direct relevance, perusal of which clearly depicts that for taking any such decision 
the first  thing which is  to be kept  in  mind is  the investigation of the very  case, whether it can 
effectively be carried out at that district  where the case is to be transferred as compared to the 
District/Police  Station  where  it  has  been  registered,  whereas,  when  matter  in  hand  is  passed 
through the said test it is quite obvious that the impugned decision is not supported by any such 
ground  as  admittedly  there  is  no  proper  infrastructure  available  at  FATA  required  to  properly 
investigate the matter and no investigating agency or an institution like Police is working there. 
Moreover, it is also an admitted fact that the drone attacks in the tribal areas are being controlled 
and  administered  by  the  CIA  authorities  which  run  its  affairs  from  Islamabad's  area  which  is 
situated in the territorial jurisdiction of Police Station Secretariat, Islamabad. In addition to that it 
is also observed that it is a matter of sensitive nature which is directly linked with the affairs of the 
Federal  Government  as  during  the  investigation  support  of  the  Federal  Government  shall  be 
required  at  each  and  every  stage  either  it  is  for  procuring  attendance  of  the  accused  or  other 
witnesses. 

Moreover, as the accused is currently out of Pakistan thus for locating or arresting shall 
have  to  be  made  through  International  Criminal  Police  Commission-INTERPOL  which 
department operates in its member countries through National Central Bureaus (NCBs) which is 
also its coordinating body and in Pakistan NCB is attached with FIA as D.G. FIA is ex-officio 
head of NCB and his office is also located in Islamabad, however, for making any foreigner part 
of  the  investigation  or  for  arresting  such  accused  correspondence  is  always  made  through  the 
Federal  Government,  meaning thereby that  at  each and every stage of the investigation role of 
Federal Government cannot be denied. 

Another aspect of transferring a matter from one district to another is explained through 
9. 
sub-rule  (2)  of  Rule  25.8  of  the  Police  Rules  ibid  through  which  order  contained  in  Rule  3  of 
Chapter 26, Volume Ill of the Rules and Orders of the High Court is made condition precedent for 
making such transfer which for ready reference is reproduced hereunder:- ' 

"3. Cases triable in more than one district. Forum to be determined with regard to public 
convenience.-The  necessity  for  transfer  of  a  case  may  arise  purely  on  grounds  of 

 
 
 
jurisdiction or in the ends of justice. As regards the former, sections 179 to 183 of the Code 
should be consulted, when a case is to be instituted in Court. In carrying out the provisions 
of these sections, cases which are triable in more than one district should not be transferred 
unnecessarily from one district to another. A Magistrate should act under these sections 
solely  with  reference  to  the  public  convenience.  Ordinarily,  the  proper  district  for  the 
enquiry into, and trial of offences falling under those sections would be the district in which 
the witnesses could, with the least inconvenience, attend." 

When above said provision of the Police Rules is read with Rule 3 of Chapter 26, Volume Ill of 
the High Court Rules and Orders, it entails presence of public convenience while making such 
transfer which is also not the case in the present matter as transfer made in the present case does 
not make it convenient either for Complainant or witnesses to join investigation at FATA. In this 
regard plea of the Petitioner is valid that the local witnesses who are living in different areas of the 
country as Internally Displaced Persons would also not be able to join the investigation rather the 
Complainant himself is residing with his family in the Federal Capital and it would also not be 
possible  for  him  to  visit  the  North  Waziristan  frequently  where  the  incident  took  place  due  to 
deteriorated conditions of law and order as army operation is also going on there. 

In this view of the matter, impugned act of transferring the investigation from Islamabad 
10. 
to FATA is not backed by any lawful reason except the plea of incident being taken place there 
which in my view is no reason to transfer the investigation there as better conditions and necessary 
infrastructure to investigate and sort out the matter is available here in Islamabad. 

These are the reasons for my short order dated 15.01.2018, which is reproduced here-in-

11. 
below:- 

"For the reasons to be recorded later on, instant Writ Petition is allowed. Impugned order 
dated 22nd June, 2015, through which Chief Commissioner,  Islamabad transferred  case 
FIR  No.  91  dated  29.04.2015,  registered  at  Police  Station  Secretariat  Islamabad  to  the 
concerned Police Station of North Waziristan, is hereby set aside being illegal, void and 
without jurisdiction.". 

Uploaded by IT department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer: The content available In this document are just for Information. Users are advised not to depend 
on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High Court, Islamabad is not responsible for 
any damages arising in contract from the use of the content of this documen 

 
 
