ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH OURT, ISLAMABAD,
OUDICIAL DEPARTMENT)

Criminal Appeal No.9U2015
Muhammad  Rameez I2 others o. The State €t  another

Appellants  by

Raja  Ghaneem  Aabir Khan and Mr. Muhammad Ilyas
VS
Khan,  Advocates.

Respondents by

Raja Rizwan Abbasi,  Advocate for Respondent  No.2
(Complainant)
Mr. Zohaib Hassan  Gondal,  State Counsel.
Muhammad  Anar,  Inspector/I.O., P.S. Nilore,
Islamabad.
Ishaq Khan, S.I.,  P.S. Nilore, Islamabad.

and

Criminal  Revision  No. 28/2015
Faisnr  Naseer u. Nazim  lqbal I  3 others

Appellants  by: 

Raja  Rizwan Abbasi,  Advocate.

Respondents by:

Raja  Ghaneern Aabir Khan and Mr. Muhammad Ilyas
Khary Advocates  for Respondents  No.1  to 3.
Mr. Zohaib Hassan  Gondal,  State Counsel.
Muhammad  Anar,  lnspector/LO.,  P.S. Nilore,
Islamabad.
Ishaq Khan, S.I.,  P.S. Nilorc,  Islamabad.

Date of Hearing: 17.08.2020.

IUDGMENT

MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI, I: Through this common judgment,  we

intend to decide  the captioned  criminal appeal  as well as criminal revision

arising out of judgment  dated 18.1,0.2AM,  passed by Additional  Sessions Judge

(East),  Islamabad, whereby Muhammad Rameez,  Nazim  lqbal  and Muhammad

Attique  (appellants)  have been convicted in case FIR No.91,  dated 2'1..08.2012,

under Sections  302,324,  337-F(ii)/34 PPC, P.S. Nilore,  Islamabad and  sentenced

in the following manner:

o  Under  Section 302(b)  PPC to undergo imprisonment  for life and to pay

compensation  to the tune of Rs]200,000/-  each to legal heirs  of deceased

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015  and Crl.  Revision  No

2015

Page  | 2

under Section 544-A Cr.P.C., in default  whereof, the appellants  shall

further suffer  simple imprisonment for a period of six (06) months  under

Section 544- A(2) Cr. P. C.

.  Under  Section 324 PPC to undergo rigorous  imprisonment  for 10 years

with fine of Rs.30,000/-  each, in default  whereof,  appellants  shall further

undergo simple imprisonment  of two months.

.  Under  Section 337-F(ii)  PPC  to undergo  simple imprisonment for one year

with fine of Rs.5,000f - each, in default  whereof, appellants  shall  further

undergo  simple imprisonment of three  (03) months.

.  Benefit  of Section  382-8  Cr.P.C. has been  given to the appellants.

2.  Brief and consolidated  facts referred in the instant cases are that Faisar

Naseer  (Complainant) filed a complaint  (Exh.PU) against Muhammad  Rameez,

Nazim Iqbal, Muhammad  Attique (appellants)  and Muhammad  Raqeeb (died

during  the trial) with the allegations  that he while  heading towards  his house

after performing his duty at Abbasi  CNG Station,  Bhara  Kahu, Islamabad  met his

younger  brother namely Aser Naseer  (deceased) nearby abandoned  house of

Muhammad Raqeeb at about 0L:30 p.il., where  appellants Muhammad Rameez,

Nazim  Iqbal and Muhammad  Attique (armed with .30 bore pistols) along with

Muhammad Raqeeb  (armed with a fire-arm) intercepted  them, whereby  Nazim

lqbal/appellant  made  two fire shots  on the deceased  hitting at the back of his

neck  followed by another  shot hitting the deceased  on right leg near his knee,

Muhammad  Attique/  appellant  fired  at the deceased  hitting him on right side

thigh and Nazim Iqbal/appellant  fired at the deceased hitting on right side

thigh. The complainant on raising  hue and cry was shot by Muhammad Raqeeb

with a pistol hitting  him at right superior  iliac spine  region  making an exit from

right thigh. The deceased  succumbed  to injuries at spot while complainant  was

taken to hospital  by his uncle  Qazt and cousin Asim. The motive alleged  in

1

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and  Crl. Revision  No.28/2015

Page | 3

complaint  was stated  to be that complainant's  sister was divorced by appellants'

uncle namely Abid Hussain. After  completion  of investigatiory  the said four

accused persons were charged  on 27.02.2013, to which they pleaded  not guilty

and claimed  trial. The Learned trial Court  after recording  of pro and contra

evidence  passed  the impugned  judgment 18.10.2014  while the appellants  and

complainant  feeling aggrieved  thereof  have filed the captioned  criminal appeal

and criminal  revision seeking acqulttal and enhancement  of  sentence,

respectively.

3. 

Learned  counsel for appellants contends  that the learned trial Court while

passing the impugned  judgment has ignored  the settled principles  of law and

has not given any reasoning  for passing of the impugned  judgmen!  that the

learned trial Court  had not taken into account  the discrepancies apparent on

record  and even ignored the defence evidence  brought on record  by the

appellants; that the medical  evidence  and ocular  account  are at variance to each

other but no benefit  in this regard  has been extended to the appellants; that the

learned trial Court while passing  the impugned judgment has also violated the

golden principle of criminal jurisprudence  as despite availability of glaring

discrepancies on record, benefit of doubt has not been extended to the

appellants,  therefore, impugned  judgment is liable to be set-aside  and appellants

may kindly be acquitted  of the charge.

4.  Conversely, learned  counsel for complainant  opposed the filing of

criminal  appeal of accused persons  on the grounds  that the prosecution has

successfully proved  the case against appellants,  as such the occurrence  has not

been denied  by the appellants  and the motive  as described by the complainant

has been proved against the appellants; that the medical evidence  is in line with

the prosecution  evidence,  while negative FSL report has no bearing  on the case

being  a corroborative piece  of evidence;  that the learned trial Court has rightly

appreciated  the evidence  available on record  but could not apply its judicial

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and  Crl. Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 4

mind while passing  the impugned judgment,  therefore, instant  criminal  revision

may kindly be accepted and Nazim lqbal/ appellant,  who  has been awarded  life

imprisonment, may be awarded death sentence  under Section  302(b) as well as

the fine as imposed by the learned  trial Court may be enhanced.

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record perused.

Perusal of record reveals that PW-LL  Faisar Naseer  (complainant)  lodged  a

complaint  Exh.PU to S.H.O. P.S. Nilore, Islamabad with the allegations  he was

going to his house on motorcycle  at 01:30 p.m. and when  he reached near the

house of Muhammad  Raqeeb/accused he joined his younger  brother  Aser

Naseer  (deceased),  aged about  77 /18 years, who was coming with his livestock

after  grazing.  In the meanwhile, appellants namely Nazim Iqbal,  Muhammad

Attique  and Muhammad Rameez, all armed with .30 bore pistol, while

Muhammad Raqeeb  armed with weapon, unpredictably  appeared and blocked

their way, whereby  Nazim  lqbal/ appellant  fired tr,vo shots  upon deceased

hitting on his back side of neck, Muhammad Attique/appellant fired upon

buttock  of the deceased,  whereafter  Nazim lqbal/ appellant again  fired upon  the

deceased  hitting on his right leg near knee gap. Whereas,  Muhammad  Raqeeb

fired upon the complainant on raising  of his hue and cry, which hit him on the

abdomen  and exit from the thigh. The incident was witnessed by his uncles

Khalid Hussain and Wazir as well as his cousin Asim Wazir, who took the

injured to hospital. The motive was the divorce  of complainant's sister by the

maternal uncle of accused persons namely Abid Hussain.  The complaint Exh.PU

was converted into FIR No.9L, dated 21..08.2012, under  Sections 302,324,  337-

F(ii)/34  PPC, P.S. Nilore,  Islamabad,  referred as Exh.PA.

7. 

The police  after reaching  at spot shifted the dead  body to PIMS  Hospital

through Muhammad  lftikhar Hussain/HC for the purpose of postmortem,

whereas  the complainant  was treated  by PW-6 Dr. Tanveer  Afsar Malik/MLO  at

I

Crl. Appeal  No.91l2015  and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 5

about  2.20 p.m. and as per MLR (Exh.PF), the following  injuries have  been

observed:

i., Fire-arm  entry  utound just 1cm medial to right superior  iliac spin
about 1 /z c.m. in size, irregular in margin with  no blackening,  no
tattoingbut  slight charring  marks uround in muscle deep.

ii. Fire-arm exit toound  on lateral surface  of nght thigh  about 7-9 c.m.
approximately from the anteior supeior  iliac  spine 1lz c.m. in size,
irregular in shape on examination ight femoral/pulsation  popliteal
pulsation  pousal pedals  pulsation,  The Abd soft and normal  BP 1.40/90
pulse  84 per min.

8. 

PW-9  Dr. Muhammad  Farrukh  Kamal/MLO,  PIMS Hospital conducted

the autopsy of Aser Naseer (deceased) and recorded the following eight injuries:

i.  Entry utound 1x1 c.m. circular  inaerted  margins  bloodstained  7cm
from right shoulder  6cm from  ruckbetuoeen  neck and shoulder.
ii.  Exit toound  2x2cm irregular aoerted margins bloodstained 3cm  from

sternel  notch  on ight side front  of chest.

iii.  Entry wound 'l.{Lcm circular inaerted  margin  bloodstained  9cm

from abooe Scm from mid line ight back  of chest.

itt.  Exit toound  2x2cm  irregular  aarted margin  bloodstnined  3cm from

sternel  notch  on ight front of chest.

o.  Entry ruound  1x7 circular  imterted  margin Scm abooe from mid

gluteal  line 4cm  from midline  gluteal on ight.

oi.  Exit  roound'1..5  x 1.5on irregulm aaerted  margin  bloodstained 8cm from
anteior supeior  iliac supiru  4cm from  midline  on left louer  abdomen.

uii. Wound  1x1cm  abrasion  type in the center of back.
aiii. Entry  utound  7cm aboae circular  iruterted margins  from ight  knee.
No exit rrtound.  X-ray  (P-5) showing  ight metallic bullet impacted
inbone of ngW thigh.

lnternal Examination

Walls  of thorax, pleurae, ight lung,  mesenteic aessels,  walls of
abdomen, peitoneum, gluteal and thigh muscles  ruere  ruptured and
damaged. All others were intact.

Opinion

ln my opinion  deceased died due to fire-arm injury which  caused
ruptured  and damage  of ngfu lung small  intestine  along utith  mesenteric
oessels  and muscles  of gluteal region and thigh ruere  ruptured and
damaged, All injuries are ante-mortem in nature and  sufficient  to cause
death  in ordinnry course  of nature.

Time  between  iniury  and death

1 to 2 or feru min,  time  befiwen death  and postmortem  3 to 4 hours

approximately,

The  postmortem  report has been referred  as Exh.PM, inquest  report as Exh.PN

and hospital  slip as Exh.PO.

Crl. Appeal  No.91l2015  and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page | 6

9.  During  the course of cross-examination,  PW-9 Dr. Muhammad  Farrukh

Kamal/MLO  acknowledged  that he has not mentioned  about the corresponding

holes  on the clothes of deceased.

10.  PW-16 Muhammad Anar/S.L i.e. Investigating  Officer of this case,

prepared  the rough  site plan Exh.PA/B,  secured  the blood through  cotton  vide

recovery  memo Exh.PB  and has also taken  into possession 09 empties  (P15/9)

along with one bullet head (P16)  through recovery  memo  Exh.PW.  The

Investigating  Officer  arrested  Muhammad  Raqeeb/accused  on same  day and got

physical remand  on next day i.e. 22.08.2012,  while the next day the Investigating

Officer  got recovered  the pistol on pointation of Muhammad  Raqeeb/accused

from his house vide recovery memo  ExtuPY.

11,. On 02.09.2012,  appellants  namely Nazim Iqbal and Muhammad  Attique

surrendered  before the police while Muhammad  Rameez  was arrested  on

04.09.201,2.  On 06.09.2012,  Nazim Iqbal/appellant got recovered  .30 bore  pistol

from his house through recovery memo Exh.PX,  regarding  which case FIR under

Sections 13/20/65  of the Arms Ordinance,1965  was  registered.  On09.09.2012,

Muhammad  Atiq and Muhammad  Rameez  got recovered.30  bore pistols from

their  respective house,  which were taken into possession vide recovery  memos

Exh.PZ and Exh.PZf 1., regarding  which  separate FIRs under Sections 13/20/65

of the Arms Ordinance,  1965 were registered,  whereafter  the appellants

Muhammad  Attique,  Muhammad Rameez and Nazim  Iqbal were sent to judicial

lockup  on 1.0.09.201,2,  against whom the Investigating  Officer  submitted

incomplete  challan on 1.2.09.2012. The Investigating Officer  has also  taken into

possession Talaqnama submitted by Rizwana Naseer,  vide recovery memo

Exh.PT.

1.2. The star eyewitness of this case is the complainant  i.e. PW-L1 Faisar

Naseer, who reiterated  his stance  of complaint. PW-lL Faisar Naseer  stated  that

he was not in company  of his deceased brother  f.or grazing  of the cattle, rather he

Crl. Appeal  No.91l2015  and CrI. Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 7

was on duty and after finishing his duty when he was coming  home the

occurrence  had taken  place,  though he has not produced  any of his attendance

sheet or evidence  to justify his attendance  to the Investigating Officer.  As per

stance of PW-1.1  Faisar Naseer, he was coming back from his duty and

accidentally met the scene of occurrence. He was confronted  with his stance

Exh.PU  regarding the weapon  of offence used by Muhammad Raqeeb,  whereby

he stated  that he used .30 bore pistol,  however  when Exh.PU  was confronted,  it

was not so recorded. He also mentioned  in his statement  recorded under  Section

161  Cr.P.C.  that Shalwar  of deceased  (Exh.P8) was having five  (05) bullet  holes,

however when it was confronted with the statement this fact was not so

recorded. He further confirmed  that Abid Hussain  had divorced  his sister two

years ago through  Talaqnama Mark-A,  which was not witnessed  by any of the

accused  person  as marginal witness.  PW-11 Faisar Naseer  further  confirmed  that

he filed  his application Exh.PU  at Polyclinic  Hospital to the Investigating  Officer,

but he was not sure that he informed the police, who  reached  the hospital,

however he acknowledged  that he had not informed the police  about  the

occurrence through any phone  call. PW-11  Faisar  Naseer  remained in hospital for

two months after the incident, but nothing  has been brought  on record  to that

effect. During  the course of incident  he had seen  his brother  and accused  persons

at the same time when firing was being made.

13.  The other eyewitness  of the occurrence is PW-12 Khalid Hussain,  who

stated that on 21,.08.2012,  he along  with nephew Aser  Naseer  were going to home

after grazing  the cattle and suddenly  the accused party  appeared  at spot and

stopped them. Nazim  lqbal/ appellant  made two fires upon the deceased hitting

him on the back side of neck, followed  by another fire shot by Muhammad

Attique/appellant  hitting the deceased on his left buttock,  whereafter  Nazim

lqbal/ appellant  made a straight  fire hitting the deceased  on right leg near the

knee joint.  PW-11 Faiser Naseer/complainant  on seeing  the said firing rushed

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015  and CrI. Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 8

towards his brother (deceased) while making  hue and cry, upon which

Muhammad Raqeeb/accused  made a shaight fire on him hitting  him below  the

right side of abdomen. PW-12 Khalid  Hussain also stated that his brother  Wazir

and other nephews  reached at  the spot and took PW-11 Faiser

Naseer/complainant to Polyclinic Hospital. He alleged the motive of the

occurrence  as previous  enmity  i.e. divorce of the deceased's sister by the

maternal uncle  of appellants. During the course  of cross-examination,  PW-1,2

Khalid Hussain acknowledged that he is real uncle of deceased and works in

Phoenix  Security Company,  Aapbara from  last 6/7 years with 12 duty hours i.e.

from 06 a.m. to 06 p.m. He further confirmed  that he had no enmity with the

accused  party, however his brother  (father of deceased)  had developed  enmity

with the accused  party after  the divorce  of his daughter.  He also confirmed that

he mentioned  in his statement recorded under Section  161 Cr.P.C.  that accused

Muhammad  Attique  made a straight  fire hitting the deceased on left buttock,

however  when confronted  no such fact was recorded.  Similarly, he had also  been

confronted  with his statement  where he had mentioned  that deceased tried to get

up after receiving  fire-arm injury from  Muhammad  Attique/  appellant,  but same

was not mentioned  in his statement, nor had he mentioned  the motive  behind the

occurrence in his statement  recorded  under Section 161 Cr.P.C., even he has been

confronted  regarding  statement of  repeated fire alleged upon Nazim

Iqbal/ appellant, but said fact was not recorded.  PW-12 Khalid Hussain  has not

produced  any documentary  evidence to confirm that he was on leave on the day

of occurrence  and the incident took place in the main street of village.  He further

acknowledged that police reached at spot after 15/20 minutes  of the alleged

occurrence and he recorded  his statement under Section 1.67  Cr.P.C. to

Muhammad  Anar/S.I.  i.e. Investigating  Officer of this case. He did not

accompany  the injured to the hospital, however  he confirmed  that  he and PW-11

Faisar  Naseer/complainant were  behind the deceased in the alleged incident  and

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 9

none from  locality  was present over thert, even none  else crossed them in street

while passing through the street.

1.4. In order to prove  the motive  of this case, the prosecution  has produced

PW-13 Rizwana Naseer, who stated that she was married to Abid Hussain in the

year 1996 and the accused party used to fight with his brothers  and on the

instigation of accused persons/appellants  her husband used to torture  her. She

stated that she was divorced on 10.11.2011,  which is the motive behind the

occurrence.  During the course  of cross-examination,  she acknowledged  that she

remained  wife of Abid Hussain  for 15 years  and  she has one son from the said

wedlock, who is presently living with Abid Hussain,  regarding  which she has

filed a suit for custody of his son, which  is still subjudice. She further

acknowledged that at the time of occurrence she along  with injured  brother

(complainant)  and  deceased  were present  at spot and none other was present  at

the spot.

15.  The prosecution  has also produced  recovery  witness  i.e. PW-14  ZaIar

Mehmood, who stated that on 21,.08,2012,  he was present at the scene of

occurrence when Investigating Officer  had secured blood through cotton  as well

as recovered nine empties of .30 bore pistol along with one bullet  head through

recovery memos  Exh.PV  and Exh.PW, respectively.  On06.09.201,2,he along with

Wajid Hussain were present  at the shop of one Haroon  ur Rasheed  at about  L2 in

the noon, when  Nazim Iqbal/appellant  along with Investigating  Officer and

other police  officials came there, whereby  said accused  person led the police

parry  towards a residential house,  from where  he got recovered  .30 bore pistol

(P10) from a gun holster lying in a room, which was taken into possession

through  Exh.PX. During  the course  of cross-examination , PW-1,4 Zatar Mehmood

acknowledged  that he is the real brother of Muhammad  Naseer i.e. father  of

deceased  and real uncle of deceased.  He further  acknowledged  that none from

the locality has been  asked to record  their statement,  except  him and the other

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and  Crl. Revision  No.28/2015

Page | 10

witness, even the recovery  was not witnessed by the other residents of the

locality. He also confirmed  that on 06.09.2012,  three (03) police  officials came at

the house of Nazim lqbal/ appellant  for alleged  recovery and no one  was present

there at the shop,  except  him,  and he accompanied  them, however  he could not

recognize  the pistol  recovered  during his presence.

1.6. Likewise,  on 31.08.2012, PW-15 Ikram ZaIar witnessed the recovery of .30

bore pistol (P11) having been  effected on the pointation  of Muhammad

Raqeeb/accused  along  with its licence  (P1,2) vide recovery memo  Exh.PY.  He

again  joined the recovery  proceedings of .30 bore pistol  (P13),  recovered on the

pointation  of Muhammad Attique/appellant  along with Abdul Aziz  on

09.09.201,2  through  recovery  memo  Exh.PZ.  He was also witness  of recovery  of

third pistol i.e. .30 bore pistol  (P14) on the pointation of Muhammad

Rameez/appellant,  which was taken into possession vide recovery  memo

Exh.PZ/1,. During  the course of cross-examination,  PW-15 Ikram Zaf.ar has

recognized  the pistols recovered  in his presence from  accused persons namely

Muhammad  Raqeeb, Muhammad  Atiq and Muhammad  Rameez.

17.  PW-1.6 Muhammad Anar/S.I.  investigated  the crime, arrested  the accused

persons  and submitted his final report under Section  173  Cr.P.C. He stated  that

he remained  at the place of occurrence  for about 15 minutes,  who received the

written  application  from complainant in hospital on the day of occurrence.  He

acknowledged  that inquest  report  had to be signed by him and then by doctor

under the law, but his signatures were not present on the inquest  report, again

volunteered that at the end of report his signatures are available.  He also

confirmed  that Columns  No.22  and 23 of the inquest report were vacant  and not

filled up. He also confirmed that he had taken  the recovered  empties  and a bullet

head to the police station and handed  it over to Moharrar  Malkhana on same

day. The pistols  were  recovered on 31.08.2012, 06.09.2012  and 09.09.2012,  which

were  kept in the police station until 19.09.2012  when the Moharrar Malkhana had

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 11

sent the nine empties and one bullet head for ballistic examination.  He further

confirmed that on 79.09.2012, the empties and bullet  head  were  returned under

objection, whereafter same were re-sent  to the Forensic  Science  Laboratory.  He

also confirmed  that Muhammad Attique and Muhammad Raqeeb  were  not

found present at the day and time of occurrence.  The Investigating Officer has

not verified Talaqnama  produced  by PW-L3  Rizwana  Naseer. He also confirmed

that the doors of the houses belonging  to accused  Muhammad Attique and

Muhammad Rameez were  not locked,  rather closed, which were opened  by said

accused persons.

18.  On the contrary, the defence has also recorded  their counter version,

whereby  DW-1 Farhat  Shaheen  stated that on 21,.08.2012, at about 01:15 p.ffi.,

when she was at her house along with Muhammad  Attique/accused for greeting

of Eid, a child informed  them that her brother Touheed Iqbal, who is deaf and

dumb, received a stab wound  at the hands  of deceased,  as such, DW-1  Farhat

Shaheen  was not present at the scene of occurrence,  therefore,  her testimony is

considered  to be a hearsay having  no worth.

19.  Similarly, Nazim lqbal/  appellant  appeared  as DW-2 in his own defence  in

terms of Section  340(2) Cr.P.C. and stated that  he was present  at the residence of

his maternal uncle at |awa Lal Pari, where he received a call from  his brother

Naveed  Iqbal at about 1:50 p.m. informing him that the deceased and Rizwan

Zafar had attacked  on Touheed  Iqbal, whereupon he committed  murder  of the

deceased  through.30  bore pistol. During the course  of cross-examination, DW-2

Nazim  lqbal/ appellant  has failed to produce  any defence evidence to establish

that he was not present  at the scene  of occurrence, rather his plea of alibi has not

been acknowledged.  However,  DW-2  Nazim  lqbal/ appellant admitted that

complainant's sister was married to his maternal uncle namely Abid  Hussain,

who divorced  the said lady,  even he never filed any application  for the injures  on

the person of Touheed Iqbal,  nor filed any private complaint regarding  their

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and Crl.  Revision  No,28/2015

Page | 12

counter version. He was specifically  asked  a question in this regard,  but he could

not place  any valid  reason  for non registration  of the FIR.

20.  Likewise, DW-3 Muhammad Attique/  appellant acknowledged  that on

21,.08.2012,  at about L to L:L5 p.m., he was present at the house of sister DW-1

Farhat  Shaheen,  a little bit near to the place of occurrence  and during

conversation his nephew came there informing  them that  deceased  had attacked

on Touheed  Iqbal with knife, whereas  Naveed  Iqbal had fired a shot  at deceased.

However, Similarly, DW-3  Muhammad Attique/appellant  has also failed to

justify his plea of alibi,  even not justified the non-filing  of any application  to

record  their  counter  version in evidence,  especially in the case of Naveed Iqbal

and injuries  of Touheed  Iqbal.

21.. DW-4 Abid Hussain stated that he was married  to PW-13 Rizwana Naseer

on 30.06.1996  and after L5 years of his marriage the latter demanded  divorce.

During  the course of cross-examination,  he acknowledged  that all accused

persons are his real nephews and due to divorce  to PW-13 Rizwana  Naseer, the

relationship  of the accused  persons become strained with the complainant  party,

even there  was exchange of harsh  words/altercations  between  the parties  before

and after the divorce.

22.  DW-s  Muhammad Akram  stated that on 21,.08.2012  i.e. second day of Eid,

he along with his sister, brother  Muhammad  Masood,  Mehmood Hussain  and

Nazim  Iqbal/accused  were present at the house  of Muhammad  Masood  at about

1:30 p.m. to 1:50 p.m., when Nazim lqbal/ appellant  received  a telephone  call

from his brother Naveed Iqbal informing  him about the incident that he had lost

his control  on temper on seeing his brother Touheed Iqbal in injured  condition

and shot dead the deceased.  During the course of cross-examination,  DW-5

Muhammad  Akram  acknowledged  that he informed the police regarding  said

incident but despite efforts of the Coutt nothing is available on record to justify

t

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and  Crl. Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 13

the stance that he had ever  informed  the police authorities regarding their

version, therefore,  said evidence  has no value.

23.  Similarly,  Muhammad Masood appeared  as DW-6 and stated that on

second day of Eid i.e. 21..08.2012,  he hosted a feast at his house  and invited his

brother  DW-s Muhammad Akram, sister and brother  Mehmood along with

family  and Nazim lqbal/ appellant  along with family  when he received

information  that incident took place where  Touheed Iqbal got injured at the

hands  of deceased  using Churi blows, whereupon  Naveed Iqbal  had fired  upon

the deceased, but he has no clue about any complaint  ever filed on behalf of

accused side to the police  regarding  their counter  version. However,  he

acknowledged  that complainant's  sister was wife of his brother and divorce  had

taken place  between  them.  He also acknowledged  that said divorce led to

strained  relationship  between  complainant  party and accused persons.

24.  The last star witness  of defence  side is DW-7  Naveed Iqbal i.e. son of

Muhammad  Raqeeb/accused,  who stated that on 27.08.201,2,  he was present in

his house  when he heard hue and cry of Touheed Iqbal  and when  he went out

with his .30 bore pistol,  he saw the latter being  beaten up by the deceased  and

Rizwan  Zafar, to which he lost his temper and opened fire upon the deceased

hitting on his right leg, whereas  Rizwan  Zaf.ar fled away from the scene of

occurrence, while the deceased  when tried to escape from the place  of

occurrence,  DW-7 Naveed  Iqbal again opened two fires upon the deceased

hitting on his back near his shoulder, rdhereafter  he came  back to his house with

his brother Touheed Iqbal. He has also taken the stance that his brother

Muhammad Attique,  Muhammad Rameez and Nazim Iqbal and his father

Muhammad Raqeeb were not present  at the place of occurrence,  as such, PW-1.2

Khalid  Hussain  and PW-11  Faiser Naseer/complainant  were  also not present  at

the scene of occurrence.  He further steited that he informed  the police regarding

the occurrence  on same  day, but surprisingly  he had not moved  any application

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015 and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page | 14

that his brother  Touheed  Iqbal was injured in any manner  nor his father ever

moved such application, although he has taken the specific  stance  that his

brother Touheed  Iqbal was medically  examined, though  he is not aware about

the injuries  of Touheed Iqbal, which were declared  self inflected,  even he neither

accompanied  Touheed Iqbal to hospital  nor had visited the police station in this

regard,  even not informed to the higher authorities  of police through submission

of any application  or recording  of his statement.

25.  Keeping in view  the defence  version, it was imperative  for defence  to have

produced Touheed  lqbal, who had allegedly  received  injuries  at the hands  of

deceased, but surprisingly,  said Touheed  Iqbal was given up by the defence

through  recorded  statement  on 08.07.2014  before the Court.

26.  Perusal  of the defence version reveals that Naveed  Iqbal had committed

murder  of deceased  through .30 bore pistol and this fact has also been admitted

by the former before  the Court that he committed  murder of the deceased  for

having his brother Touheed  Iqbal beaten up at the hands of deceased,  as such,

non-production of Touheed Iqbal devastates  the defence  evidence  contaminating

into the view that every  step taken by the defence  is an afterthought.

27.  The juxtaposition  of prosecution evidence  and defence version  establishes

that PW-11 Faiser Naseer/complainant  i.e. brother  of deceased has explained the

alleged occurrence  with specific roles  attributed  to accused persons  and the

manner  in which deceased has been done to death, as such, exhaustive  cross-

examination  by the defence does  not shatter  the complainant,  even his statement

was corroborated  through statement of PW-12 Khalid  Hussain in a proper

manner

28.  The motive in the name of divorce  is acknowledged  by both the sides  and

proved  on record, though  the marriage was dissolved at least two years earlier to

the incident,  therefore, the immediate  cause of attack  is not brought on record by

the prosecution. 1,9.09.2012  - 21,.08.2012

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015  and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page  | 15

29.  The fire-arm 09 empties  along with one bullet head recovered from the

spot on the day occurrence were not sent to Forensic  Science Laboratory  until the

recovery  of weapons  of offence i.e. empties along with the bullet head despite

having  been taken  into possession on21.fi8201.2  were kept in Malkhana  and  sent

to FSL on 0L.10.2012, whereas  the weapons  of offence having been recovered  on

31..08.2012,06.09.2012  and  09.09.2012  were sent to FSL on 08.1,0.2012,  as stated by

PW-z Ijaz Hussain Shah/Constable. However, the result of FSL (Exh.PA/G),

dated  20.06.2013,  though  confirms  the use of recovered  pistols and matched  with

fire-arm empties,  has no evidentiary  value and is inconsequential.  Reliance  is

placed upon 2008  SCMR 707 (Ali Sher and others Verws ILe Stqte).

30.  The evidence  available  on record clearly links the appellants with the

commission  of offence,  even the defence version  has no legs to stand and  same

has been discarded  for having no material evidence, rather  is an afterthought,

especially  when the defence has not produced the injured Touheed  Iqbal  and

same  was given up by the defence.  This  aspect  leads  this Court towards  the

conclusion in terms of Article 129(9) of the Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  as the

defence  has intentionally been given up Touheed  Iqbal, who, if had been

produced,  could  have  gone against the defence  version,  though DW-7 Naveed

Iqbal confessed the commission of murder,  but his testimony has not been

corroborated  through independent means,  and as such, he is declared  to be a

witness  not truthful  and made  a staternent on oath before  the Court, which is

nothing  but a bundle  of lies. His entire version has to be considered  a created

scheme to exonerate his brothers  i.e. appellants  from the sentence awarded  by

the learned  trial Court.

31.  This Court has also gone  through  the impugned judgment  and observed

that same covers  all aspects  on the ca$e in hand and is free from any illegality.

The plea of alibi taken  by the appellants is not proved  and entire defence  version

has been demolished  by their own evidence.  The sentence awarded by the

a

Crl. Appeal  No.91/2015  and Crl.  Revision  No.28/2015

Page | 16

learned  trial Court is in accordance  with law and the accused  persons/appellants

have rightly  been convicted in terms of Section  302(b)  PPC for committing

Qatl-e-Amd of the deceased,  as such, the learned trial Court  has already  taken  a

lenient view while awarding life imprisonment  instead of death sentence,

therefore,  captioned  CrL A?peal No,91 L5 (Muhammad  Rameez I  2 others as. The

State 8 another\ is hereby DISMISSED.  However, criminal revision filed by

complainant  side  is also not made  out, especially  when no justified  reasons  have

been brought  on record for enhancement of sentence  awarded to appellants

under  the law, therefore, captioned Crl. Reaision  No.2820'L5  Gaisar  Naseer a

Nazim I

€t  i others is not made out on reasons discussed  above  and same  is

herebv  DISMISSED.

(FTAZ AHMAD  ANJUM  IANDRAN)

(MO

JUDGE

 AKHTAR
JUDGE

Announced  in open Court  on:

k

*on.

JUDGE

JUDGE

Khalid  Z.

