ORDER SHEET

TI\t Tt-{tr Tql A]VIARAN HT/:LI 

IPT TCI AIVIARAN

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

'N! 

Writ Petition No. 4416712019

Jahangeer Aslam
Vercus

Rakhshanda

etc.

Order with signature  of Judge and that of pafties
or counsel where  necessary.

S. No. of
orderl
oroceedinqs

Date of
orderl
Proceedings

(01)  24.t2.20t9  Mr. Muhammad  Waqas

Malik, Advocate  alongwith

petitioner.

Through this writ petition,  the petitioner  has

prayed for direction  for production of minor (his son)

Abdullah  Jahangeer  alis Taj Mir before  this Court.
2. 

Learned counsel for petitioner  inter-alia contends

that the petitioner has filed custody  application  in terms

of Sections 17 & 25 of Guardians  and Wards Act, 1890,

which is pending with learned Guardian Court, however,

during  the trial learned Guardian Court vide order dated

23.1L.20L9  directed respondent  No.URakhshanda  Taj,

not to remove the minor from the territorial  jurisdiction

of this Court, but despite passing of said order the minor

has been removed  by respondent  No.Umother from the

territorial  jurisdiction  of this Couft,  therefore,  petitioner

has filed an application  before the learned  Guardian

Court for initiation of contempt of court proceedings

against respondent No.1  for disobedience  of order  dated

23.LL.2019.  He further contends  that learned  Guardian

Court has issued notice to the respondent  No.l for

28.0t.2020  and as such urgency  of the matter  has not

been catered by the learned  Guardian  Couft.

3. 

Keeping in view the peculiar  circumstances  of

this case and pendenry of the matter wlth the learned

Guardian  CouG  inteference into the proceedings  of the

learned Guardian  Court is not permissible,  however,

learned  Guardian  Couft seized with the matter  is directed
to proceed with the pending application of the
petitionerpahangeer  Aslam on urgent  basis for

compliance  of its own order. It is expected from the

learned  Guardian Couft to proceed  with the matter  on

day to day basis for early conclusion  of the same.
4. 

Instant writ petition  stands dispred of in

above terms.

Khurram

(MOHSTN

JUDGE

