ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Civil Revision No. 334/2015

Mian Muhammad  Shafi  Javed etc.

VS

Muhammad  Fahad  etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedinss
(ou

Order wtth stgnature  of Judge and that of parties or
counsel where necessary.

Date of
order/
Proceedlngs
20.12.2019 Hafiz Liaqat Manzoor Kamboh, Advocate  for the

petitioners.

Mohsln Akhtar Kayani  J. Through instant  civil

revision, the petitioner  has assailed  the judgment

dated  2O.1O.2O11,  passed by learned  Civil Judge,  lst

Class, Islamabad  and judgment and decree dated

29.O5.2O15,  passed learned Additional  District Judge

(West), Islamabad,  whereby  suit filed by the petitioner

has been dismissed concurrently.

2. 

Learned  counsel for representing the legal heir

(petitioner  No.1-A  of petitioner)  inter-alia contends that

Mian Muhammad  Shafi Javed/petitioner filed suit for

Declaration and  Perpetual  Injunction  against

Muhammad Fahad/respondent No.1 (real son),

whereby Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed had challenged

the transfer of suit House No. 198, Street No. 46,

Sector F-l1/3, measuring 500 s.q yds, comprising  of

double  storey in 

the  name of  Muhammad

Fahad/respondent  No.1  in 

the  office  of

CDA/respondent No.2 on  the  ground of  fraud,

misrepresentation,  undue  influence in  his lifetime,

however, during the pendency of the suit petitioner

' 

,.RNo.334l2015

Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed  died on O7.ll.2OO9,

whereby Mian Muhammad  Sami (petitioner  No.l-A)

and respondents No. 1-A to l-D were impleaded as

parties. It has further been contended that the learned

Trial Court as well as learned Appellate  Court have not

considered the evidence in  its  true perspective,

whereby question of fraud  was proved on record and

respondent  No.l has failed to justify any valid reason

for the transfer of the suit property in his name nor

any valid justification  was brought  on record as to why

the late father Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed of the

petitioner and respondents,  deprived other legal heirs

including  present petitioner by  transfer of  suit

property  in 

the  name  of  Muhammad

Fahad/respondent  No.1 only. It  has lasfly been

contended  that the question of fraud has been proved

by the petitioner as well as from the record of

CDA/respondent  No.2, which has further been

corroborated  by the medical  evidence referred on

record i.e. Ex.P1 to Ex.P54.

3.  Arguments  heard, record perused.

4. 

From the perusal  of record, it has been observed

that Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed was owner  of

House No. 198, Street No. 46, Sector  F-l1/3,

measuring 5OO s.q yds, who transferred the suit

property  in 

the  name  of  Muhammad

Fahad/respondent  No.1 (real son) vide transfer letter

dated 05.05.2007, issued by  the  respondent

No.2/CDA,  which has been brought on record by the

plaintiff Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed through

Mark-A. Mian Muhammad  Shafi  Javed was father  of

J

' 

".RNo.334l2015
present  petitioner No. 1-A) namely  Mian Muhammad

Sami and respondent No. 1 / Muhammad  Fahad  and

respondents

No. 1-A to I-D (real sons and daughters),  who died on

O7.ll.2OO9.  During  the pendency  of the civil suit, he

challenged  the transfer of the suit house in the name

of respondent  No.1/Muhammad  Fahad  mainly on the

ground that transfer of suit property in the name of

respondent No.1 is result of fraud, misrepresentation

and undue influence. After the demise of late Mian

Muhammad  Shafi Javed, Mian Muhammad  Sami

transposed in his position being  plaintiff,  whereas

other  legal heirs  have been impleaded  as respondents

as 1-A to l-D in the main suit as well as before this

Court in the instant civil revision.

5.  The meticulous review of plaint  disclosed that

late Mian Muhammad  Shafi Javed acknowledges that

he has transferred  the suit property in the name  of

Muhammad Fahad/respondent  No.l vide CDA letter

No.CDA/EM-F- rt /3 (1981I 83 /6128 dated 05.05.2007,

Islamabad, whereby the particular plea taken by the

late Mian Muhammad  Shafi Javed has been reflected

in para-S, 6 of the plaint in the following  manner:-

5.  Thnt tlrc plaintiff lws neuer transfer  the
suit house  in fauour of the defendant
No.7, neuer got recorded his statement,
neuer applied in  anA manner, neuer
signed  anA paper,  neuer moued anA
application  to tle concern authoritg CDA.

6. That in anA case  anA paper is signed or
thumb  impressed  bg the plaintiff  in
respect of tlrc transfer  of tlw suit lwuse
bg tle plaintiff  infauour of tle defendant
tlen it  due to undue influence and
mbrepresentation.  Tlrc defendant  JVo.l is
real son of tlrc plaintiff  and had good
terms with plaintiff. The plaintiff lnd

4

C.R  No. 334D015

blind faith and trust in defendant No.l
being the real son. The plaintiff had
neuer sign anq paper knowing and
understanding  it for the transfer of tlw
suit house. Tlrc plaintiff is unable  to
read, sign and understand  angthing.

6.  The above referred stance spells out that late

Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed claims that he never

executed  any document, nor  submitted transfer

application  in the office of CDA and at the same time,

he claims  that any document signed or any thumb

impression  made by him was result of undue influence

and misrepresentation.

7.  On 

the  other  hand,  Muhammad

Fahad/respondent  No.l has contested the suit by

hling the written statement on record, wherein he

contends  that he is in possession  of the suit house

and has also entered into lease agreement  with one

Muhammad  Yasin and is paying the tores, installed

PTCL connection  bearing no. 2225176 in his name

and defended the transfer of suit property in his name.

The other legal heirs i.e. 1-A to l-D except present

petitioner  have also filed written statement,  wherein

they have taken a categorical  stance  that their father

Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed has transferred the suit

house in the narne of Muhammad  Fahad/respondent

No.l, being the younger son in the family members

and deceased/father had great love and affection

towards him, who gifted the suit house to  the

Muhammad Fahad/respondent  No.l with consent  of

all other family members.

8.  The issues were framed and Mian Muhammad

Sami/present  petitioner  entered  into witness box as

5

C.R  No. 33412015

PW- 1 on behalf of Mian Muhammad  Shafi Javed and

recorded his evidence, whereby he acknowledged  the

demise of his father on O7.LL.2OO9  and has also

acknowledged  the relationship  of respondents  No.1, 1-

A to  l-D  (impleaded  as legal heirs) of late Mian

Muhammad Shafi  Javed.

9.  Present  petitioner while appearing in witness

box as PW-l contends that his father was owner of the

suit house, constructed  the same.  He was sick since

long having diabetes and hypertension,  lack of sight

and hearing  problem  and he never transferred  the

property  in the name of respondent No.l, however,

when he verified  the status of the suit house in the

office of CDA, it came to his knowledge  that the suit

house has been transferred on 05.05.2007  in  the

narne of respondent No.l/Muhammad  Fahad,  which

was challenged  by him on the question  of fraud.

10.  During the  course of  cross-ex€rmination,

petitioner acknowledges  that they are five brothers  and

one sister, but none of them appeared  as witness  in

the witness box with him. He denied that they did not

agree with his stance. He also acknowledges  that:-

-7r x f  i g,CD A o f o ctb !7v  t t o

1 1.  The first floor of the subject property was leased

out to Muhammad Yasin by respondent No.l and

respondent No.l was living in the ground  portion. He

also acknowledges  that

-+{: challenge  /o t * f  i tu i u.d. f ,ut !7v  tt.

12.  Petitioner No.l-A has also admitted that at the

time of transfer of suit house in the CDA office, his

t 

a.R No.  33412015

brothers and sister were witnesses and he has also not

produced  evidence  to the effect that his father was

suffering from any disease  at the time of transfer  of said

property and respondent  No.l was living with the late

father.

13.  On the  other hand, respondent  side has
produced  Adil  Hussain,  Assistant  Estate

Management-I,  CDA as Dw- 1, who submitted  the

record of the CDA and contends  that suit plot was

transferred  in 

the  name  of 

respondent

No.l/Muhammad  Fahad  and it was transferred in his

narne on 05.05.2007  and he has also produced  the

original application  for transfer of plot as Ex.DW-1/1

and application  of Mian Muhammad  Shafr Javed for

transfer  of the suit property through Ex.Dl/2  alongwith

reply of application  Ex.DWl /3, he acknowledges  that
propert5r was transferred by way of family transfer,

which was in the name  of respondent No.l and the

application for transfer  contains  the signatures  of

Muhammad  Fahad only. Dw- 1 further  stated that

Ex.Dl/l  was contested/verified by Mian Muhammad

Rafi/respondents  No.1-A, son of Mian Muhammad  Shali

Javed, however, clearance of NAB as Ex.Dwl/pl  was

available on record.

t4.  Respondents have also produced  Muhammad

Yasin tenant of the first floor of the suit property  as

DW-2, he acknowledges  that he was the tenant  of

respondent  No.l/Muhammad Fahad through lease

agreement  and late Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed died

in  the sarne house.  Respondent  No.l/Muhammad

Fahad also appeared as Dw-3 and has produced

' 

,.RNo.334l2015

transfer letter as Ex.Dw-3/  1 and reiterated the stance

that the property in question  was transferred  in his

n€une  and leased out  the  first  floor to  Dw-

2/Muhammad  Yasin.  He has also produced  property

tar  record as  Ex-Dw-312, Ex.Dw-3/3  alongwith

conservancy  charges as Ex.Dw-3/4 to Ex.Dw-3/6,

similarly he has produced  telephone bills as Ex-Dw-

3/7 and electricity bill as Ex.Dw3/8.

15.  During the course of cross-examination  Dw-3

acknowledges that  transfer letter as  Ex.Dw-3/ 1

contains his picture, which  was photographed in the

office of CDA.  Respondents  have also produced Mian

Muhammad Rafi as Dw-4, who is the oldest  son of late

Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed,  who contends that his

late father called all the brothers and sister in the year

2OO7 and expressed  his desire for the transfer of suit

house in the name of respondent  No.1 and all the legal

heirs (brothers and sister) have acknowledged  their

decision and resultantly,  property was transferred  in

the name of respondent  No.I, he also acknowledges

that he is the witness of transfer of the suit proper$,

when the suit property  was transferred in the name of

Muhammad Fahad/respondent  No. 1,  he  also

acknowledges  that at the time of transfer  he signed  as

a  witness. DW-4 further confirms  that the suit

property is in  possession of respondent  No.l and

Muhammad  Yasin was his tenant, who was residing  in

the first floor.

16.  Keeping  in view the above background, it has

been  confirmed  from the record that propert5r was

owned by late Mian Muhammad Shafi Javed,  which

8

C.RNo.33412015
was subsequently  transferred in  the  narne of

respondent  No.1 vide transfer  application Ex.Dw-3/ 1

dated O9.O4.2OO7, which contains the photograph,

signatures, thumb  impression of  Late  Mian

Muhammad  Sha-fi Javed  and respondent No.l with

their photographs,  which was identified during the

course of evidence. The separate  application from Mian

Muhammad  Shafi  Javed was also filed in the name of

Director Estate Management,  CDA as Ex.DwL/2  with

the claim that he transferred suit property in the name

of respondent  No.1 and the life of respondent  No.1 was

in danger and he intends  to include  the name of Mian

Muhammad  Sami in the said property, which was

replied by the CDA vide letter dated 06.08.2007,

whereby  late Mian Muhammad  Shafi Javed was

informed that his request for inclusion could not be

acceded  to.

17.  The entire record reflects that the suit property

was transferred  by late Mian Muhammad  Shafi  Javed

in his lifetime voluntarily through his consent while

taking into confidence the other family members, who

acknowledge  the transfer of the suit property in the

name of Muhammad  Fahad/respondent  No.1.

18.  As  such the  initial onus is  upon  Mian

Muhammad  Sami/petitioner  No.l-A), who failed to
justify the  onus regarding question of  fraud,

misrepresentation and undue influence  nor he is able

to demonstrate from record that Mian Muhammad

Shafi Javed was suffering  from any disease in which

his mental faculties could not understand  nature of

the act.

I

t

' 

".RNo.334l2015
19.  The documentary  evidence qua the medical

history of Mian Muhammad  Shafi Javed appended

with the record as Ex.Pl to Ex-P12 are the Lab test

report  of diabetes and his OPD treatment  for his eyes,

which  do not reflect any serious ailment,  through

which it  could be assumed  that the property  in

question  was wrongly  transferred.

20.  On the other hand,  CDA authorities  have

acknowledged the transfer of the suit property  in the

name of respondent  No.l through a proper manner

and no element of fraud/misrepresentation is visible

on record.

2L.  I have  gone through  the concurrent findings of

the learned Trial Court as well as learned  Appellate

Court, whereby  issue No.l has rightly been answered

in favour of Muhammad Fahad/respondent No.l in

detail  by the Trial Court and the findings  given by the

said Court were upheld by the learned Appellate  Court

in Regular First Appeal.

22.  It is trite law, that the question  of facts, which

have been appreciated  concurrently by the Courts

could not be interfered in any manner in revisional

jurisdictional  under Section 115 CPC.  Reliance is

placed upon 2O76  SCMR 24  (Naztm-ud-ad  and,

others  VS Shelkh Zla-ul-Oamar  and others).

23.  The petitioner has failed to discharge the onus

qua the question  of fraud as required in Article lLT of

Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 1984, failing which, he is

not entitled for his relief as determined by tJ:e Courts

below. Petitioner has also failed to  produce  any

independent evidence to justify his plea and as such

10 

c.R  No.  334/2015

no illegality or jurisdictional  error has been highlighted

during the arguments rather  entire matter argued by

the  petitioner side reflects that  it  is  personal

vengeance  and lust of the properff, which  persuaded

the petitioner to  challenge the valid transfer of

property in favour of respondent  No.1, despite the fact

that his brothers  and sister acknowledged that the

property has been transferred in  the name  of

respondent No.1 from the name of Mian Muhammad

Shafi Javed.

24.  The epitome  of the discussion is that instant

civil revision is misconceived  and same is hereby

dlsmlssed  ln llmlne.

JUDGE

RAMZAN

