JUDGMENT  SHEET.
ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT" ISLAMABAD.
DEP

W.P No.650/2011.

Muhammad  Ziyam Samma  VS

Inspector  General of
Police,Islamabad  and
others.

Petitioner by:

Mr. Mushtaq  Hussain,  Advocate.

Respondents  No.1 to 4 by:

Mr.  Sadaqat Ali Jatrangir, State
Counsel.

Respondent No.5 by: 

Sardar Bashir Hussain,  Advocate.

Respondents  No.6,  7 &8by 

Mr.liazAhmed  Chadhar, Advocate.

Rafi Ullah, S.I, P.S Kohsar,Islamabad.

Date of Hearing: 

06.12.2019.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI. J:- Through  this writ petition, the

petitioner has prayed  for following  relief:-

"It is therefore,  very respectfully  prayed that the instant
writ petition  may very bindly be allowed and respondents  No.l to
4 be directed  to complete  the final investigation  report of the
crime referred to above in the light of forensic, circumstantial
and  other  evidence relating  to the commission  of the oJfence  by
specifically  detecting  the murderers  of the petitioner's  mother
and  consequently  direction the issue to commence  the trial of the
accused respondents  No.S to 8 and others, if any, in the light of
submission  above.

Any other relief this Honourable  Court deems  appropriate

may also please  be granted."

2. 

Leamed counsel  for the petitioner  contends  that  the petitioner  is minor,  who

was born on23.ll.2017 and has filed instant  writ petition  through her real  maternal

grandmother  Mst. Riffat Aman,  who has no adverse interest  against  the petitioner;

that real mother of the petitioner was murdered on 17.04.2018  and FIR No.178,

dated 17.04.2008,  UIS 302134  PPC,  P.S Kohsar,  Islamabad  was registered  on the

complaint  of husband of the deceased/respondent  No.5,  however, during the course

of investigation  on the basis of recovery of blood stained  clothes, shoes with hairs

of the deceased, DNA  test report dated 02.06.2008 proved that  respondents No.5 to

8 are accused of that case; that the deceased  mother  Mst. Ammara  has left three

2

W.P No.650/2011.

legal heirs rumely Aman  Ullah Chaudhry (father),  Mst. Riffat Aman (mother)  and

the petitioner (minor son),  whereas both  matemal  grandparents in capacity of

parents  of the deceased  issued  affidavit in favour of accused persons/respondents

No.5 to 8 and  got recorded  their detailed statements in their favour  before learned

Trial Court during hearing  of bail application  and exonerated the accused,  however,

they were  not committed  to waive of the Qisas, Diat,  Arsh  and  Daman  to the extent

of present  petitioner  as he is entitled to one third share in the legacy  of the deceased

mother; that challan was submitted  on 27.08.2008  before the Illaqa  Magistrate,

which  was sent to learned Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad  on 28.08.2008  for trial.

However,  application  U/S 265-K, Cr.P.C  was filed, which was  allowed vide

judgment  dated  01.09.2008  and respondents  No.5 to 8 were  acquitted.  Leamed

counsel funher contends  that the petitioner seeks indulgence of this Court to

determine  "who committed murder  of the petitioner's  mother and what is the

impact  of Human  DNA  dated  02.06.2008 on the said case";  that on the basis  of

available  record  in evidence,  acquittal order  01.09.2008,  passed by learned Sessions

Judge is not sustainable  in the eyes  of law and respondents No.5 to 8 could not be

acquiued  in terms of section  3l l, PPC.

3.  Conversely,  leamed  counsel for respondents  No.5 to 8 contends  that  the

respondents have  been acquitted by learned  Trial Court after  hearing  detailed

arguments vide order  judgrnent 01.09.2008  by learned Sessions Judge,Islamabad in

terms of section 265-K,  Cr.P.C  mainly on the ground  that  complainant Aman Ullah

and  his wife appeared  before  the Court on27.06.2008  and swom their affidavits  to

the effect that  after  taking oath from  the accused  for their  innocence, their suspicion

stands removed  and that they have no objection  on acquittal  of the accused; that

statements  of both the maternal  grandparents  of the petitioner were recorded by

Additional  Sessions  Judge in Court,  which made the very  basis of acquittal of

respondents  No.5 to 8 as there  was no probability  of conviction  on record;  that

minor  son (present petitioner)  has also  been  referred  in the statements  of Ch.  Aman

Ullah and  his wife Mst. Rifat Aman before  the Court and as such  the plea raised by

the petitioner  is not justified under  the law; that instant writ petition is based upon

malafide and has been  filed as counterblast  to the custody petition filed by

W.P No.550/2011.

3

respondent  No.5 (father of the petitioner)  against  maternal  grandparent  at Lahore  on

O7.O2.2Oll,  where-after the present writ petition  was advertently filed on

25.02.2011 by the petitioner,  who intends to engage respondent  No.5  and to use this

case as shield to deprive  father/respondent  No.5 from seeking  custody; that instant

writ petition is not maintainable in view of Article  13 of the Constitution  of Islamic

Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read with section 403,  Cr.P.C  as the main /li has already

been adjudicated  by the competent  Court and this  very fact was in the knowledge of

the petitioner,  even otherwise  instant writ petition  is hit by principle of laches  as the

instant  writ petition was filed  after three years of the acquittal and no justified

reason has been  brought on record;  that  instant writ petition  is also not maintainable

as remedy under Article  199 of the Constitution  cannot  be used as substitution  of

the statutory  remedy i.e. section 417(2)  Cr.P.C against acquittal order  of

respondents  No.5 to 8.

4. 

Leamed State Counsel  contends  that instant case  is open and shut case,

whereby the role of respondents No.5 to 8 is proved in the investigation  and they

have  been  challan  U/S 173, Cr.P.C by the I.O and the very judgment of learned

Sessions  Judge regarding  acquittal  of respondents No.5 to 8 U/S  265-K, Cr.P.C is

not maintainable.

5. 

6. 

I have  heard  the arguments and perused  the record.

Perusal of the record  reveals that Mst.  Amara Asif wife of Muhammad Asif

Samma/respondent No.5 and  mother of the petitioner  was murdered  in the confines

of House  No.2, 8ft Avenue, Sector  F-Tll,Islamabad  by un-known  persons and

respondent No.5 lodged complaint  to police  station,  Kohsar, Islamabad,  which was

converted into FIR No.178, dated 17.04.2008, U/S  302134  PPC,  P.S Kohsar,

Islamabad,  however, during  the course of investigation,  an application  was filed by

Ch. Aman Ullah (father of the deceased) on 18.04.2008 and expressed  his suspicion

upon respondent No.5 and his family members that they were  involved in the

alleged  murder of his daughter Mst. Amara.  The investigation  offtcer  after

collection  of entire evidence  arrested Muhammad  Asif/respondent  No.5  and

collected technical  evidence and submitted the final report  alongwith  DNA result

before the competent Court. During the proceedings  of the case,  respondent  No.5

4

W.P No.650/2011.

filed  an application  for his post ilrest bail, which was heard by leamed Additional

Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad,  who also recorded  statements of Ch. Aman Ullah and

Mst. Rifat Aman (father  and  mother of the deceased)  on24.06.2008,  whereby they

have exonerated  respondent No.5 and  his family  members from the murder case of

deceased  Mst.  Amara. Statement  of Ch. Aman Ullah is reproduced  as under:-

" It is stated that I am father  of deceased  Ammara  Asif of case
FIR No.l78  dated 17.4.2008 offence U/S 302 PPC Police
Station, Kohsar,  Islamabad. Said  FIR was  initially  registered on
the report of Asif Saman against  unknown persons. Later on, on
my application,  petitioners  Naseem Akhtar  and Shazia Raia were
implicated  as accused persons  in the instant  case.  The petitioners
and their co-accused  have been  given oath on Holy  Quran
regarding their  innocence  and also to the effect  that neither  they
have  committed  the murder of Ammara Asif nor they are
involved,  in any way, in her murder.  My daughter Ammara Asif
was married with Asif Saman  and they had one son namely
Ziyam aged about l8 months. Her legal heirs includes  myself, my
wife Riffat and Ziyam Asif, In the light of oath gwen  by accused
persons regarding their innocence, I have  no objection  over the
grant of post-arrest bail to the petitioners. Similarly,  I have  no
objection if all the accused  persons  of the instant case  namely
Asif Saman, Naeem Saman, Begum Nasim  Akhtar and Shqzia
Raja are acquittedfrom  the cose or are discharged by the police
from the case. I  waived  my right of Qisas, Diat, Arsh and
Daman.  Since the accused  persons  have assured me regarding
their innocence,  hence, it is decided  between the parties  that
subsequent to their acquittal, the accused  persons  will fully
cooperate  with me and the local  police for the detection  and
arrest of actual  culprits.  I furnish my ffidavit Mark-A in this
regard."

7. 

In view of above referred  statement,  respondents  No.5 to 8 were  granted

post arrest  bail by leamed Additional Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad  vide order  dated

27.06.2008, however,  the challan  was  submitted before the Court on20.07.2008.

Respondents  No.5 to 8 filed an application U/S 265-K, Cr.P.C  before  learned

Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad,  who after hearing the respondents side as well  as

District Attorney,  acquitted respondents No.5 to 8 vide  impugned  judgment dated

01.09.2008.  The petitioner,  who  born on 23.11.2007  and  was of 5 months  of age at

the time of alleged  murder  of his mother has filed instant writ petition through his

maternal grandmother  Mst. Rifat  Amman  and claims that investigation  of the case

of his real  mother was not completed  and  entire trial  has to be conducted. The

instant  writ petition was filed on 05.03.2011  against respondents No.5 to 8,

however,  respondents  No.5 to 8 have brought the certified record, whereby

respondents  No.5 being  father of the petitioner  frled  application U/S 25 of the

W.P No.650/2011.

5

Guardians  and Wards Act, 1890 before Guardian Judge Lahore and  claimed

custody  of the petitioner  (minor),  which  made  very basis  of filing of the instant  writ

petition by matemal  grandmother, who has already got recorded her statement  in

favour of respondents  No.5 to 8 before the Court of learned Additional Sessions

Judge,  Islamabad.

8. 

The  custody  petition filed by respondent  No.5 was allowed  by Guardian

Judge  Lahore  vide order  dated 31.3.2016 and it was  directed that custody  of the

minor be handed over to respondent  No.5. The said order was assailed before

leamed  District Judge,  Latrore in appeal by matemal  grandparents,  but the appeal

was dismissed  vide judgment  dated 14.9.2018 (comprising  of 28 pages) by learned

Additional District  Judge  Lahore,  whereby  leamed  Judge  has thrashed  out entire

evidence  including  allegations of maternal grandparents. After concurrent findings

against  the matemal grandparents, they  challenged the same before  the Latrore High

Court, Rawalpindi Bench in writ petition  No.23929912018, which is pending

adjudication.

9. 

The above  referred history demonstrates that  instant writ petition has been

filed as counter  blast to the custody petition  filed by the father/respondent  No.5

against maternal grandparent, who are not willing to hand over custody of the

minor/petitioner  to the father despite  the fact that respondents  No.5 to 8 were

acquitted,  even on the statements  of matemal grandparents  of the petitioner/real

parents  of the deceased Mst. Amara.

10.  During  the course  of arguments,  learned  counsel for the petitioner  tried to

convince  this Court that impugned  judgment U/S 265-K,  Cr.P.C  is defective  and

has been  passed on their  back  and they were  not aware regarding  passing  of the

impugned judgment,  however, their statements  have been refuted by their own

pleadings in paras 8 & 13 of the instant writ petition, in which it has been

acknowledged  by the petitioner  that  respondents  No.5 to 8 were  acquiued from the

case  U/S  265-K, Cr.P.C. Similarly,  the petitioner  has also referred in ground-X,  in

which  he has acknowledged  that the respondents  were acquitted through  short

order, although  detailed judgment is available  on record  and the record  has been

requisitioned  by this Coun  and  even  the copy appended by the petitioner himself

W.P No.650/2011,

6

with the writ petition at pages  No.38 to 44 reveals  that  certified  copy of the detailed

judgment was  obtained vide  application  No.10571,  applied  on 02.09.2008,  which

was prepared on 03.09.2008  and received  on the same day, hence,  the ground  raised

by the petitioner is an afterthought  and  against  his own arguments  as copy  of the

judgment  was  with them but despite  receiving  the said  copy of detailed  judgment,

the petitioner's maternal  grandparents  have not assailed the said judgment before

any Court of law.

11.  In view of above position, I have  gone through  the provisions of section

417(2)  Cr.P.C, which  deals with the appeal in case of acquittal,  whereby a person

aggrieved  by the order of acquittal passed by any Court other  than High Court may

within 30 days,  file appeal  against  such order but surprisingly  no such  appeal was

filed and  instant writ petition  was filed after delay of almost 3 years, therefore,

instant writ petition  is not competent  as Article 199 of the Constitution  cannot  be

used  as substitution of the remedy  provided under Cr.P.C  i.e. section 417(2-A),

whereby right  to file appeal  against  acquittal  order has been provided.  Reliance  is

placed upon 2

otheril.

12.  Moreover,  the instant writ petition is hit by principle  of laches as the same

has been filed after three years of the acquittal and no justified  reason  has  been

brought on record. Reliance  is placed upon PLD  2003 SC 90 (Maso

throueh Lesal Heirs VS Government  of Puniab throush Secretarv,  Forest.

Lahore  and 9 othersl.

13.  Moreover,  High  Court has to consider  the following  test to determine the

adequacyofthereliefinthelightofjudgmentreportedas2W

Sher Afshan Khan Niail 

:-

"9. 
The learned High  Court will have to consider  in each
case  the following  tests  to be applied to determine  the adequacy
of the relief:-
(i) 

If the relief available through  the alternative remedy
in its nature or extent  is not what  is necessary to give
the requisite relief, the alternative remedy is not an
"other  adequate  remedy"  within the meaning of
Article 199.

(ii)

If the relief available  through  the alternative  remedy,
in its nature  and  extent, is what is necessary  to give
the requisite relief, the 'adequacy' of the alternative
remedy  must further  be judged, with reference  to a

W.P No.550/2011.

7

comparison  of the speed,  expense or convenience  of
obtaining  that relief  through the alternative remedy,
with the speed,  expense or convenience  of obtaining  it
under Article  199. But in making  this  comparison
those factors must not be taken into account  which
would themselves  alter if the remedy  under Article
199  were  used as a substitute  for the other remedy.

(iii) 

In practice the following steps may be taken:-

(a) Formulate the grievance  in the given case, as a

generalized  category;

(b) Formulate  the relief that is necessary to redress  that

category of grievance;

(c) See if the law has presuibed  any remedy  that  can
redress  that category of grievance  in that way and to
the required  extent;

(d) If such a remedy is prescribed the law contemplates

that resort must be had to that  remedy;

(e) If it appears  that the machinery  established  for the
purposes  of that  remedy is not functioning  properly,
the correct step to take will be a step that  is
calculated  to ensure, as far as lies in the power of the
Court, thot that machinery  begins  to function  as it
should. It would  not be coruect to take  over the
function of that machinery. If the function of another
organ is taken over,  that other organ  will atrophy,
and the organ  that takes over, will break  clown under
the strain;

(/) If there is no other remedy that can redress that
category of grievance  in that  way and to the required
extent,  or if there is such a remedy  but conditions  are
attached  to it which  for  a particular category of cases
would  neutralise  or defeat it so as to deprive  tt of its
substance,  the Court  should  give  the requisite relief
under Article 199;

(g) If there  is such other  remedy,  but there  is something
so special in the circumstances of a given case  that
the other remedy  which generally  adequate,  to the
relief  required for that  category  of grievance,  is not
adequate  to the relief that is essential in the very
special category to which that case  belongs, the Court
should  give the required relief under  Article 199.
If the  procedure  for obtaining  the relief  by some  other
proceedings  is too cumbersome  or the relief cannot be
obtained  without  delay and expense, or the delay
would  make the grant of the relief meaningless  this
court would not hesitate to issue  a writ if the party
applying for it is found entitled to it, simply because
the party could  have chosen another course  to obtain
the relief which is due." (Ibrahim  T.M. Ltd. v.
Federation  of Pakistan  PLD i,989 Lah. 47, Allah Ditta
v. Muhammad  Saeed Yatoo PLD 1961 Lah. 479,
Shamas  Din and Bros. v. Income-tax  and Sales  Tax
Olficer  PLD 1959 Lah. 955, Khaliq Najam Co. v.
Sales-Tax  Officer  PLD 1959  Lahore 915)."

14.  In view of above principles,  the statutory  remedy  UIS 417(2-A),  Cr.P.C

cannot be bypassed in any manner  and by filing instant writ petition,  the petitioner

intends to circumvent the legislative intent  provided under Criminal  Justice System.

W.P No.650/2011.

15.  I have also gone through Article  13 of the Constitution, which provides

protection  to every  individual from prosecution for same offence  more  than once

and the said principle has also been provided  in section  403 Cr.P.C, which  is

8

reproduced  as under:-

u403. Persons once convicted  or acquifred  not to be triedfor  the
same offence. (l) A person who has once been  tried by a Court of
competent  jwisdictionfor  an offence  and convicted or acquitted  of
such  offence shall,  while  such conviction or acquittal  remains  in
force,  not to be liable to be tried againfor the  same  offence, nor  on
the same facts for any other offence  for which a dffirent  charge
from the one  made against  him might have  been  made under
section  36, or for which he might hqve  been  convicted  under
section  237.

(2) A person acquitted  or convicted for any offence may be
afierwards tried for any distinct  offence  for which a separate
charge  might have been made  against him on the former  trial
under  sections  235, subsection  (l).

(j) A person  convicted of any offence  constituted by any act
causing  consequences which together with such act,  constituted  a
dffirent offence  from that of which he was convicted, may be
afterwards  tried for  such  last-mentioned  offence,  ,f  the
consequence had not happened, or were  not happened, or were  not
lcnown  to the Court  to hqve  happened,  at the time when  he was
convicted.

(4) A person  acquitted or convicted ofany offence  constituted by
any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction,  be
subsequently charged with,  and tried for any other offence
constituted  by the same  acts which he may have committed  if the
Court by which he was first tried  was not competent to try the
offence withwhich he  is subsequently  charged.

(5) Nothing in this  section  sholl  affect  the provision  of section  26

of the General Clauses  Act, 1897, or section 188 of this Code."

16.  The above  referred section  clearly  spells out that once a person was
acquitted  and the said order "lruiggill@" 

the said person cannot  be retried

on same charges, as such the ground  raised by the petitioner  in this case cannot  be

considered  valid as judgment of acquittal  in case FIR No.l78, dated 17.04.2008,

UIS 302134  PPC,  P.S Kohsar,  Islamabad still  holds field.

17.  I have  also  gone through the prayer clause of the writ petition, whereby  the

petitioner  tried to convince this Court  that final investigation  report  was not filed,

which is not a true fact as per contents of the pleadings  of the petitioner  as well as

from  the record because  challan was submitted  before the Trial Court after its

completion  on 20.7.2008,  therefore, such kind of prayer is against  the facts and is

not justified.

18.  The matter has already  been  investigated.  The entire evidence  was collected

and same was placed  before  the Court, whereby  leamed  Sessions Judge  through

detailed judgment  has acquitted respondents No.5 to 8 while considering no

9

W.P No.650/2011.

probability of conviction, especially when the only  star witnesses  Ch. Aman  Ullah

and Mst. Rifat  had expressed  their suspicion against  respondent  No.5 and  later on

resiled  from their stance after being satisfied on the explanation and oath of

respondents  No.5 to 8. In the given circumstances,  learned  Sessions  Judge had no

other option but to acquit  respondents No.5 to 8, however, the question raised  by

the petitioner  regarding waiver of Qisas is not justiciable and in this regard I have

gone through sections 309,310,311 &312  PPC as well as section  345 Cr.P.C.,

whereby the complete concept  of compounding has been  highlighted and the Wali

of a minor  can waive or compound the right  of Qisas. The record reflects that the

petitioner  was well in knowledge  that the maternal grandparents,  who are Wali of

the minor Muhammad  Ziyam Samma, at the time of recording  of their  statements

before learned  Trial  Court,  have waived  and compounded  the matter, although the

entire case is based  upon suspicion, where there  was no direct  evidence  or witness

who suggest that  Respondents  No.5 to 8 have committed  the murder  of deceased

Mst. Ammara Asif. It is settled law that  suspicion  cannot  be replaced with  evidence

and learned Trial Court has considered this aspect in proper manner,  even  the

proposition  in hand to that extent is also  considered  in the light of judgment

reported asP 
19.  In view of above  discussion,  the instant  writ petition is not maintainable on

.

merits,  due to laches, malafide  on part of maternal grandparents  of the petitioner

(who earlier recorded their own  statements  before  the leamed  Trial  Court  upon

which  the Respondents No.5 to 8 have  been acquitted  of the charge)  as well as due

to non-availing  the alternate  remedy  UIS 417(2-A),  Cr.P.C, which was available  to

the petitioner,  but he has not exercised the same at proper time, therefore,  the

instant writ petition stands  DISMISSED.

AKHTAR
JUDGE

Announced in open Court  on:  !-!.&2q.19.

R Arjrm

