ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.2885/2019 
Adnan Zar 
VS
Mst. Khadeeja Khanum & 2 others 

Petitioner by: 

Raja Waqar Ahmad, Advocate. 

Respondent No.1 by: 

Barrister Faisal Khan, Advocate.  

Date of Decision: 

17.01.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  called  in  question  judgment  of  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge (West), Islamabad, dated 28.06.2019 as well as judgment and decree dated 

07.03.2019  of  the  learned  Family  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  with  the  prayer  to 

dissolve the marriage on the basis of Khullah, rather on the basis of cruelty.  

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  Adnan  Zar 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  “petitioner”)  and  Mst.  Khadeeja  Khanum  (hereinafter 

referred to as “respondent”) tied the knot on 13.10.2010 with dower consideration 

of  Rs.500,000/-,  while  Rukhsati  took  place  on  25.01.2014.  Later  on,  the 

respondent  filed  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of  cruelty, 

recovery  of  dower,  past  and  future  maintenance  together  with  dowry  articles. 

The suit was contested by the petitioner being defendant on the ground that the 

allegations referred in the plaint are not correct and respondent become Nasheeza 

as  the  respondent  left  her  abode  and  joined  her  parents,  although  he  had  also 

managed a Jirga in Islamabad, but of no avail, rather she refused to return to the 

abode  of  the  petitioner.  The  learned  Family  Court  after  hearing  the  parties 

framed  seven  (07)  issues  vide  order  dated  15.12.2016,  while  the  petitioner  is 

presently arguing his case to the extent of Issue No.1, which is as under:  

“Whether  plaintiff  is  entitled  for  dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of 
cruelty? OPP 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 2 

The  learned  Family  Judge  while  recording  the  evidence  of  the  parties  decided 

Issue No.1 in favour of respondent (wife) and dissolved the marriage on the basis 

of  cruelty  vide 

judgment  and  decree  dated  07.03.2019,  which  has  been 

maintained  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  in  appeal  vide  impugned 

judgment dated 28.06.2019.   

3. 

  Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  as 

well  as  the  learned  first  Appellate  Court  has  not  considered  the  evidence  and 

passed  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  on  the  basis  of  misreading  and 

non-reading of evidence; that the respondent has miserably failed to produce any 

cogent and reliable evidence in respect of cruelty; that the learned Trial Court has 

also relied upon the medical treatment receipts  (Exh.P/3 to Exh.P/5) which are 

inconsequential,  especially  when  the  doctor  or  any  independent  impartial 

evidence was not produced to prove the said receipts; that the respondent herself 

had  left  the  abode  of  the  petitioner,  therefore,  she  is  not  entitled  for  any 

maintenance as she become Nasheeza. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  (wife)  contends  that  she  had 

proved the cruelty faced by her at the hands of petitioner during subsistence of 

marriage  and  the  factum  of  physical  abuse  was  not  rebutted  during  the  test  of 

cross examination; that the medical evidence is corroborated by the oral version 

of respondent that she was abused on different occasions by the petitioner, which 

is the very basis of cruelty; that the ground of cruelty has been proved in terms of 

Section 2 of the  Dissolution of  Muslim Marriages Act,  1939 and  the respondent 

through her consistent statement justified that the marriage was rightly dissolved 

on the basis of cruelty by both the Courts below and as such, constitutional court 

could  not  enter  into  question  of  facts,  which  is  appreciated  by  both  the  Courts 

below  without  any  illegality,  therefore,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  not 

maintainable and is liable to be dismissed.  

5. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 3 

6. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner  and  respondent  married  on 

13.10.2010  against  dower  consideration  of  Rs.500,000/-,  while  Rukhsati  took 

place  on  25.01.2014,  however  the  respondent  has  filed  a  suit  for  dissolution  of 

marriage,  recovery  of  dower,  dowry  articles  and  maintenance  on  26.03.2016 

which  specific  ground  raised  in  Issue  No.1  that  she  is  seeking  dissolution  of 

marriage on the basis of cruelty. 

7. 

In order to prove the case, the respondent wife (plaintiff) has referred the 

instances of cruelty in Para-6 of the plaint, which are as under:  

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

After  the  Nikah,  but  prior  to  her  rukhsati,  the  plaintiff  had  to 
visit  Canada  and  reside  with  her  parents  there  for  some  time. 
During  this  period,  the  Defendant  would  show  obsessive 
behavior  and  ask  the  Plaintiff  to  converse  with  him  over  the 
telephone and sit in front of the camera on Skype for many long 
hours, despite knowing the different time zones and deliberately 
trying to get the Plaintiff in trouble with her supervisors at her 
place  of  employment. When the Plaintiff  tried to explain this to 
the Defendant, he used to get angry and seemed to take perverse 
pleasure in doing this to her.  
After  the  rukhsati,  during  the  time  when  the  Plaintiff  and  the 
Defendant  were  celebrating  their  honeymoon  in  Lahore,  the 
Plaintiff was shocked to find out that the Defendant was calling 
his home every day to update his elder sister, Ms. Nargis, of all 
the  intimate  details  of  their  trip,  including  a  minute-by-minute 
account of what they had done during the day and the day-to-day 
expenses of their trip. The Plaintiff was perturbed by the fact that 
the Defendant did not respect their privacy and this became a big 
issue for the Defendant.  
The Defendant would often call the Plaintiff’s family with filthy 
names  and  had  a  dedicated  nickname  for  the  Plaintiff’s  mother 
i.e.  kanjoosni  (miser).  Furthermore,  when  the  Plaintiff  would 
object  to  such  name  callings,  the  Defendant  would  get  violent 
and  threaten  her  with  physical  harm,  such  that  the  Plaintiff 
would be too scared to say anything and start crying.  
There  were  a few  occasions when the Defendant’s  temper  flared 
up  and  he  inflicted  physical  harm  on  the  Plaintiff.  In  one 
incident,  the  Defendant  held/twisted  the  right  arm  of  the 
Plaintiff  over  a  petty  issue,  despite  knowing  very  well  that  the 
said arm of the Plaintiff was already injured and she was having 
physiotherapy  for  it.  On  another  occasion,  the  Defendant 
dragged the Plaintiff to the staircase and said that he was going 
to take her down the stairs so that he could insult her in front of 
his whole family and then divorce her. The Plaintiff grasped the 
railing,  but  the  Defendant  lifted  her  and  tried  to  dislodge  her. 

 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 4 

Somehow  the  Plaintiff  managed  to  free  herself  and  ran  back  to 
her  room.  At  this  point,  the  Defendant  were  after  her,  dragged 
the  Plaintiff  by  the  shoulder,  which  had  already  been  sprained 
previously  and  during  this  struggle,  the  Plaintiff’s  food  hit  the 
furniture,  got  injured  and  some  skin  came  off.  Similarly,  on 
another  occasion,  while  the  Plaintiff  was  reading  a  book,  for  no 
rhyme or reason, the Defendant grabbed her left knee and dug his 
fingers into her flesh, to such an extent that the Plaintiff started 
crying. The Defendant seemed to enjoy hurting the Plaintiff and 
took sadistic pleasure in doing so.  
The  Defendant  would  not  let  go  of  a  single  opportunity  to 
ridicule, embarrass and bully the Plaintiff in front of his friends 
and  family.  There  have  been  numerous  instances  where  the 
Defendant  started  shouting  at  the  Plaintiff  in  front  of  relatives 
and friends over petty issues and threatened to divorce her on the 
spot. He would also make fun of her speaking accent in front of 
people,  as  the  Plaintiff  did  not  speak  Pushto  very  fluently,  and 
could  not  say  some  words  of  Pushto.  This  was  done  to 
intentionally ridicule and make fun of her in front of others.  

e) 

8. 

The abovementioned grounds were reiterated by PW-1 respondent in her 

statement of affidavit Exh.P1 in Para-7 (a, b, c, d & e), however PW-1 respondent 

(wife)  was  not  cross  examined  qua  the  factum  of  cruelty  in  a  specific  manner, 

rather the facts specifically narrated in Para 7 of Exh.P1 were not refuted by the 

petitioner,  except  that  a  suggestion  was  given  by  the  petitioner  regarding 

reporting  of  complaint  of  physical  torture  to  the  police  on  which  PW-1 

respondent acknowledged that she has neither filed any application to police nor 

produced any medical certificate before the Court. 

9. 

The  respondent  also  produced  PW-2  Dr.  Tariq  Khan  i.e.  her  father,  who 

has  given  entire  details  of  relationship  existed  between  the  petitioner  and 

respondent, however even PW-2 Dr. Tariq Khan was not cross examined on the 

issue  of  cruelty  and  same  is  the  case  with  PW-3  Aneesa  Begum  and  PW-4 

Taimoor  Khan  as  they  have  not  been  put  to  any  question  regarding  issue  of 

cruelty. It is trite law that if the witness has not been cross examined on material 

facts recorded on oath by way of affidavit or otherwise the same stand admitted 

in  terms  of  Article  133  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  although  the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 5 

principles  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  are  not  applicable  in  family  court 

jurisdiction.  

10. 

PW-1 Respondent has referred a specific stance in her evidence that: 

There were a few occasions when the Defendant’s temper flared up and he 
inflicted  physical  harm  on  the  Plaintiff.  In  one  incident,  the  Defendant 
held/twisted  the  right  arm  of  the  Plaintiff  over  a  petty  issue,  despite 
knowing  very  well  that the  said  arm  of  the  Plaintiff  was  already  injured 
and  she  was  having  physiotherapy  for  it.  On  another  occasion,  the 
Defendant dragged the Plaintiff to the staircase and said that he was going 
to take her down the stairs so that he could insult her in front of his whole 
family  and  then  divorce  her.  The  Plaintiff  grasped  the  railing,  but  the 
Defendant  lifted  her  and  tried  to  dislodge  her.  Somehow  the  Plaintiff 
managed  to  free  herself  and  ran  back  to  her  room.  At  this  point,  the 
Defendant were after her, dragged the Plaintiff by the shoulder, which had 
already been sprained previously and during this struggle, the Plaintiff’s 
food  hit  the  furniture,  got  injured  and  some  skin  came  off.  Similarly,  on 
another occasion, while the Plaintiff was reading a book, for no rhyme or 
reason,  the  Defendant  grabbed  her  left  knee  and  dug  his  fingers  into  her 
flesh,  to  such  an  extent  that  the  Plaintiff  started  crying.  The  Defendant 
seemed to enjoy hurting the Plaintiff and took sadistic pleasure in doing so. 
(underlining is provided for emphasis) 

11. 

The above referred specific issue of cruelty  has been corroborated by the 

respondent  by  placing  on  record  the  document  dated  16.06.2016  of  the  Shifa 

International  Hospital  (Exh.P2),  whereby  the  respondent  was  examined  by  Dr. 

Rizwan Taj as well as document of prescription Exh.P5, in which medicines have 

been  suggested.  The  respondent  was  also  seen  by  Dr.  Asima  M.  Khan  vide 

Exh.P4/1, who is specialized in Adult Cognitive Behavior Treatment as referred 

in  Exh.P4,  who  suggested  relaxation  techniques  as  referred  in  Exh.P4/2,  dated 

17.06.2016.  

12. 

The  above  referred  views,  if  seen  in  juxtaposition  with  the  aforesaid 

documentary evidence, it is necessary to go through the stance of petitioner, who 

appeared as DW-1 through his evidence of affidavit Exh.D1, in which he has not 

denied any allegation in specific manner, rather refers that: 

 یہر  یترک  گىت  وک  ںولاو  رھگ  ےک  شا  روا  ہیلعاعدم  ،ہیعدم  یداش  نارود  ہک  ہی
 تامسلا تڑھگ هم رپ ہیلعاعدم روا ےہ یک ہو ششوک یک ےىست ھتاس ےک نا
 رواےہ
۔ےہ ہو دوجو یئوک اک هج ۔ےہ یہر یتاگل

7۔

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 6 

During  the  course  of  cross-examination,  the  DW-1  petitioner  admitted  the 

following facts.  

 ۔اتکس ےد ںیہو رہم كح روا ہقفو و ناو ،شئاہر گلا وک ہیعدم با ںیم
 کیا ںیم ۔یئوہ عورش اووہ يسیشاو دعت ےک یتصخر ہیعدم ۔ےہ اتوہ نامرفاو ةلطم اک يسیشاو ظفل
 ہو اک  ےىید  قلاط وک ہیعدم  کت یھتا  ےو ںیم ۔اھت  اتہاچ اىہر ںیم یداش ھتاس ےک توع  يسیشاو
 یہو رپ  ھجم ہیعدم ۔اچوس ہو اک ےورک رئاد  ٰیوعد وذات فلاخ ےک ہیعدم یھثک ےو ںیم ۔اچوش
 ےواج ےس شاپ ےریم ہک اہک دوخزا ںیہ ےھکل ںیم  ٰیوعد ےىپا ےو شا وج یھت یتاگل تاما
سلا
۔ےھت ےئاگل رپ ھجم تاماسلا ےو شا دعت ےک
 رثمسد ہک ےہ تسرد ہی

 وک ہیعدم ےو ںیم ےس دعت ےک

maintain

۔ےہ ایک ہو

5102

 
 

 

13. 

The  above  referred  position  available 

in  the  evidence  has  been 

concurrently  appreciated  by  both  the  Courts  below  in  findings  of  Issue  No.  1, 

therefore,  while  going  through  these  factual  aspects,  I  have  attended  to  the 

grounds referred in Section 2 of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939, 

whereby  the  non-provision  of  maintenance  and  treatment  of  wife  with  cruelty 

includes habitual assault as referred in Section 2(viii)(a), which refers as under: 

(viii)  That the husband treats her with cruelty, that is to say:-  

(a) 

habitually  assaults  her  or  makes  her  life  miserable  by 
cruelty of conduct even if such conduct does not amount 
to physical ill-treatment; 

14. 

The word “cruelty” has not specifically been explained in the Dissolution 

of  Muslim  Marriages  Act,  1939,  but  perusal  of  the  aforesaid  Section  2(viii)(a) 

clearly  establishes  that  cruelty  is  not  limited  to  physical  injury.  Nevertheless, 

the  meaning  of  word  “cruelty”  has  been  observed  from  different  connotations 

i.e.  brutality,  savageness, 

inhumanity,  barbarism,  murderous,  callous,  ruthless, 

heartlessness,  evil,  heinous,  unkindness,  abuse,  harshness,  painful,  trauma,  etc.  (as 

referred in the Oxford Thesaurus of English).  

15. 

The  entire  testimony  brought  on  record  by  the  parties  proves  that  there 

was  no  possibility  of  reunion  to  live  together  as  husband  and  wife  within  the 

limits prescribed by Allah Almighty in Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse No.231.  

16. 

The  aversion  and  hatred  are  required  to  be  proved  and  its  onus  is  upon 

respondent in this case, whereas the evidence recorded on oath was sufficient to 

display  a  version  of  hate  against  husband,  which  is  primary  consideration  for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 7 

dissolution of marriage on the basis of cruelty and the instances reported in the 

evidence were not rebutted, whereas the main test laid down by the Holy Quran 

is  that  when  a  Qazi  apprehends  that  limits  of  Allah  “will  not  be  observed”. 

However,  it  is  relevant  to  talk  about  the  two  instances  relating  to  the  wives  of 

Sabt Ibn-i-Qais as reported in the history of Islam, whereby his first wife namely 

Jamila and second wife Habiba had sought dissolution of marriage from him and 

Holy  Prophet  (PBUH)  had  enforced  the  right  of  Khulla  on  both  occasions.  In 

particulars,  Jamila  had  disclosed  her  concern  that  she  found  no  fault  with  Sabt 

Ibn-i-Qais  and  the  sole  reason  why  she  wanted  to  be  released  was  that  he  was 

ugly  and  she  could  not  bear  him  for  she  being  herself  a  beautiful  woman, 

whereafter  Holy  Prophet  (PBUH)  made  pronouncement  that  husband  and  wife 

could  not  amicably  live  together.  On  the  other  hand,  Habiba  had  sought 

dissolution  of  marriage  from  Sabt  Ibn-i-Qais  on  the  basis  of  cruelty  as  she  had 

been physically abused by the latter, whereupon the Holy Prophet (PBUH) had 

dissolved the marriage.   

17. 

The  entire  philosophy  of  relationship  of  husband  and  wife  in  Islam  is 

based  on  the  teachings  of  Holy  Quran  as  also  explained  in  PLD  1967  SC  97 

(Mst. Khurshid Bibi VS Baboo Muhammad Amin) in the following manner:  

37.   When the Holy Qur'an conferred on women a status of equality 
with men in their rights by stating نھیلع یذلا لثم نھلو (women have rights 
against  men  similar  to  those  that  men  have  against  them  according  to 
the  well  known  rules  of  equity),  it  was  natural  and  logical  that  she 
should have been conferred the right of khula, as compared to the right of 
talaq existing in men. Verse 2: 229 of the Holy Qur'an requires that the 
husband  should  either  retain  the  wife  in  honour  according  to  the  well 
فورعملااب کاسم  or release her with grace ناسح اب خیرست 
recognised custom  
so  that  detaining  them  wrongfully  is  sinful.  It  further  enjoins 
on  the  husband  not  to  cling  to  the  woman  in  order  to  cause  her 
injury ودتعتل ارارض نھوکسمت لاو. Allah further commands in verse 19, Sura 
Al Nisa (iv):  

ا

“Nor should ye detain them that ye may take away a part of what 
ye have given them.” 

Thus the Holy Qur'an prohibits the wrongful or unwilling retaining of 
women, and favours their release. According to a hadith “let no harm be 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 8 

done, nor harm be suffered in Islam ملاسلاا یفرارضلاوررضلا. If the Qazi is 
satisfied  that  relations  between  the  spouses  are  so  embittered  that  .a 
marriage relationship between the spouses consistent with the tenets of 
Islam  is  not  possible,  and  a  reconciliation  is  out  of  question,  the 
husband's clinging to her would be injurious to her, and since she would 
be prejudiced by  the continuance of the marriage, the express words of 
the  Holy  Prophet  clothe  the  Qazi  with  ample  authority  to  dissolve  the 
marriage  "If  a  woman  be  prejudiced  by  marriage,  let  it  be  broken  off" 
(Sahi  ul  Bukhari),  as  quoted  by  Ameer  Ali  in  Muhammadan  Law, 
Volume II (1965 Edition) at page 478. 

The nature and extent of the power and authority of the, Qazi to 
38.  
order  dissolution  of  marriage  is  to  be  found  in  the)  following  words  of 
Mujalla tul Ahkam :    

 مسح و لصف لج لا ناطلسا لبق ںم بصنی و نیعی یذلا تاذلا وھ مکاحلا
 اھم  یواعدلا  اکح  لا  اقیفوت  سانلا  نیب  ہتعقاولا  تامصاخملا  و  یواعدلا
"ہتعورشملا
(Hakim  (Judge)  is  that  person  who  is  appointed  by  the 
Sultan  to  finally  adjudicate  upon  and  determine  disputes 
and claims between the contestants according to Shariat). 

Mabsoot, Volume V, at page 97 states:   

"قلاطل اب ملظلا ہتلاذا ہتی لاو یضاقتلل"
(The  Qazi  has  the  power  to  prevent  zulm  by  effecting 
separation). 

Hedaya makes this further clear by stating in Volume II at page 323 as 
follows: -  

“As  Allah  has  enjoined  that  the  husband  should  either 
retain  the  wife  according  to  the  well  recognised  custom 
release  her  with  grace  if  she  is  not  kept  accordingly,  it  is 
necessary for him to release her with grace, or the Qazi will 
release her on his behalf.” 

Raddul  Muhtar,  which  is  a  ,commentary  of  Hedaya,  states  that  if  the 
husband  refuses  to  divorce  his  wife,  she  will  make  an  application  to  the 
Qazi, and if her husband's refusal to divorce her is zulm, the Qazi will act 
on his behalf for relieving her of zulm, and it is permissible for the Qazi to 
dissolve the marriage. 

18. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  position,  this  Court  truly  believes  that  the 

petitioner had made the life of respondent miserable by giving her emotional and 

psychological  trauma  by  way  of  verbal  and  physical  abuse,  which  are  the  key 

factors  and  covered  under  Section  2(viii)(a)  of  the  Dissolution  of  Muslim 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 9 

Marriages Act, 1939. The minimum threshold of evidence regarding cruelty was 

brought on record by the respondent, but surprisingly the learned Family Court 

has  ignored  the  most  important  factor  of  the  Family  Court  Act,  1964,  which 

provides exclusive jurisdiction to the Family Court in terms of Section 5, Part-II of 

the Schedule, however in order to understand the law it is important to reproduce 

the provision of Section 5 of the Family Court Act, 1964, which is as under:  

5.   Jurisdiction.–  [1] Subject to the provisions of  the Muslim Family 
Laws  Ordinance,  1961,  and  the  Conciliation  Courts  Ordinance,  1961, 
the  Family  Courts  shall  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  entertain,  hear 
and adjudicate upon matters specified in [Part I of the Schedule]. 

(2) 
Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Code  of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), the Family Court shall 
have  jurisdiction  to  try  the  offences  specified  in  Part  II  of  the 
Schedule,  where  one  of  the  spouses  is  victim  of  an  offence 
committed by the other. 

The  Government  may  amend  the  Schedule  through  addition, 

(3) 
deletion or substitution of any entry in the Schedule. 

19. 

Section 5 provides two parts in Schedule, while this Court keeping in view 

the case in hand feels it indispensable to illustrate Part-II of the Schedule, which 

is as under:  

Part II 

Offences and aid and abetment thereof under Sections: 
  337A(i) PPC (Shuja-e-Khafifa) 
  337F(i) PPC (Damiyah) 
  341 PPC (Wrongly Restrain) 
  342 PPC (Wrongful confinement) 
  343 PPC (wrongful confinement for 3 or more days) 
  344 PPC (wrongful confinement for 10 or more days) 
  345 PPC (wrongful confinement of a person whose liberation writ has 

been issued) 

  346 PPC (wrongful confinement in secret)  
  352 PPC (assault or use of criminal force) 
  509 PPC (insulting modesty or causing sexual harassment of a woman). 

20. 

The  wisdom  laid  down  by  the  legislature  in  this  enactment  by 

incorporating  Section  5(2)  read  with  offences  defined  in  Part-II  of  the  Schedule 

left no other meaning except that women have to be given protection, although 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 10 

the legislative intent in Section 5(2) refers as, where one of the spouses is victim 

of offence committed by other. Hence, it can easily be construed that it protects 

both  husband  and  wife  tied  in  a  matrimonial  bond  if  either  of  the  party  is 

abusing the other spouse and committed the offences of Sections 337A(i), 337F(i), 

341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 352 and 509 PPC. However, it has been observed that 

in  numerous  judgments  passed  by  Family  Courts,  despite  availability  of 

overwhelming  evidence  on  record,  the  Courts  are  not  attending  to  the  wisdom 

laid down in Section 5(2) read with Part-II of the Schedule of the Family Courts 

Act,  1964,  in  which  the  family  courts  have  been  given  exclusive  jurisdiction  to 

proceed  against  a  spouse,  who  is  an  aggressor  and  had  committed  any  of  the 

above  mentioned  offences  notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Code  of 

Criminal Procedure, 1898. This aspect gives a legal cover to the family courts to 

prosecute  those spouses, who  have inflicted injuries  on other spouse by way of 

emotional,  psychological  as  well  as  physical  harm,  especially  when  the  victim 

wife has been detained against her wishes or confines secretly in some place for 

different intervals of time or abuses physically  (whether medical  is available or 

otherwise).  

21. 

In this case, the physical abuse was explained by respondent together with 

the  psychological  harm,  which  has  been  corroborated  through  documentary 

evidence  Exh.P2  and  Exh.P5,  as  such,  concurrent  findings  given  by  the  Courts 

below  prove  that  petitioner  had  abused  the  respondent  wife  with  extreme 

cruelty,  the  marriage  was  rightly  dissolved  under  the  law  as  no  illegality  has 

been established by the petitioner. However, it is the duty of the family courts to 

consider the following guiding principles.  

a) 

After recording of evidence by  the Family Court, if it appears that 

any  spouse  who  has  suffered  the  psychological  and  physical 

injuries  at  the  hands  of  other  spouse  covering  under  the  offences 

referred  in  Part-II  i.e.  Sections  337A(i),  337F(i),  341,  342,  343,  344, 

 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 11 

345, 346, 352 and 509 PPC, the learned Family Judge has to proceed 

against the perpetrator and award sentence in accordance with the 

law.  

b) 

The Family Court while considering the offences referred in Part-II 

of  the  Schedule  should  give  clear  findings  and  verdict  while 

dilating upon the evidence, even with or without framing of charge 

of that offence as the legislation has used the term “notwithstanding 

anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”. 

c) 

The Family Court can summon the evidence of expert psychiatrist, 

doctor, CMO  or the relevant  doctor who  had treated the victim  in 

such type of cases.  

d) 

The  Family  Court,  before pronouncement of the final judgment,  if 

prima  facie,  seem  the  offences  referred  in  Part-II  of  the  Schedule, 

may issue a show cause to the perpetrator or the spouse accused of 

the offence(s) in order to justify the requirements of Article 10-A of 

the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 by giving 

full opportunity for his defence and may record his/her statement 

being  an  accused  as  required  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  or  340(2) 

Cr.P.C., if so required. 

e) 

The  Family  Court  may  also  call  the  summary  inquiry  through  the 

relevant  police  authorities  or  seek  a  report  and  treat  all  those 

reports, record and documents as part of trial and may also provide 

the copies of those documents to the person accused of the charge 

before final pronouncement of the judgment.  

f) 

The  Family  Court,  while  deciding  the  issue  of  cruelty,  may  frame 

specific  charge  for  the  offence,  consider  the  evidence  on  the 

touchstone  and  requirement  of  ingredients  of  offences  referred  in 

Part-II  of  the  Schedule  and  pass  a  sentence  simultaneously  in  the 

 
 
W.P. No.2885/2019 

Page | 12 

same  judgment  or  may  proceed  separately  in  accordance  with 

procedure provided under the Cr.P.C. 

g) 

The Family Court who has not given any findings on Part-II of the 

Schedule  (of  the  offences)  in  its  judgment  despite  availability  of 

evidence  in  the  Family  Court  jurisdiction,  shall  be  treated  as 

misconduct on its part, which has to be dealt with separately by the 

High Court on its administrative side.  

22.  While considering the above background, this Court is confident to hold 

that  the  petitioner  has  failed  to  prove  his  case  on  any  legal  justification, 

whereas  the  Family  Court  has  rightly  dissolved  the  marriage  on  the  basis  of 

cruelty,  therefore,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  misconceived  and  the  same  is 

hereby  DISMISSED.  However,  this  Court  while  sitting  in  constitutional 

jurisdiction could not award any punishment at this stage in this case.  

23. 

The  learned  Registrar  of  this  Court  is  directed  to  circulate  copy  of  this 

judgment  to  District  &  Sessions  Judges  of  both  Division,  Islamabad  for  their 

perusal and information.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
    JUDGE 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 

Khalid Z. 

    JUDGE 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
