ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Revision  No.50/2015 
Munir Ahmed  & another 
v. 
The State, etc. 

Petitioners  by: 

Mr. Ali Hussain Bhatti, Advocate along with petitioner. 

Respondents  by: 

Barrister Ayesha Siddique  Khan, State Counsel. 
Ms. Rakhshanda Azhar,  Advocate for Respondent No.2. 
Jamshed Khan, Inspector, P.S. Shalimar, Islamabad. 
Ghulam  Abbas Khan, ASI, P.S. Shalimar, Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

15.01.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI, J:  Through  the  instant  criminal  revision 

petition,  the  petitioners  have  called in question  order  dated  31.01.2015, whereby 

the  petitioners  were  convicted  in  case  FIR  No.415,  dated  28.08.2009, under 

Section 392/ 411 PPC, P.S. Shalimar, Islamabad  by the learned  Judicial Magistrate 

and  sentenced  to  undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for  three  (03)  years  in  each 

offence along  with  fine  of Rs.20,000/-  (each), in  default  of payment  of fine, the 

petitioners  have  to  further  undergo  simple  imprisonment  for  the  period  of two 

(02)  months.  Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. was  also extended  to the petitioner 

and  the  sentences  shall  run  consecutively,  and  as  such,  the  order  of  learned 

Judicial  Magistrate  was  further  maintained  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge vide impugned  order  dated  30.03.2015. 

2. 

Brief facts referred  in the instant  criminal revision  petition  are that  on the 

complainant  of Muhammad  Ashraf Qureshi/respondent No.1, the  aforesaid  FIR 

No.415/2009  was  registered  against  two  unknown  persons  along  with  two 

co-accused  ladies  for  committing  robbery  with  the  complainant's  family  by 

taking  away  gold  ornaments,  mobile  phones,  cash,  etc.  The  petitioners  were 

implicated  in the  instant  case on the  basis of supplementary  statement  recorded 

by the complainant  and  after  completion  of investigation/  evidence,  the  learned 

trial  Court  convicted  and  sentenced  the  petitioners  vide  impugned  order  dated 

Crl.  Revision No.50/2015 

Page  I  2 

31.01.2015. Feeling aggrieved  thereof, the  petitioners  preferred  their  appeals, 

which were dismissed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge vide impugned 

judgment dated 30.03.2015. Hence, the instant criminal revision petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioners  contended  that  both  the  Courts  below 

have  erred  in  law  and  convicted  the  petitioners  on  the  basis  of  insufficient 

prosecution evidence; that the impugned judgments of both the Courts below are 

the result  of non-reading  and  mis-reading of the  evidence as  both  the  Courts 

below  have  ignored  the  ingredients  of  the  alleged  offences, regarding  which 

there  is  no  proof  available on  record  against  the  petitioners; that  the  case as 

established by the prosecution is full of doubts but both the Courts below have 

misread the same and  unlawfully convicted the petitioners, therefore, the same 

are liable to be set-aside and petitioners may be acquitted of the charge. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

complainant/respondent  No.1 opposed the instant criminal revision petition and 

contended that  both  the Courts below have rightly appreciated the facts of the 

case and evidence produced by the prosecution; that the recovery of looted gold 

ornaments as well as weapon of offence from the petitioners connects them with 

the commission of offence; that  there is sufficient evidence available on record 

against the petitioners, including the account of eyewitnesses, who  corroborate 

the case as established by the prosecution, on the basis of which both the Courts 

below  have  rightly  convicted  and  sentenced  the  petitioners  vide  impugned 

judgments, therefore, the instant criminal revision petition may be dismissed. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that petitioners Munir Ahmad and  Muhammad 

Waris have been convicted in case FIR No.415, dated  28.08.2009, under  Sections 

392/ 411  PPC,  P.S.  Shalimar,  Islamabad  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  vide 

impugned  judgment  dated  31.01.2015 and  sentenced each to  undergo  rigorous 

imprisonment for 03 years along with fine of Rs.20,000/- each, under Section 392 

PPC, whereas  they  have  also  been  simultaneously  convicted  and  sentenced 

Crl.  Revision  No.50/2015 

Page  I  3 

under  Section 411  PPC to  undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for  03  years  along 

with fine of Rs.20,000/- each. In default of payment of fine, the petitioners shall 

further undergo  simple imprisonment for 02 months. The said judgment  of the 

learned Trial Court has been maintained in appeal by learned Additional District 

Judge, Islamabad vide impugned judgment dated 30.03.2015. 

7. 

Muhammad  Ashraf Qureshi/ respondent  No.2 being complainant of the 

instant  case has  appeared  as  PW-1 before the  Trial Court  and  stated  that  on 

28.08.2009, at about 8:30 a.m., he left his home for Mardan on his official vehicle 

leaving his two housemaids namely Mst. Shumaila and Mst. Sumaira as well as 

Tasawar Abbas/Chowkidar  in the house and  during  the journey he received a 

telephonic call  from  his  home  informing  him  about  commission  of  robbery, 

whereafter  he  informed  the·  police and  came  back  to  Islamabad  whereby  he 

learnt  that  the  said  two  housemaids  in  connivance  with  two  other  accused 

persons namely Muhammad Waris and Tasawar had tied up his wife as well as 

his children and  snatched away gold ornaments, two mobile phones (Nokia and 

Sony Ericson) as well as cash amounting to Rs.50,000/-, and five star watches on 

gun point. The complaint was converted into FIR Exh.P A.  After the occurrence, 

PW-1 Muhammad  Ashraf  Qureshi/ complainant  while  going  to  Sector G-11, 

Islamabad  with  his  family  saw  both  the  housemaids  along  with  present 

petitioners,  who  were  recognized  and  identified  by  his  family  members, 

whereafter  he  by  informing  the  police has  nominated  those  accused  persons 

through  supplementary  statement.  During  the  course  of  cross-examination, 

PW-1 Muhammad Ashraf Qureshi acknowledged that the accused persons were 

identified by his wife and daughter in Police Station and has also verified the fact 

that accused Munir Ahmad/ petitioner got recovered two gold Karha  (IJS),  three 

chains and  three  rings along with  some other items comprising of earring tops 

and 

cash 

amounting 

to  Rs.20,000/-.  PW-1  Muhammad  Ashraf 

Qureshi/ complainant  was  further  cross  examined  by  the  petitioners/ defence 

Crl. Revision  No.50/2015 

Page  I  4 

side,  whereby  he  admitted  that  the  accused  persons  were  not  known  to  his 

family members earlier, rather they had seen them during the incident. 

8. 

The prosecution  has  produced  the wife of complainant namely Naeema 

Ashraf as PW-2, who  stated  that  on 28.08.2009, the two housemaids called two 

persons in the house, one of whom was armed with pistol, and all four of them 

collectively robbed jewelry, clothes, mobile phones, watches and cash amounting 

to Rs.50,000/- from her while they had  locked her and  her  daughter  in a room 

and fled away while extending life threats. She further stated that they had seen 

the accused persons in Sector G-11 (Kachi Abadi)  after 04  weeks of the incident, 

upon  which the  police arrested  them.  During the  course of cross-examination, 

PW-2 Naeema Ashraf acknowledged that the accused persons were identified in 

jail by her  and  her  daughter  as well. She also identified the recovered jewelry 

articles, however she reiterated that the female accused persons had snatched the 

jewelry while the petitioners being male accused persons had extended threats. 

9. 

Sadia  Ashraf  i.e.  daughter  of  complainant  appeared  as  PW-3  and 

reiterated  the  stance  of  her  mother  and  father  while  maintaining  that  she 

identified both the housemaids together with the petitioners and contended that 

accused persons had  snatched their mobile phones, cash and jewelry as well as 

they  extended  life  threats.  She further  confirmed that  she  identified  accused 

persons  near  Kachi  Abadi  in  Sector  G-11  after  3 / 4  weeks  of  the  incident, 

whereupon the accused persons were arrested. 

10. 

The prosecution has also produced PW-3 Asma Bibi/Lady Constable, who 

is recovery witness  of female accused person  namely  Munazza  Bibi, who  got 

recovered jewelry  and  cash amounting  to  Rs.4,700/- from  Mehrabadi through 

Exh.PB. She also witnessed recovery of Rs.5,200/- from Sania Bibi alias Sumaira 

Bibi from her house through Exh.PC. 

11. 

The prosecution has  also produced  another recovery witness i.e. Kifayat 

Ullah/HC  as PW-5, who reiterated the stance that both female accused persons 

got recovered the amount and he witnessed the recovery proceedings and signed 

Crl. Revision No.50/2015 

Page  I  5 

the recovery memo Exh.PB and Exh.PC. He further stated that he witnessed the 

recovery of .30  bore  pistol  along with  five live bullets on  pointation  of Munir 

Ahmad/petitioner  from  jungle  area  of  Sector F-10/3  through  Exh.PD and  is 

recovery witness of jewelry recovered on pointation of Munir Ahmad/ petitioner, 

which contains three earrings, three tops and one locket with chain vide recovery 

memo Exh.PE. Similarly, he has also witnessed the recovery on 18.10.2009 from 

Muhammad Waris/petitioner,  who got recovered two Karha  (I.JS),  one locket and 

two  gold  chains 

through  Exh.PF.  However,  PW-5  Kifayat  Ullah/HC 

acknowledged that  both  the petitioners have separately got recovered the gold 

jewelry  on  their  pointation.  He  also  acknowledged  that  vehicle  bearing 

registration No.TF-350 used in incident was also recovered. 

12. 

The last witness produced  by the prosecution is PW-6 Jamshed Khan i.e. 

the  Investigating  Officer  of  this  case,  who  prepared  site  plan  Exh.PJ and 

confirmed  that  he  arrested  Tasawar  Abbas, Azhar,  Fakhar  Imam  and  Altaf, 

whereas  three  accused  persons  were  discharged  of the  charge  due  to  lack of 

evidence. He further stated that he on receiving information that female accused 

persons  working  as  housemaid  in  the  house  of complainant  have  been  seen, 

whereupon he arrested them on 09.10.2009, who have been identified as Munaza 

and Sania, who  disclosed the details of incident committed with the help of the 

petitioners, whereupon  the  other  two  accused persons  were  arrested  and  got 

recovered cash amount  together with  other jewelry articles and  pistol from the 

petitioners. He also acknowledged that  both petitioners have been identified in 

Adiala  Jail  in  presence  of  Magistrate,  however  he  has  not  attached  the 

identification parade record with the final report. 

13. 

Both the petitioners/ accused persons have recorded their statement under 

Section 342 Cr.P.C. and denied their involvement in this case, however both were 

convicted under Section 392/ 411  PPC and sentenced to three (03) years rigorous 

imprisonment each along with fine. 

Crl.  Revision  No.50/2015 

Page  I  6 

14. 

I have minutely attended to the entire evidence and observed that the two 

eyewitnesses namely  PW-2 Naeema Ashraf and  PW-3 Sadia Ashraf remained 

consistent upon the following facts. 

a) 

The  manner  and  mode  in  which  the  incident  took  place  on 

28.08.2009, both the housemaids namely Munaza and Sania as well 

as petitioners namely Munir Ahmad and  Muhammad Waris were 

identified. 

b) 

Both the  eyewitnesses namely  PW-2 Naeema  Ashraf  and  PW-3 

Sadia  Ashraf  verified  the  fact  that  their  jewelry  articles, mobile 

phones, cash amounting to Rs.50,000/- and watches were snatched, 

whereas the petitioners extended life threats on gun point. 

c) 

The  recovered  jewelry  articles  have  been  identified  by  PW-2 

Naeema Ashraf. 

d) 

Both the  eyewitnesses i.e. PW-2 Naeema Ashraf and  PW-3 Sadia 

Ashraf on seeing all the accused persons after 04 weeks of incident 

near Kachi Abadi, Sector G-11, Islamabad had informed the police, 

whereafter the accused persons were arrested. 

e) 

The  accused persons  have  been  identified through  identification 

parade  proceedings  in  jail,  but  no  such  record  is  available  on 

record,  whereas  the  eyewitnesses  have  identified  the  accused 

persons before the Trial Court. 

15.  Keeping in view the  above position, the  star witnesses, who  are natural 

and  having  no  animosity against the  petitioners, have  properly  identified the 

petitioners after the incident and on their information the accused persons were 

arrested by the police, whereafter they led to recovery of gold jewelry, .30 bore 

pistol  and  cash  amount,  which  has  been  placed  on  record  through  Exh.PB, 

Exh.PC,  Exh.PD,  Exh.PE  and  Exh.PF.  The  recovery  proceedings  have 

independently  been  proved 

through 

the 

testimony  of  PW-4  Asima 

Crl.  Revision  No.50/2015 

Page  I  7 

Bibi/Constable,  PW-5  Kifayat  Ullah/HC  and  PW-6  Jamshed  Akhtar/LO., 

wherein  no discrepancy  has been noted, who remained  consistent  on all scores. 

16. 

I  have  taken  into  account  the  defence  plea  of  the  petitioners,  which  is 

silent qua  any justified  reason.  Both the courts below have  given  detailed  stance 

while  appreciating  evidence  available  on  record  in  which  the  alleged  incident 

dated  28.08.2009 was  proved  to  be  committed  by  petitioners  as  well  as  by  the 

housemaids,  who  have  absconded  during  the  course  of  trial.  Both  the  Courts 

below have rightly  appreciated  the evidence produced  by the prosecution,  which 

also fulfills the  requirements  of Article 40 of the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984 

and  as such,  the  defence  has  failed  to justify  any  previous  animosity,  motive  or 

false  implication,  on  the  basis  of  which  the  petitioners  have  rightly  been 

convicted by the learned  Trial Court,  even otherwise,  the findings  are concurrent 

and no illegality has been observed. 

17. 

The  requirements  of  offence  under  Section  392  PPC  are  visible  from 

record,  whereby 

the  petitioners  have  carried  away 

the  property  of  the 

complainant,  PW-2 Naeema  Ashraf  and  PW-3 Sadia Ashraf  by way  of extortion 

on gun  point,  which  was  later  on also recovered  on the pointation  of petitioners, 

therefore, nothing  is to be presumed  in favour  of petitioners,  who have also been 

declared  guilty by two courts below. 

18. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  position,  the  captioned  criminal  revision 

petition  filed  by  petitioners  is hereby  DISMISSED.  Both the  petitioners  are  on 

bail, they be taken  into custody  to serve their remaining  sentence. 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KtYANI) 

JUDGE 

. 

Announced 

in open  Court  on: _t)_3_J!d 

)..o __ u_._ 

JUDGE 

KhalidZ. 

