ORDER SHEET

fAt

rq, AMAR,AI-I I1TCI1 CNI

QI AMAR,AN

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P. No.475 of 2O77.

Muhammad Usman Syed,

VS

COMSATS Institute of Information TechnologY,  etc.

DATE  OF HEARING:
PETITIONER  BY:
RESPONDENTS  BY:

02-04-2012.
Barrister Omer Farooq, Advocate
Raja Abid Hussain, Advocate  for respondent
No.1.

SHAIIKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI' J: Brief facts gleaning out

from the writ petition  are that, petitioner applied to various

universities  and degree awarding institutes,  including
Respondent No.1, FAST University,  Air University  and
Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute for admission in  BS
programme  with major in computer sciences.  A provisional

offer was made by Respondent No.1 vide provisional offer

letter dated July, 07, 20to which was accepted  by way of

deposit of fee, vide Pay order No.3L3t299, RBS Bank,  F-7

Branch,  Islamabad.

2.  Later ofl, petitioner received an offer from FAST
University to join its BS Program  on July, t9, 2010'
Petitioner accepted the later offer and deposited  the dues
amounting to Rs.85,000/- on July 28, 2010 as FAST

university was the preferred  choice  of the petitioner from
the outset. The Father of petitioner, on Juty 29, 2010

through an email addressed  to Mr. Nadeem-ud-din  Qureshi,

Additional  Registrar of Respondent  No.1 communicated the

lt'

q

W.P  No.415  o12011

-2-

petitioner's  decision to withdraw his acceptance of a place

at COMSATS and sought refund of the fee who responded

to same on July 31, 2010 refusing  refund of fee, on the

ground that no such practice

IS

prevalent at Institute,

petitioner's  father, on August 04, 2010 served  a legal notice

on Respondent  No.1 demanding  reimbursement of fee, but

did not receive  response in affirmative, hence  instant

petition.

3.  The learned counsel for petitioner argued  that

petitioner is an "aggrieved  party" within the meaning  of

Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic  Republic of

Pakistan,  L973. Moreover,  petitioner brings the instant
Petition before this court in the public interest, as

promotion to the right of education and prohibition  of any

unreasonable  restriction or restraint as policy and practice

of Respondent No.1, is illegal, unreasonable and unfair
which directly undermine  the Fundamental  Rights of

petitioner and thousands of other students of the country.

4.  The learned counsel added that when a petition  under

article 199 is instituted before the High Court in the public
interest, petitioner need not prove that he/she is an

aggrieved  party within the meaning of Article 199. The real

test in public interest litigation is the subject  matter of the

petition or the abuse of public trust complained of. Once the

court assesses that breach of trust and violation of law by a

W.P No.415  of 2011

-3-

public institution has taken place, the court must
immediately  proceed further to rectify the breach, the

identity  of antecedents of petitioner  pale into insignificance.

Moreover,  with the development of new concept of public

interest Iitigation in the recent years, a person  can now

invoke the constitutional  jurisdiction of the superior courts,

even if he is not an aggrieved  party as held by the superior
courts of the country in number of judgments.  In this
regard Iearned  counsel placed his reliance  on 2010 pLD

Lahore 605, PLD 2009 Lahore 22,2007  MLD 999, pLD 2006

Supreme  Court 394, 2000 CLC 47L (Lahore),  tggT CLC

L379  (Lahore) and 1992  CLC 2065  (Lahore).
5.  while arguing on the point of acquiescence to the

terms and conditions  of the Provisional offer Letter, issued

by Respondent No.1 and principles of estoppel,  learned
counsel for petitioner contended  that the principle  of

estoppel does not apply to the instant petition, since the

Refund  Policy infringes the Fundamental Rights of petitioner

and it is settled law that there is no estoppel against  law.

consequently,  even if petitioner was aware of the Refund

Policy or agreed to the terms and conditions  thereof, such

knowledge or acquiescence  does not estopp  petitioner from

agitating the instant  petition as he cannot contract out of

his Fundamental Rights.
6.  Learned counse! further argued that COMSATS  is a

body corporate,  established pursuant to the COMSATS

W.P  No.415  oI2011

-4-

Institute of  Information Technology  Ordinance,  2000

(COMSATS  Ordinance).  By virtue of Section 13 of the

COMSATS  Ordinance,  the general supervision and control of

administrative,  academic  and financial  affairs of COMSATS

and the power to lay down policies  of COMSATS  vest in the

Board of Governor  consisting  of (a) the Executive  Director,

COMSATS,  who is the Chairman of the Board (b) the
Rector, (c) the Secretary, Ministry of  Science and
Technology,  Government  of Pakistan, (d) the Secretary,

Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan (e) the

Chairman, University Grants Commission,  (f)one person to

be nominated by the Educational NGOs, (g) the Director of
the campuses of the Institute (h) two Deans to be

nominated by the Managing Committee of COMSATS  and

three person of outstanding  merit to be nominated by the
Managing Committee of  COMSATS  i.e  Registrar of
COMSATS, who is the Secretary.  Therefore, as per
established  dicta, an entity is considered to be "a person

performing  functions in connection with the affairs of the

Federation  (i) where the functions  entrusted  to it are indeed

functions  of the state. COMSATS, therefore,  is "a person

performing  functions in connection with the affairs of the

Federation".  On this point, learned  counsel for petitioner

placed his reliance on PLD 2010 SC 676, 2006 MLD 686,

2010 PLC (C.S) 184 and PLD 2000 (Lahore)  489.

W.P  No.415  of 2011

-5-

7.  on the point that, whether  a policy decision  of a public
functionary can be challenged in  the constitutional
jurisdiction of the High court, the Iearned  counsel for

petitioner argued that the Refund  policy is essentiaily a
manifestation of an executive policy/act by a  person
performing  functions in connection with the affairs  of the
Federation. In this regard, it  is setued raw that any
unreasonable restraint, hindrance, or condition  on the
exercise of a Fundamental  Rights is ultra vires to the

constitution, irrespective  of whether, same was imposed by

an administrative  or executive act, by some statutory  rule

or even by the statute itself. It is also well settled that if a

policy is in conflict with any provision of law or is violative

of the Fundamental Rights of a citizen, the same can be

called in question before High court in its constitutional

Jurisdiction.  In this regard,  learned  counsel for petitioner

placed his reliance on 20tL SCMR 1621, PLD 2007 Karachi

116 and PLD 1979 SC 1.

8  On the other hand, respondent  No.1 filed its reply and

parawise comments and sought  dismissal of the writ

petition on the grounds that, petitioner  has no cause of

action to file the instant  petition as he himself  willingly

preferred for admission  in BS (Computer Science) Program
of  respondent  Institute and thereafter  accepted the

admission offer and the terms and conditions thereof.  That

institute  announces  opening and closing  dates of its

W.P  No.415  of.2011

-6-

admissions through leading  dailies and its website as well.
The admission criteria in detail is provided in CIIT's

prospectus.  Petitioner like all other candidates/applicants

submitted his application form for his admission in BS

(Computer  Science) Program and after fulfilling all the

requirements  he was granted  admission on provisional  basis

which he willingly accepted  and reserved a seat in the

relevant discipline  of Respondent  Institute.  Therefore, by

accepting this admission  offer, petitioner restrained
respondent  Institute to allow admission to any other

candidate, against  his allocated/reserved  seat. That e-mail
response of  Additional Registrar of 

the

University/respondent  Institute has been misconstrued,

basically any of the candidates/applicants  who intends  to

withdraw from his/her admission  at CIIT is entitled only to

the refund of "Caution  Money". The policy for the result

awaiting  candidates  as explained by the Additional Registrar
in his e-mail  response  was revised by CIIT since it is

empowered to amend its policies at any stage without any

prior notice. That, the Institute's  undergraduate  prospectus
2010-2011  session  contains therein a self explanatory
"Disclaimer" that justifies al! its  actions and /or

amendments in its policies  from time to time. That every
educational institution has its own governing body,
empowered to formulate,  approve and promulgate  its

policies, rules and regulations  which it has to follow in letter

W.P No.415 ot2011

-7 -

I

J

and spirit. on grounds, it is averred that, CIIT is governed
under the provisions of "the COMSATS Institute of
Information  Technology ordinance,  2ooo,. The admission
policies are always  formulated  within the framework  of the
statutes  of the educationar institutions  estabrished under
any statu'e. tne admission policy of the respondent institute
was framed in accordance with the said ordinance  and
statueb  framed there under and certain competent forums
have been established  who are empowered to regulate the
policies regarding admissions  in different degree program.
The respondent institute has never deviated  from its laid
down rules/regulations and procedure for admission  in any
of its discipline.  That respondent  Institute has stricUy
complied with an{followed the admission policy in letter and
spirit and no question  of viotation  of any provision of the
constitution  of pakistan  and /or principle  of natural justice

anses

I  have heard the learned counsel, appreciated  the
respective pleadings  and perused the documents annexed.

9.  In order to narrow  down the controversy, I find it
appropriate to provide admitted facts, which are as under:-

o  Admission  granted  to petitioner  was  provisional, as like many other

sfudenfs his result was  awaited.

o  Dues/fee  received  from petitioner  was of regular  student.
o  Petitioner stay at lnstitute  was for a short  span of time.
o  Petitionertook admission in FAsr  university  and teft  respondent  No.1.
o  There is no statutory  provision  through which  entire fee deposited  by

student  can be foieited.

W.P  No.415  o12011

I

10. In my humble estimation,  non-refund  of fee to any

student who left the institution at very initial stage  is harsh

and against the principles  of natural justice. One of the

features of social contract i.e. Constitution  of the Islamic

Republic of Pakistan  is to eliminate exploitation and non-

refund of fee tantamounts to exploitation, thereby  resulting

into an infringement to constitutionally guaranteed  rights to

citizen  of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. It is also against

the golden principles  of Islamic Iaw and moral  values to

make claim with regard to that amount against  which no

service,  Iabour or product is provided.  One of the reason of

prohibiting Ribba (interest) in the Islamic State is that it

leads to exploitation.

11. It is being observed  with great concern that trend of

Educational Institutions in the public and private  sectors  in
parting the education appears to be with commercial
approach  and due to this very reason policies  are

introduced to Squeeze money from the students, who in the

compelling  circumstances are forced to give an undertaking
of  acceptance of terms and conditions.  Educational
Institutions cannot be a!lowed to operate purely on
commercial considerations  rather main object of
Educational Institutions  should be to part the education
with the purpose of building a nation with sense of

civilization, rule of law and transparency  in the affairs.  This

W.P  No.415  of 2011

-9-

type of policies,  in-fact burden the entire family  and there

are instances  where most brilliant students deprived  of

education  as families were not financially strong to deposit

fee of different Institutions. This illogical policy depriving
students from lower middle class which is  naked
discrimination and offending to principles of equity, fair

Flay, equality  and transparency. In an Islamic and Welfare

State right of good education  can never  be confined to rich,

influential and mighty ones.

L2. The management  of the Educational Institutions  is

expected to demonstrate parental  conduct and approach

towards  students  instead of businessmen. Every student

make his dream true by opting for Educational  Institution  in

accordance  with his priorities and means, it is the right of

every student to ensure that his Educational  career  is
guarded,  therefore, to apply for getting  admission in

different institutions  should not be treated as an offence

bringing penal consequences  of forfeiture of entire fee/dues

received  by the Institution.

In this view of the matter, instant petition is allowed

by declaring that there is no rationale in the policy  of non-

refund of entire fee which  is unjust, harsh, illegal, besides
the mandate of the constitution,  principles of natural
justice, equity, social justice,  dictums laid down by the

superior courts of the country, therefore, Same cannot be

, 

W.P No.415  of 2011

- 10-

allowed to  be applied by the public/private  sector
institutions.  Respondent  Nos. 1 and 2 are directed  to

restructure  the applicable policy and bring the same in

conformity with the observations  made herein above.

However, Institutions  may retain amount against expenses

and services provided to any student, til! his stay at the

Institution.

AZ|Z StDDtQUt)

JUDGE

Announced in open court on Jo-O+-2012

Approved for repofting.

'WaqarAhmed"

otu gt?

"/rU

