JUDGMENT SHEET. 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Consumer Appeal No.05/2016 

      Ashfaq Ahmed Khan                
   Appellant: 
      Respondents by 
   Date of Hearing: 

            VS              PTCL & another. 

In person. 
Barrister Faisal Khan, Advocate. 
04.03.2016. 

Consumer Appeal No.06/2016 

      Ashfaq Ahmed Khan                
   Appellant 
      Respondents by 
      Date of Hearing: 

            VS              PTCL & another. 

In person. 
Barrister Faisal Khan, Advocate. 

           04.03.2016. 

Criminal Appeal No.11/2016 

     PTCL & another                      
   Appellants by 
      Respondent 

   Date of Hearing: 

VS             Ashfaq Ahmed Khan. 
Barrister Faisal Khan, Advocate. 
In person. 
Ch. Muhammad Haseeb, Standing Counsel. 
Ms. Shazia Bilal, State Counsel. 
04.03.2016. 

Criminal Appeal No.15/2016 

     PTCL & another                      
    Appellants by 
    Respondent 

 VS             Ashfaq Ahmed Khan. 
Barrister Faisal Khan, Advocate. 
In person. 
Ch. Muhammad Haseeb, Standing Counsel. 
Ms. Shazia Bilal, State Counsel. 

    Date of Hearing: 

          04.03.2016. 

Criminal Appeal No.40/2016 

    Ch. Nadeem Ahmed 
    Appellant by 
    Respondent No.2 By: 

 VS   Addl: District Judge and other. 
Ch. Abdul Ghafoor, Advocate 
Malik Abdul Munir, Advocate. 
Ch. Muhammad Haseeb, Standing Counsel. 
Ms. Shazia Bilal, State Counsel. 

    Date of Hearing: 

           18.03.2016 

Consumer Appeal No.113/2015 

Muhammad Akram Malik  

VS 

M/s Telenor Pakistan Ltd. etc. 

   Appellant 
     Respondent No.1 by 

     Respondent No.2 by 

     Date of Hearing: 

In person. 
Mr. Muhammad Junaid Akhtar, 
Advocate. 
Barrister Munawar Iqbal Duggal, 
Advocate. 
Ch. Muhammad Haseeb, Standing Counsel. 
Ms. Shazia Bilal, State Counsel. 
04.03.2016. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

2 

Consumer Appeal No.185/2015 

     Muhammad Akram Malik                    VS              Ehsan Raqib, etc. 
     Appellant 
     Respondent No.1    
     Date of Hearing: 

In person. 
In person.  
04.03.2016. 

          MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.  By  this  single  judgment  I  intend  to 

decide  all  the  captioned  consumer  appeals  as  common  questions  of  law  and  facts  are 

involved in all these appeals.  

2. 

In Consumer Appeal No.113/2015 the appellant has prayed for setting aside of 

judgment  dated  08-05-2015  and  has  further  prayed  that  respondents  be  framed  and 

punished in accordance with Section 9 of Islamabad Consumer Protection Act, 1995 for 

infringement  of  appellant’s  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  and 

having  committed  criminal  breach  of  trust  by  indulging  in  unfair  trade  practice  i.e. 

issuance of SIM  in the name of appellant without his consent by  misusing copy of his 

CNIC (lying in their custody as trust). It is also prayed that compensation and damages 

to  the  tune  of  Rs.100,000/-  may  also  be  granted  to  the  appellant/complainant  being 

victim  of  unfair  trade  practice/criminal  breach  of  trust.  The  respondents  may  also  be 

directed  to  disclose  number  of  third  SIM  illegally  sold  in  the  name  of  appellant  (by 

misusing  his  CNIC)  to  a  third  person  alongwith  details  of  number  of  SIM,  name  of 

unauthorized seller, purchaser and user of third SIM. 

3. 

The  facts  in  brief  relating  to  Consumer  Appeal  No.113/2015  are  that  the 

appellant  purchased  two  SIMs  No.0345-5547802-3  from  Telenor/respondent  No.1 

however,  a  third  SIM  was  illegally  sold  by  respondent  No.1 to  a third  person  without 

express  consent/knowledge  of  appellant  by  misusing  his  CNIC.  The  appellant  asked 

respondent  No.1  to  divulge  number  of  third  SIM,  name  of  its  unauthorized  seller  and 

purchaser/user which was refused whereupon the appellant filed a complaint before the 

Additional  District  Judge  Islamabad  which  was  dismissed  in  a  slipshod  manner  on     

25-05-2013 hence, the instant appeal. 

4. 

The  brief  facts  relating  to  Consumer  Appeal  No.185/2015  are  that  appellant 

handed  over  Japan  made  remote  controller  of  Sony  TV  set  to  the  respondents  on        

03-11-2014 for minor repair which was retained  by them  however,  after one week the 

 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

3 

respondents  informed  the  appellant  that original  remote  control  set  cannot  be  repaired 

and  retained  the  same  for  sending  it  to  Sony  Company’s  main  workshop.  They 

persuaded  the  appellant  to  purchase  a  copy  of  remote  control  from  them  for  Rs.500/- 

which  was  purchased  against  a  sum  of  Rs.500/-.  The  said  remote  control  was  found 

defective  and  on  the  very  next  day  the  appellant visited  workshop  of  respondents  and 

demanded  the  replacement  of  defective  remote  control  but  respondents  flatly  refused 

and  even  usurped  original  remote  control.  The  appellant  filed  a  complaint  before  the 

Consumer  Court,  Islamabad  however,  the  said  complaint  was  dismissed  vide  order 

dated 14-10-2015, hence, the instant consumer appeal. 

5. 

The  brief  facts  relating  to  Consumer  Appeal  No.05/2016  are  that  on  30-11-

2010  the  complainant  got  installed  a  landline  telephone  connection  and  broadband 

internet  from  PTCL/respondent  No.1.  The  said  internet  connection  was  1  Mbps. 

However, respondents upgraded the said broadband internet connection of 1 Mbps to 2 

Mbps  and  then  to  4  Mbps.  Resultantly,  the  appellant  was  being  charged  against  the 

broadband connection of 4 Mbps without any lawful justification. The  appellant filed a 

complaint before the Additional District Judge, Islamabad and the Court concerned vide 

order  dated  21-12-2015  imposed  a  penalty  of  Rs.40,000/-  upon  the  respondent  No.1 

alongwith  compensation  of  Rs.100,000/-  payable  to  the  appellant.  Hence,  the  instant 

appeal  filed  by  the  appellant  alleging  therein  that  the  amount  of  compensation  be 

enhanced  from  Rs.100,000/-  to  Rs.10,000,000/-  and  has  further  prayed  that  the 

respondents  be  directed  to  pay  a  Rs.200,000/-  as  cost  of  litigation.  Hence,  the  instant 

appeal. 

6. 

Brief facts relating to Consumer  Appeal  No.06/2016 are that on 20-03-2016 a 

landline  telephone,  broadband  internet  connection  and  smart  TV  was  installed  at  the 

address  of  the  appellant  and  appellant  was  regularly  paying  the  bill  of  the  same.  The 

smart  TV  connection  of  the  complainant  was  not  working  for  the  last  two  weeks 

however,  despite  repeated  requests  respondent  No.1  did  not  pay  any  heed  to  the 

requests  of  the  appellant.  The  appellant  asked  respondent  No.1  for  1  Mbps  but  the 

respondents  upgraded  the  1  Mbps  to  2  Mbps  and  then  to  4  Mbps  without  any  lawful 

authority.    Resultantly,  the  appellant  was  being  charged  against  the  broadband 

 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

4 

connection of 4 Mbps without any lawful justification. The appellant filed a complaint 

before  the  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad  and  the  Court  concerned  vide  order 

dated  21-12-2015  imposed  a  penalty  of  Rs.40,000/-  upon  the  respondent  No.1 

alongwith  compensation  of  Rs.100,000/-  payable  to  the  appellant.  Hence,  the  instant 

appeal  filed  by  the  appellant  alleging  therein  that  the  amount  of  compensation  be 

enhanced  from  Rs.100,000/-  to  Rs.10,000,000/-  and  has  further  prayed  that  the 

respondents  be  directed  to  pay  a  Rs.200,000/-  as  cost  of  litigation.  Hence,  the  instant 

appeal. 

7. 

Brief facts relating to Criminal Appeal No.11/2016 are that through the instant 

appeal,  the  appellants  have  assailed  the  order  dated  21-12-2015  passed  by  learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad  whereby  the  appellants  have  been  ordered  for 

payment  of  fine  of  Rs.40,000/-    alongwith  compensation  of  Rs.100,000/-  payable  to 

respondent No.1. Hence, the instant appeal. 

8. 

Brief facts relating to Criminal Appeal No.15/2016 are that through the instant 

appeal,  the  appellants  have  assailed  the  order  dated  21-12-2015  passed  by  learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  appellants  have  been  ordered  for 

payment  of  fine  of  Rs.40,000/-    alongwith  compensation  of  Rs.100,000/-  payable  to 

respondent No.1. Hence, the instant appeal.   

9. 

Brief facts relating to Criminal Appeal No.40/2016 are that through the instant 

Criminal  Appeal,  the  appellant  has  assailed  the  order  dated  22.01.2016  passed  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad  whereby  the  complaint  of  the  appellant 

was dismissed on the ground that only payment receipt of the product has been annexed 

with  the  plaint  wherein  it  was  written  “service  warranty  one  year”.  The  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  further  declared  that  the  from  the  plain  reading  of  receipt 

suggests  that  the  responsibility  of  respondent  does  not  extend  to  the  replacement  of 

product  i.e.  the  geyser  rather  the  respondent  was  only  liable  for  service  of  product 

within year of its purchase, hence the instant appeal.  

10. 

Arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  in  each  of  the  above  mentioned 

appeals as well as learned Standing Counsel and learned State Counsel have been heard, 

record perused. 

 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

5 

11. 

From the meticulous perusal of the orders assailed by the appellants through the 

captioned  appeals  it  transpires  that  the  same  have  been  passed  by  the  “Authority”  in 

terms of Islamabad Consumer Protection  Act, 1995. However,  from the perusal of the 

said orders it is very much evident that the same have been passed without taking into 

consideration the  very spirit of  law  and the procedure to be adopted as per the golden 

principles laid down by the legislature and refined /modified with the passage of time to 

bring  improvements  towards  achieving  the  destination  of  substantial  justice  to 

ultimately meet the ends of equity and fair play as guaranteed under the Constitution of 

Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 1973. Certainly to reach at a just and fair conclusion, the 

procedure  and  mechanism  set  forth  by  the  law  in  its true  perspective  is  required  to  be 

followed  strictly.  However,  the  orders  assailed  by  the  appellant through  the  captioned 

appeals,  reflect  a  different  impression.  While  dealing  with  the  complaint  in  each  and 

every matter, the “Authority” has undertaken the entire exercise only by comparing and 

perusal  of  pleadings  of  the  parties  i.e.  complaint,  reply  of  complaint  submitted  by  the 

respondent  and  attached  documents,  hence,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  core 

question as:- 

1.  What procedure has to be followed when punishment is awarded and; 
2.  What procedure has to be followed while awarding compensation. 
3.  What would be the  minimum  standard to be applied while resolving 

the controversy under the term “inquiry” 

4.  What  would  be  the  minimum  standard  of  evidence  required  in 

Consumer Complaints. 

5.   What  are  the  implication  of  Article  10-A  of  the  Constitution  of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 upon the grey areas of Islamabad 
Consumer Protection Act, 1995? 

12. 

Before parting with these questions it is necessary to overview the provisions of 

Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  in  order  to  protect  the  interest  of  the 

consumer which is evident from its preamble is reproduced hereunder:- 

“An  Act  to  provide  for  protection  and  promotion  of  the  rights  and 
interests of the consumers” 

13. 

Three Words are given special weightage i.e. promotion, protection and interest. 

a) 

Promotion  means  “The  action  of  promoting  someone  or 
something  to  a  higher  position  or  rank  or  the  fact  of  being  so 
promoted” 

 
 
 
  
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

6 

b) 

(c) 

Protection  means  “A  legal  or other  formal  measure  intended  to 
preserve civil liberties and right” 
Interest  means  “The  feeling  of  wanting  to  know  or  learn  about 
something or someone. 

Hence  it  is  made  clear  by  the  legislature  while  using  the  above  mentioned  words  that 

the main person whose interests/rights and feelings are to be protected is a “consumer" 

in Islamabad Consumer Protection Act, 1995. The said Act is the first Law of its nature 

passed by the Parliament, therefore, it is considered as initial legislation on the subject 

and thereafter Provincial Assemblies also step forward for the following legislation:- 

1.  The Punjab Consumer Protection Act, 2005. 
2.  The Punjab Consumer Protection Rules, 2009. 
3.  The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Consumers Protection Act, 1997. 
4.   The Balochistan Consumers Protection Act, 2003.  

14. 

The most important aspect of this law is word “Consumer” defined in Section 2 

(c) of the Act ibid which is reproduced as under:- 

(i)  Buys  goods  for  a  consideration  which  has  been  paid  or  partly  paid 
and  partly  promised  to  be  paid  or  under  any  system  of  deferred 
payment  or  any  system  of  deferred  payment  or  hire  purchase  and 
includes  any  user  of  such  goods  but  does  not  include  a  person  who 
obtains such goods for re-sale or for any commercial purpose; or 
(ii) hires any goods or services  for a consideration which  has  been paid 
or promised or partly paid and partly  promised or under any  system 
of deferred payment and includes any beneficiary of such services.  

15. 

However, in order to understand the above term, the comparison available in 

different legislations of the world have been perused and the conclusion arrived at is:- 

At  present  there  is  no  universally  agreed  definition  of  the  term 
“consumer”  for  legal  purposes.  However,  its  definition  has  been 
attempted  and  debated  at  length  by  various  jurists  and  consumer 
activists,  and  a  good  deal  of  literature  is  available,  for  example, 
Nadel (1971), Smith (1990), Sethi & Seetharaman (1994), Rachagan 
(1997), etc. 

a)  The  definition  of  “consumer”  in  the  guidelines  given  for  a  Model 
Law  for  Consumer  Protection  in  Asian  countries,  drafted  by  Dr. 
Sothi Rachagan defines “consumer” as a person who acquires or uses 
goods  or  services  of  a  kind  ordinarily  acquired  for  personal, 
domestic, or household use of consumption; and does not acquire the 
goods  or  services,  or  hold  himself  or  herself  out  as  acquiring  the 
goods or services, primarily  for the purpose of re-supplying them  in 
trade; or consuming them in the course of a process of production or 
manufacture;  or  in  the  case  of  goods,  repairing  or  treating  in  trade 
other goods or fixtures on lands. Consumer related legislation  in the 
developing countries has been reviewed by Dr. S. Sothi Rachagan in 
order  to  draw  out  their  comparison  and  contrast,  which  is  set  forth 
herein below: 

b)  The Brazilian Consumer Protection Code 1990 (BCPC) contains four 
definitions  of  the  term  “consumer”.  The  first  two  definitions  are 
general  or  residual  and  apply  when  either  of  the  other  two  specific 

 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

7 

definitions  are  not  applicable.  The  third  definition  applies  only  to 
products and services liability, whereas the fourths definition applies 
only  to  commercial  practices.  The  BCPC  offers  protection  to  legal 
entities  regardless  whether  they  are  profit-making  or  not  in  nature. 
However,  the  corporate  consumers  are  provided  protection  only 
when they use goods or services as end users. 

c)  The Consumer Act of Philippines 1991 (CAP) restricts the definition 
of  consumer  to  a  ‘natural  person’,  who  is  a  purchaser,  lessee  or 
recipient of  consumer  products,  services  or  credit. This  definition  is 
further amplified in the definition of consumer products and services 
as  meaning  ‘goods,  services  and  credits’,  which  are  primarily  for 
personal,  family,  household,  or  agricultural  purposes.  In  contrast  to 
the  BCPC,  the  CAP  excludes  all  corporations  including  charities. 
However, it is important to note that it includes all goods bought by 
individuals  for  agricultural  purposes,  even  when  the  individual  is  a 
large-scale planter engaged in wholly commercial agriculture. 

d)  The  Indian  Consumer  Protection  Act  1986  (ICPA)  provides  two 
definitions  of  consumer;  one  in  relation  to  goods  and  the  other  in 
relation  to  services.  In  relation  to  goods,  it  excludes  persons  who 
obtain  goods  for  resale  or  any  commercial  purpose,  thus  excluding 
self-employed persons. It was amended in 1993 to change definition 
in  order  to  include  self-employed  persons  in  it  by  way  of  an 
explanation, which qualifies that ‘commercial purpose’ of earning his 
livelihood by means of self-employment.’ However, the definition of 
consumer  in  relation  to  services  is  broad,  and  includes  not  only 
persons  who  hire  any  service  for themselves  for a  consideration  but 
also beneficiaries of such services.  

16. 

The  other  important  definitions  includes  “Services”  and  “Unfair  Trade 

Practice”  used  in  Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  which  are  reproduced  as 

under:- 

banking, 

(e)  “Services”  includes  services  of  any  description  which  is  made 
available to potential users and includes the provision of facilities in 
connection  with 
transport, 
manufacturing  processing,  accountancy,  supply  of  electrical, 
mechanical  or  any  other  form  of  energy,  boarding  or  lodging, 
entertainment,  medicine,  education,  construction  work,  amusement, 
catering,  security  or  purveying  a  news  or  other  information,  and 
similar other services,  but does include the rendering of any  service 
free of charge or under the contract of personal service; and 

insurance, 

financing, 

inquiry 

loss  or 

(f)   “unfair trade practice” means a trade practice which, for the purpose 
of sale, use or supply of any goods or for provision of any service or 
for  their  promotion,  adopts  one  or  more  of  the  following  practices, 
causes 
though  hoarding,  black-marketing, 
adulteration,  selling  of  expired  drugs,  food  items  and  commodities 
unfit  for human consumption, or charging  for the goods and service 
in excess of the prices fixed by an authority authorized to do so under 
any law for the time being in force or in furtherance of such sale, use 
or  supply  makes  any  statement,  whether  orally  or  in  writing,  or  by 
chalking  on  walls  or  through  sign-boards  on  neon-sign  or  by 
distributing  pamphlets  or  by  publication  in  any  manner,  including 
through electronic media, by 

17. 

Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  provides  two  way  protection  to  the 

consumer i.e. (i) by way of punishment to be awarded to a person playing unfair trade 

 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

8 

practice  with  the  consumer  while  adopting  Criminal  Procedure  and  (ii)  by  granting 

compensation to the consumer. Islamabad Consumer Protection Act, 1995 differentiate 

the procedural aspect of punishment and compensation, which can be observed from the 

following table:- 

Criminal procedure for punishment   Procedure for compensation  

1 

Complaint Sec 8 (1) 

Complaint Sec 8 (1) 

A 
in 
complainant  may 
respect  of  any  goods  sold  or 
delivered  or  any  service 
supplied  or 
provided  or 
against  any  unfair 
trade 
practice file a complaint with 
the Authority. 
Sec 8 (3)  

Where on examination of the 
complaint 
received  under 
subsection  (1)  or  sub-section 
(2),  the  Authority  is  of  the 
opinion  that  any  right  of  the 
consumer has been infringed, 
it  shall  cause  the  notice  of 
the complaint to be served on 
the  respondent  who  shall  be 
required  to  give  his  reply 
within  a  period  of  seven  (7) 
days. 
Sec 8 (4)  

2 

3. 

Sec 8 (3) 

Sec 8 (4)  

After 
the 
considering 
complaint  and  the  reply  of 
the 
after 
respondent 
providing 
the  parties  an 
opportunity  of  being  heard, 
or if no reply is received and 
the 
after  such 
Authority 
deem 
appropriate  it  may  pass  such 
orders  as  the  circumstance 
may require.  
Section 8A  

inquiry  as 

may 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

to 

to 

Without  prejudice 
the 
foregoing  provisions  and  in 
the  powers 
addition 
exercisable  by  the  Authority 
right  of 
where 
a 
consumer 
infringed  or 
contravened  by  way  of 
profiteering, hoarding, black-
marketing,  adulteration  of 
food items, selling of expired 

any 
is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

9 

items  of  food  and other  item 
unfit for human consumption 
of  charging  for  goods  and 
services 
in  excess  of  the 
prices fixed by the competent 
authority  under  any  law  for 
the  time  being  in  force,  it 
shall  be  tried  by  a  special 
Magistrate  appointed  under 
section  14A  of  the  Code  of 
Criminal  Procedure,  1898, 
(Act  VI  of  1898) 
in  a 
as 
manner 
summary 
provided  in  sections  262  to 
265 of the said Code 
Sec 9 (1) Penalties 

Where any right of consumer 
to  be  protected 
required 
under  section  5 of  the  Act  is 
in  any  way  infringed,  the 
person  responsible  for  such 
infringement 
be 
punished  with  imprisonment 
which  may  extend  to  two 
years,  or  with  fine  which 
may extend to forty thousand 
rupees, or with both. 

shall 

Sec 9(2) 

manner 

Whoever 
makes 
advertisement  through  print 
or  electronic  media  or  be 
chalking  on  walls  or  in  any 
other 
in 
contravention  of  section  7, 
he  shall  be  punished  with 
imprisonment  which  may 
extend  to  two  years,  or  with 
fine,  which  may  extend  to 
thirty  thousand  rupees,  or 
with both. 

Sec 9 (3)  
The Authority may, where it may 
deems  appropriate,  order 
for 
payment  of  compensation  to  the 
the 
consumer 
consumer 
any 
damage or loss through any unfair 
trade practice.  

the  extent 
suffered 

to 
has 

Sec 9(4)  

it 
The  Authority  may,  where 
deems necessary for protection of 
the  rights  of  other  consumers, 
order  for  confiscation  of  any 
goods  or  material  or  direct  for 
their destruction.  

Hence,  from  the  above  comparison  following  words/terms  are  surfaced  which  are  the 

basic  factors  to  be   considered  necessary  by  the Authority/ Court while adjudicating                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

10 

upon the consumer complaints:- 

1.  Examination  
2.  Opinion. 
3.  Consideration, considering. 
4.  Opportunity of being heard. 
5.  Inquiry. 
6.  Deem appropriate  

All  these  terms  /key  words  are  not  defined  specifically  in  the  Islamabad  Consumer 

Protection  Act,  1995,  however,  the  terms  are  defined/explained  in  the  different  law 

books /judgments/dictum laid down by the superior Courts in the following manner:- 

  1.   Examination 

According  to  Black  Law  Dictionary  “Examination”  means  “An  investigation; 
search; interrogation. 

In Criminal Practice it means “an investigation by a magistrate of a person who 
has  been  charged  with  crime  and  arrested,  or  of  the  facts  and  circumstances 
which  are  alleged  to  have  attended  the  crime  and  to  fasten  suspicion  upon  the 
party so charged, in order to ascertain whether there is sufficient ground to hold 
him to bail for his trial by the proper court”?  

In  Trial  Practice  “The  examination  of  a  witness  consists  of  the  series  of 
questions put to him by a party to the action, or his counsel, for the purpose of 
bringing  before  the  court  and  jury  in  legal  form  the  knowledge  which  the 
witness  has  of  the  facts  and  matters  in  dispute,  or  of  probing  and  sifting  his 
evidence previously given.” 

2. 

Opinion 

According  to  Webster  Dictionary,  opinion  is  a  belief  stronger  than  impression 
and less strong than positive knowledge. It can also be called a view; judgment, 
etc.  The  words’  to  opine’  mean  (I)  to  think,  (ii)  to  suppose,  or  (iii)  to  hold  or 
express  an  opinion.  And  the  word  ‘opinion  means  (I)  a  belief  not  based  on 
absolute  certainty  or  positive  knowledge  but  on  what  own  mind;  (ii)  an 
evaluation, impression or estimation of the quality or worth of a person; (iii) to 
formal judgment of an Expert on a matter in which his/her advise is sought; (iv) 
the statement by a judge bearing on a case. PLD 1995 Kar.436 

Section  13  of  the  Income  Tax  Act,  1922,  defines  the  word  ‘opinion  as:  “An 
opinion  on  the  basis  whereof  a  statutory  authority  is  proceedings,  may  be 
accurate or erroneous, but it must be an honest opinion or conviction, based on 
tangible material capable of sustaining such opinion, and not a mala fide opinion 
or a colourable exercise of statutory power.  PLD 1988 Lahore. 725 

With  reference  to  Sec.  309  Cr.  P.C.,  it  has  been  held  that  the  word  ‘opinion’ 
implies  that  the  assessors  should  apply  their  minds  and  then  come  to  the 
conclusion of guilty or not guilty. For this purpose they must consider the facts, 
apply the law to them and thereafter draw their conclusions. PLD 1960 Kar. 1; 
PLR 1960 (1) 422. 

The use of the word ‘opinion’ in Sec. 16 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 
(XIV of 1908) is significant and it clearly shows that the legislature intended the 
criterion to be purely subjective and not objective. PLD 1964 Kar. 478. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

11 

Martial Law Order [CMLA] No. 12, para. 2 Word “opinion” used  in para. 2 is 
equivalent  to  the  word  “satisfaction”  mentioned  in  certain  other  enactments 
dealing with preventive detention. Forming of opinion by detaining authority is 
a  must  and  essential  ingredient  in  detention  cases.  Opinion  or  satisfaction  of 
detaining  authority  has  to  be  clearly  mentioned  in  order  itself  and  not  to  be 
presumed. It is  further held that detention  in the absence of  such an opinion or 
satisfaction, is illegal. PLD 1979 Lahore 91. 

3.  

Consideration-Considering.  

Word ‘consideration’ has been discussed and referred to in Volume I of Second 
Edition  of  “Words  and  Phrases  Legally  Defend”  by  John  B.  Saunders. 
Butterworths. 1969 Edition as under:- 

“A ‘consideration’, I apprehend, is something which one takes into account as a 
factor  in  arriving  at  a  decision.  “  (Hanks  v.  Minister  of  Housing  and  Local 
Government (1963) I All ER 47). 
The Concise Oxford Dictionary, 7th Edition at page 201 gives the meaning of the 
word  ‘consider’  as  “contemplate  mentally,  weigh  merits  of  (course  of  action, 
claim candidate, etc.)”. 
Chamber 21st Century Dictionary at page 292 defines ‘consideration’ as “a fact, 
circumstance, etc. to be taken into account” 

“Due consideration” has been defined by Black’s Law Dictionary, 5th Edition of 
1979 at page 448 as under:- 

“To  give  such  weight  or  significance  to  a  particular  factor  as  under  the 
circumstances  it  seems  to  merit,  and this  involves  discretion.  (United  States  ex 
rel.  Maine  Patato  Growers  and  Shippers  Association  v.  Interstate  Commerce 
Commission, 66 App. D.C 398, 88 F.2d 780, 783)” 

Even  otherwise,  the term  “due  consideration”  interpreted  in  its  perspective  can 
only  mean  proper,  serious, reasonable,  fair  and  honest  application  of  mind  and 
evaluation of comparative rights and records of eligible candidates.  2003 MLD 
98   

4. 

Opportunity of being heard. 

Opportunity defined in the Black’s Law Dictionary by Bryan A Garner Eighth 
Edition  means  that  the  fact  alleged  doer  of  an  act  was  present  at  the  time  and 
place of the act. Wherein the term opportunity to be heard has been defined as 
the  chance  to  appear  in  a  Court  or  other  Tribunal  and  present  evidence  and 
argument before being deprived of a right by governmental authority. 

The  opportunity  to  be  heard  is  a  fundamental  requirement  of  procedural  due 
process.  It  ordinarily  includes  the  right  to  receive  fair  notice  of  hearing,  to 
secure the assistance of counsel, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. 

Hearing.  
 “The  word  “hearing”  therefore,  means  taking  of  evidence  or 
consideration  of  question  relating  to  suit  enabling the  Judge  to  come  to  a  final 
adjudication  and  not  consideration  of  merely  an  interlocutory  matter”.  PLD 
1983 SC (AJ&K) 223. 

“Means  date  on  which  either  evidence  recorded  or  arguments  heard,  or  other 
steps taken by Court towards further proceedings”. PLD 1973 Lahore 659. 

“Hearing  of  a  case”  ---Meaning  and  scope---Hearing  (of  a  case)  meant  a 
meaningful,  purposeful  and  effective  hearing  which  enabled  a  judge  to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

12 

understand the legal and factual proposition involved in the matter as opposed to 
an illusionary and cursory hearing conducted barely as a formality and to bring 
on record mere compliance of the rule of hearing---Where effective hearing was 
not provided, it shall tantamount to non-hearing of the party concerned and the 
legal consequences of non-hearing of parties shall follow. 2015  SCMR 1550.   

In the context of (b) Civil Procedure Code (V of 1908), O.IX, r. 8 the expression 
“……when the suit is called on for hearing”, the word “hearing” implies taking 
down  of  evidence  or  hearing  arguments  or  where  question  relating  to  the 
determination of suit is considered. PLD 1970 Lahore. 412. 

“The word ‘hearing’ has a restricted meaning perhaps out of the natural anxiety 
of  Courts  to  ensure  that  cases  are  decided  on  merits.  The  Code  has  neither 
defined the term nor does it at the same time differentiate between a date when, 
say evidence  is to be recorded or arguments are to be heard or issues are to be 
framed as against those for which, say, the defendants are summoned or the case 
is otherwise adjourned. In the Code itself every adjourned date has been termed 
as  a  date  of  hearing.  It  may  be  emphasized  that  the  Court  has  not  to  hear  the 
plaintiff or the defendant but it has to hear the case. Thus in a sense the coming-
up  of  the  case  before  the  Court  on  any  adjourned  date  of  hearing  cannot  be 
termed  anything  but  its  hearing.  It  was  contended  that  to  interpret  the  word 
‘hearing in such a way may lead to harsh results but appears that it is always at 
liberty  to  show  that  his  absence  was  due  to  sufficient  causes  and  Court  have 
generally  been 
PLD 1972 A J & K  7. 

scope  of 

enlarging 

liberal 

such 

the 

in 

causes”.                        

“The  right  of  “hearing”  does  not  mean  that,  as  said  in  common  parlance,  that 
hear from the one ear and let that pass from the other, as if there was nothing in 
between  to  hold  or  ponder  about.  When  the  law  or  general  principles  of  law 
require  that  a  person  shall  be  heard  before  he  is  condemned,  it  postulates  that 
what he says shall be considered, and, if not accepted, the reasons thereof shall 
be  given.  To  hold  otherwise  would  amount  to  saying  that  only  formality  of 
“hearing” might be gone through, even without actually hearing, or, considering 
what is said. In such circumstances, nobody adjudge as to whether the petitioner 
had  been  dealt  with  on  facts  and  reasons  and  not  arbitrarily  fancifully”.  PLD 
1975 Lahore 1385; PLJ 1966 Lahore 35; Law Notes 1975 Lahore 675. 

5. 

Enquiry/Inquiry. 

Term  “Inquiry” 
is  synonymous  to  word  “Examination”  according  to 
Webster’s New World Dictionary (Third Edition) the word “Inquiry” means (1) 
the  Act  of  Inquiring  (2)  an  investigation  or  examination  and  according  to 
chambers  21st  century  Dictionary  (Revised  Edition)  term  “Inquiry”  means  an 
act or the process of asking for information, an investigation specially a formal 
one. PLD 2006 Kar. 314. 

Inquiry  was  the  first  step  towards  the  commencement  of  the  process  of  the 
judicial  or  quasi  judicial  proceedings---  inquiry  was  conduced  to  collect  the 
primary evidence in respect of an offence or allegations by the police officer or 
any other officer/person duly authorized by competent authority. 2016 P.Cr.L.J 
336. 

Word  “Enquiry”  means  an  act  or  the  process  of  asking  for  information.  The 
process of  asking  for  information  includes  asking of  information  from  affected 
person also. 2007 YLR 3203.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

13 

6. 

Deemed appropriate. 

“The  word  “appropriate” 

Appropriate.   
to  a  wide 
connotation and includes suitable or proper. Words “make an appropriate order” 
employed  in  subsection  (3)  of  section  21  of  the  Sindh  Rented  Premises 
Ordinance, 1979 are of significance, they empower the appellate Court to pass a 
remand order.” PLD 1994 SC 52. 

is  susceptible 

“The expression “deem” is commonly used to create legal fiction 
Deem.   
and  introduce  an  artificial  conception.  Speaking  generally  when  legislature 
commands that a language is to be deemed to be something, obvious conclusion 
is that in reality it is not that thing, what the legislature requires it to be treated. 
It  is  settled  rule  that  the  Court  is  entitled  to  ascertain  the  object  for  which  the 
legal  fiction  is  creation  and  confined  to  the  purposes  for  which  it  is  meant.” 
1993 SCMR 745. 

“The word “deemed”,  is used, great deal  in  modern  legislation  different senses 
and  it  is  not  that  a  deeming  provision  is  every  time  made  for  the  purpose  of 
creating  a  fiction.  A  deeming  provision  might  be  made  to  include  what  is  the 
uncertain for the purpose of a statute, but in each case, it would be a question as 
to with what object, the Legislature had made a deeming provision.  PLD  1997 
Lahore. 499. 

“The word ‘deemed’ is defined in Stroud’s judicial Dictionary as: “when a thing 
is to be ‘deemed’  something else  it  is to be treated as that something else with 
the  attendant  consequences,  but  it  is  not  that  something  else”.  PLD  1973 
Lahore. 164. 

“Word  ‘deemed’  used  in  statute  is  commonly  introduced to  create  legal  fiction 
and  when  used  in  relation  to  a  particular  thing  it  implies  that  legislature  wants 
that  thing  to  be  treated  as  something  which  in  reality  it  is  not”.  PLD  1988 
Lahore. 49. 

Hence,  for  what  has  been  discussed  above,  it  is  necessary  for  an  “Authority”  under 

Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  to  follow  the  procedure  of  Section  8  for 

punishment or compensation purposes. Keeping in view the words and terms used in the 

said  section  of  law  from  its  meanings  defined  above  as  when  the  special  law  is  silent 

qua  the  definition  of  different  terms,  it  is  imperative  upon  the  Courts  to  adopt  the 

meaning of ordinary sense or to use dictionary meanings even they are bound to follow 

the  meaning  generally  defined  in  different  authoritative  decisions  of  High  Courts  and 

Supreme Court. 

The  general  terms  of  “examination,  inquiry,  opinion,  consideration,  opportunity  of 

being  heard  and  deem  appropriate”  are  not  considered  in  their  true  prospective  by  the 

courts  below, hence it can safely be concluded that in all above mentioned consumer or  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

14 

criminal  appeals  arising  out  of  Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  following 

loopholes/lapses/deficiencies have been observed:- 

a)  Trial Court has not recorded any evidence. 
b)  No  document  has  been  exhibited  in  evidence  in  terms  of 

Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984. 

c)  Statement of witness or cross-examination of the witness has 

not been recorded. 

d)  Technical/Expert  witness  has  not  been  called  or  produced  in 

order to prove the cases, where it was so required. 

e)  No  order  has  been  passed  by  the  Authority/Court  to  give  a 
meaningful  step  in  terms  of  Section  8(4)  under  the  term  “it 
may pass such order” through which the Authority can further 
undergo towards the recording of evidence or give its reasons 
for not doing the same.  

Therefore,  in  order  to  clarify  the  entire  procedural  steps  the  Authority/Court  has  to 

observe  the  following  steps  during  the  consumer  complaints  in  terms  of  Islamabad 

Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  because  no  word  or  words  of  summary  trial  is/are 

mentioned in the Act ibid while adjudicating upon the complaints filed under Islamabad 

Consumer Protection Act, 1995 by the “Authority”.  

STAGE-I 

The Authority i.e. Court of Session during the course of examination of 

the  Complaint,  if  the  Authority/Court  formulated  its  opinion  on  the  basis  of 

prima facie reading of available facts, documents, evidence and correspondence 

of parties if any comes to the conclusion that any right of the consumer has been 

infringed then section 8 (3) comes into play i.e. “it shall cause the notice of the 

complaint to be served on the respondent who shall required to give his reply 

within period of 7 days”.  

STAGE-II 

The Authority /Court has to consider the following factors while passing 

the order :- 

1.  Complaint. 
2.  Reply of respondent, documents. 
3.  After  providing  the  parties  and  opportunity  of  being  heard 
(statement  of  the  parties,  cross-examination  of  the  parties, 
documentary evidence for the purposes of inquiry). 

The  word  “after”  has  been  used  twice  in  Section  8  (3)  of  Islamabad  Consumer 

Protection Act, 1995 by the  legislature, which confirms the  intention of the  legislature 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

15 

to  give  more  emphasis  on  the  re-evaluation,  due opportunity,  hearing,  evidence  of  the 

parties  and  to  allow  the  parties  to  produce  their  evidence  in  order  to  prove  their 

respective pleas before passing any order. 

Hence, after consideration of all the above aspects which otherwise are essential to meet 

the  ends  of  justice,  equity  and  fair  play,  the  “Authority”  has  to  consider  all  kind  of 

information,  collection  of  facts,  recording  of  evidence  by  adopting  the  procedure  of 

framing  of  issue,  recording  of  evidence,  and  by  allowing  the  witness  to  be  cross-

examined or receiving documentary evidence and thereafter can pass such order which 

qualifies the determination of the dispute with reasons,  logic and  based upon evidence 

available on record. 

STAGE-III 

After considering the above mentioned factors of stage-II, the Court has to pass 

order  for  the  determination  of  consumer  complaint.  However,  two  separate  kinds  of 

speaking  orders  are  required  (a)  for  the  purposes  of  prosecution  and  (b)  for  the 

purpose of compensation.  

If the “Authority” comes to the conclusion that prima facie some offence 

has  been  committed  which  is  referred  in  section  8-A  e.g.,  hoarding,  profiteering, 

blackmailing, adulteration of food items, selling expired  items of  food and other items 

unfit for human consumption or charging for goods and services in excess of the prices 

fixed  by  the  competent  authority  then  follow  the  procedure  available  in  Section  262, 

263 & 264 Cr.P.C. for the purpose of summary trial which can only be tried by Special 

Magistrate appointed U/S14-A of Cr.P.C. 1898, therefore,  matter to that extent can be 

referred to Special  Magistrate and penalties U/S 9(1) and 9(2) of Islamabad Consumer 

Protection Act, 1995 be given after the summary trial. However, Special Magistrate can 

award  the  punishment  to  the  extent  of  six  (6)  months.  Therefore,  if  the  quantum  of 

punishment  to  be  awarded  is  more  than  six  (6)  months,  the  “Authority”  Court  of 

Sessions can also pass the same after adopting the procedure under Cr. P.C.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

16 

b) 

For  the  purposes  of  compensation,  speaking  order  in  terms  of  Section  9  (3)       

and 9 (4) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1995 has to be passed, keeping  in  view the 

entire pleadings, evidence, documents and technical expert evidence if any.  

18. 

From  above  discussion,  it  is  clear  that  during  the  course  of  inquiry,  Authority 

has to:- 

(i) frame issues if so required. 
(ii) record statements of witnesses. 
(iii) allow cross-examination. 
(iv)  receive  documentary  evidence,  if  any  and  Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order 1984 has to be applied in essence. 

19. 

The  above  mentioned  analogy  can  be  drawn  from  three  different  examples  of 

special statutes i.e. Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001,  Government Servants 

(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and Companies Ordinance, 1984.    

a) 

Islamabad  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance,  2001,  which  only  deals  with 
the  issues  of  landlord  and  tenant  but  it  only  provides  the  concept  of 
inquiry wherein application of CPC, 1908 and Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 
1984 is excluded but even then the Rent Controller in order to decide the 
questions  relating  to  default,  expiry  of  lease,  personal  bonafide  need, 
reconstruction  or  issue  of  structural  change  applies  the  mechanism  of 
framing  of  issues,  recording  of  evidence,  cross-examination  upon  the 
witnesses,  receive  documentary  evidence,  allow  summoning  of  record 
only to resolve the controversial question or  contentious  issues  between 
the parties although no such procedure has been provided. 

b)  Government  Servants  (Efficiency  and  Discipline)  Rules,  1973 
wherein  case  of  any  civil  servant  where  major  penalty  of  compulsory 
retirement  of  dismissal  was  imposed  on  him  after  summary  procedure 
and  he  denied  the  allegations,  it  was  not the  case of  having  recourse to 
the shortest procedure of show cause notice as controversial questions of 
facts  were  involved  which  could  not  be  resolved  without  recording  of 
evidence  and  without  giving  opportunity  of  cross-examination  to  civil 
servants.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  PLD  1994  Supreme  Court  222 
“Nawab  Khan  and  another  VS Government  of  Pakistan  through 
Secretary  Ministry  of  Defence  Rawalpindi  and others”,  wherein  it  has 
been held that:- 

to  decide,  whether 

“Under  Rule  5(1)(iii)  of  the  Rules,  an  authorized  officer 
has  discretion 
in  a  disciplinary 
proceeding against a civil  servant in  response to  his reply 
to  the  charge-sheet,  a  regular  inquiry  should  be  held  or 
not.  The  above  discretion  is  not  controlled  by  any 
precondition  or  guideline  but  nevertheless  this  discretion 
like  all  other  discretion  is  to  be  exercised  fairly  and 
reasonably  and  not  arbitrarily  or  capriciously  with  the 
object to deny the civil servant the right of fair defence. So 
if  the  charge  is  founded  on  admitted  documents/facts,  no 
full fledged inquiry is required but if the charge is based on 
disputed questions of fact, a civil servant cannot be denied 
a  regular  inquiry,  as  the  same  cannot  be  resolved  without 
recording  evidence  and  providing  opportunity  to  the 

 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

17 

parties  to  cross-examine  the  witnesses.  In  such  a  matter  if 
findings  of  fact  are  recorded  without  recording  any 
evidence,  the  same  will  be  based  on  surmises  and 
conjecture,  which  will  have  no  evidentiary  value  as  to 
warrant  imposition  of  any  punishment  on  the  civil  servant 
concerned.” 

c)   Section 9 of Companies Ordinance, 1984 provides summary procedure 
to  be  applied  during  the  issues  related  to  the  affairs  of  company, 
including  mis-management  of  its  affairs,  shares  transfer,  winding  up, 
powers  and  functions  of  CEO,  directors,  memorandum  and  Articles  of 
Association,  jurisdiction  of  Board  of  Directors,  AGM  and  SGM  were 
exclusively  decided  by  the  Company  Bench  of  High  Court  having  its 
jurisdiction  but  in  order  to  resolve  certain  complicated  questions,  only 
summary procedure has been provided under the law. 

Now  in  order  to  understand  the  term  summary  procedure  provided  in  Companies 

Ordinance, 1984, reliance is placed upon 2005 CLD 747 [Karachi], Rauf Baksh Kadri 

and  others  VS M/s.  National  Technology  Development  Corporation  Ltd.  And 

others” wherein it has been held that:- 

“From  the  preamble  of  the  Ordinance,  it  is  apparent  that 
the purpose of the Ordinance is to consolidate and amend 
the  law  relating  to  the  companies  and  certain  other 
associations  for  the  purpose  of  the  healthy  growth  of  the 
corporate enterprises, protection of investors and creditors, 
promotion  of  investment  and  development  of  economy  and 
matters arising out of or connected therewith. The purpose 
of  the  Ordinance  obviously  is  to  adjudicate  all  matters 
falling  under  the  Ordinance  finally  to  achieve  the  results 
for which the Ordinance has been enforced. 

The  questions  arises  that  how  the  Court  can,  without 
entering into a detailed inquiry pertaining to the provisions 
of  sections  152,  290  and  305,  referred  above,  satisfy itself 
and  adjudicate  the  matter  finally  resolving  the  disputes 
between  the  parties?  Can  the  Court  without  entering  into 
in-depth  investigation  by  recording  evidence,  give  any 
finding  as  to  ‘fraudulent’  action  or  ‘sufficient’  cause  as 
provided  under  section  152(1)(a)?  Can  the  Court  under 
section  153(3)  decide  the  question  of  title  for  any  person 
without determining the points to that effect and recording 
the  necessary  evidence?  Where,  under  section  290(1)  the 
Applicant can claim himself to be the member holding not 
less  than  20%  shares  and  the  same  is  denied  by  the  other 
side,  can  the  Court  give  any  finding  in  affirmative  or 
negative  without  entering  into  a  detailed  investigation, 
which  will  again  require  evidence?  Whether  the  Court, 
without  entering  into  the  investigation  and  recording 
evidence,  can  opine  under  subsection  (2)  of  section  290 
that  the  company’s  affairs  are  being  conducted  in  an 
unlawful  and  fraudulent  manner  or  in  the  manner  not 
provided for in its memorandum or in a manner oppressive 
to  the  members  etc.  as  provided  under  subsection  (1)  of 
section  290.  Similarly  under  section  305  without  in-depth 
inquiry including the recording of evidence, can the  Court 

 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

18 

be  satisfied  for  winding-up  the  company  if  the  case  falls, 
amongst  others,  under  sub-clauses  (ii),  (iii)  and  (iv)  of 
clause (f) ibid.”  

“Therefore,  the  obvious  answer  to  the  above  questions 
would  be  in  the  negative.  Final  adjudication  of  the 
controversies indicated hereinabove can only be made after 
framing  the  points  for  determination  and  recording  the 
evidence  where  serious  disputes  as  to  the  documents  etc. 
arise between the parties. It is, however, correct that in all 
cases  the  investigation  may  not  be  in-depth  but  can  be 
conducted by looking into the documents and evidence filed 
along with the pleadings.” 

“With  due  respect  to  the  learned  Judges  deciding  those 
cases, in my humble opinion this can never be the intention 
of  the  legislature  while  directing  the  Courts  to  adopt 
summary  procedure  under  section  9  ibid.  Obviously,  the 
Court  is  not  to  follow  the  complicated  procedure  as  in  a 
civil suit and its technicalities but is required to adjudicate 
the  same  expeditiously  in  a  manner  it  deems  fit  and 
appropriate in the circumstances of each case. 

The  sum-up  of  the  dictionary  meanings  of  ‘summary 
proceedings’  referred  above  is  that  the  case  is  to  be 
disposed  of  promptly  in  simple  manner  out  of  the  regular 
course  of  the  common  law.  Nowhere  is  there  a  restriction 
on the forum in recording the evidence for final conclusion. 
If  the  matter  can  be  decided  by  apparent  perusal  of  the 
pleadings,  it  may  be  done  so  and  if  the  Court  deems 
necessary  to  frame  point  of  determination  and  record 
evidence,  the  Court  must  not-hesitate  to  do  the  needful  on 
the ground that intricate and complex questions of facts are 
involved.” 

“I am of the considered view that there is no limitation on 
the  powers  of  the  Court  in  regard  to  the  manner  in  which 
the  power  has  to  be  exercised  under  the  Ordinance;  and 
that the power should be liberally exercised without driving 
the parties to agony by ordering the litigation to be carried 
out before some other forum.” 

“The upshot of the above is as follows:-- 

(a)  The  summary  procedure  appearing  in  section  9  of  the 
Ordinance does not exclude the consideration by the Court 
of  controversial  facts  nor  does  it  restrict  it  from  deciding 
such controversies. 

(b) There  is  no  legal  impediment  in  the  Ordinance  for  the 
Courts  entering  into  any  inquiry,  framing  the  points  of 
determination, requiring oral evidence or evidence through 
affidavits.” 

“The  cases  in  hand,  in  my  opinion,  are  covered  by  the 
Ordinance and the factual controversies raised therein are 
to  be  adjudicated  by  this  Court.  The  controversies, 
however,  are  of  the  nature,  which  cannot  be  decided 
without  an  investigation/inquiry  or  by  recording  evidence. 
I, therefore, find it necessary to first determine the disputed 
points and thereafter call for evidence.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

19 

And the latest view in this regard is 2016 SCMR 213 Company Court jurisdiction, 

factual controversy is reproduced hereunder:- 

frame 

factual 

into  a 

inquiry, 

issues 
in 

a)  Section 9 (3)of the Companies Ordinance, 1984 did not 
abridge or curtail the power of the (Company) Court to 
for 
enter 
determination,  and  record  oral  evidence 
the 
proceedings before it to determine the issues relating to 
a  “company”  or  its  members  covered  under  the 
Companies  Ordinance,  1984---Company  Court  having 
jurisdiction  under  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984, 
could  receive  evidence  in  cases  it  thought  appropriate 
in  circumstances  of  the  case---Al  matters  relating  to 
companies  irrespective  of  the  fact  whether  factual 
controversy  was  involved  or  not  were  required  to  be 
tried by a court having jurisdiction under the Company 
Ordinance,  1984---Civil  court  would  not  be 
the 
appropriate forum for resolving such matters”. 

20. 

From  the  above  discussion,  inference  can  safely  be  drawn  that  while 

adjudicating  upon  the  complaint  under  Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995, the 

Authority/Court especially while awarding compensation in terms of section 9(3) of the 

Act shall conduct an enquiry which includes:- 

(a)  Framing the points of determination/ issues. 

(b) Requiring oral evidence or evidence through affidavits. 

(c)  Allow parties to cross-examine the witnesses. 

(d) Produce documentary evidence. 

(e)  Call record from any authority, company, office. 

(f)  Summon any expert witness to resolve the technical question of issue 

related to proposition in hand. 

(g) Principles of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, has to be applied. 

21. 

Besides  the  above  mentioned  principles  of  enquiry,  Authority  under  Islamabad 

Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  has  to  observe  the  difference  of  penalty,  fine  and 

compensation  under  the  said  law  as  concept  of  fine  is  only  available  in  criminal 

prosecution in terms of Section 9 (1), (2) of Islamabad Consumer Protection Act, 1995 

after  holding  summary  trial  by  Special  Magistrate  or  Authority  as  the  case  may  be,  if 

the  Authority  comes  to the  conclusion  after  holding  the  enquiry  in  terms  of  Section  8 

and  8-A  of  the  Act  to  impose  fine  as  punishment  then  it  must  be  differentiated  from 

compensation. 

In  order 

to  understand 

the  difference  of  penalty  and 

fine.             

 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

20 

Reliance is placed upon 2016 SCMR 69 “Pakistan Telecommunication Authority VS 

Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited” wherein it was held that:- 

“In  Stroud’s  Judicial  Dictionary  Of  Words  And  Phrases,  Fifth 
Edition  Volume  4 By  Johns  S.  James,  the  meaning  of  “Penalty” 
and “Fine” describes as under:- 

“Penalty” 

(1) 
“’Penalty’  is  an  ambiguous  word.  A  Penalty  may 
be  the  subject-matter  of  an  information,  or  of  a 
complaint”  (per  Wright  J.,  R.  v,  Lewis  [1896]  1  Q.B. 
665).  See  Chisholm  v.  Mackenzie,  30  S.L.R.  604,  cited 
PAIN. 
(2)  Where an Act imposes a penalty for anything done 
(Crepps  v.  Durden,  2  Cowp.  640,  cited  NECESSITY)  or 
omitted  to  be  done  (Llewellyn  v.  Glamorgan  Vale 
Railway  [1898]  1  Q.B.  473,  cited  OWNER)  on  a  day, 
that generally means only one penalty for the entire day; 
e.g.  a  man  may  “exercise  his  ordinary  calling  on  a 
Sunday” on any number of times on a particular Sunday 
but  will  only  be  liable  to  one  penalty  therefore  under 
Sunday Observance Act 1677 (c. 7) (Crepps v. Durden). 
So,  only  one  penalty  could  be  recovered  for  each  day 
that  a  railway  company  offended  against  Railway 
Clauses  Consolidation  Act  1845  (c.  20),  s.54,  by  not 
making a substituted road for an existing road which the 
company  had  interrupted  (Llewellyn  v.  Glamorgan  Vale 
Railway)”. 
(3) 
“The  civil  liability  arising  from  a  breach  of  a 
statutory  duty  is  of  a  wholly  different  nature  from  a 
penalty for such a breach. The former gives no cause of 
action  unless  damage  to  a  third  party  follows  from  it, 
and  then,  in  general,  gives  ground for  an  action for  the 
amount of such damage at the suit of such third parties. 
But  penalties  for  breaches  of  statutory  duties  apply 
whether  damage  has  been  caused  or  not”  (per  Fletcher 
Moulton  L.J.  In  David  Britannia  Merthyer  Coal  Co. 
[1909]  2  K.B.  149  (Sub  Nom.  Britannic  Merthyr  Coal 
Co.  v.  David  [1910]  A.  C.  74),  Cited  Mine  See  DUTY, 
See  also  simmons  v.  Newport,  etc.  [1921]  1KB  616; 
Couch v. Steel, 23 L.J., QB 125). 

Fine: 

it 

the  King,  and  regularly 
is  called 

(1) 
“Fine,  finis.  Here  (litt.  S.  194  signifieth  a 
pecuniarie  punishment  for  an  offence,  or  a  contempt 
committed  against 
it 
to 
finis, 
imprisonment  appretaineth.  And 
because  it  is  an  end for  that  offence.  And  in  this case  a 
man is said facere finem de transgressione, etc., cm rege, 
to  make  an  end  or  fine  with  the  King  for  such  a 
transgression.  It  is  also  taken  for  a  sum  given  by  the 
tenant to the lord for concord and an end to be made. It 
is  also  taken  for  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Authority 
(PTA),  Islamabad  v.  Pakistan    Telecommunication  C. 
Ltd., Headquarters (Sh. Azmat Saeed, J)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

21 

the highest and best assurance of land, etc,” (Co. lit 126 
b). See further Termes de la ley; cowel; Jacob; 5 encye, 
341-343; for form of fine of lands. See 2 b 1. Corn App. 
XIV. CP. REDEMPTION.” 

In  the  Oxford  Companion  to  Law  by  David  M. 
Walker,  the  term  of  “Penalty”  and  “Fine”  is  stated  as 
under:   

“Penalty. 

A  sum  of  money  payable  as  compensation  or  as 
punishment.  Many  statues  impose  penalties  for  non-
implement  of  a  public  duty.  Penalties  may  be  agreed 
upon by the parties, as in a bond subject to a condition, 
where  a  party  binds  himself  to  pay  a  sum,  frequently 
double  the  amount  secured,  if  the  condition  is  not 
complied  with.  Parties  to  a  contract  may  agree  that,  in 
the  event  of  a  breach,  the  one  in  breach  will  pay  to  the 
other an agreed sum, if this sum cannot be regarded as a 
genuine pre-estimate of the damage likely to be sustained 
by a breach of contract, but is rather a sum stipulated in 
terrorem  of  the  party  in  breach,  it  is  deemed  to penalty 
and  is  irrecoverable  so  far  as  in  excess  of  the  damage 
actually sustained. 

Fine: 

to 

fine  persons  convicted  of 

(I) 
In  criminal  law,  a  sum  of  money,  ordered  to  be 
paid to the Crown by an offender by way of punishment. 
At  common  law  a  fine  was  one  of  the  penalties  for  a 
misdemeanour.  In  1861  statute  permitted  a  fine  for 
certain felonies but only in 1948 were courts empowered 
felonies 
generally, 
Magistrates courts have limits set on the amount of fine 
imposed  for  various  kinds  of  offences  and  statutory 
offences normally provide for fines within stated limits as 
the, or a, penalty. Payment of a fine may be enforced by 
the Crown suing the offender in the civil courts, or, after 
judicial  inquiry  into  his  means,  by  imprisoning  for 
default in payment.”  

(emphasis supplied) 

In  the  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  Tenth  Edition  by 
Bryan  A.  Garner,  the  meaning  of  “Penalty”  and “Fine” 
is stated as follows:  

“Penalty: 

(15c) I. Punishment imposed on a wrongdoer, usu. In the 
form  of  imprisonment  or  fine,  esp,  a  sum  of  money 
exacted as punishments for either a wrong to the state or 
a civil wrong (as distinguished from compensation for the 
injured  party’s  loss).  Though  usu.  For  crimes  penalties 
are also sometimes imposed for civil wrongs. 
Civil  penalty  (17c)  A  fine  assessed  for  a  violation  of  a 
statute or regulation.  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

22 

Fine: 
5.    A  pecuniary  criminal  punishment  or  civil  penalty 
payable to the public treasury. Fine, vb 

“this word is ambiguously taken in our law, for sometimes it 
is taken for a sum of money or mulct imposed or laid upon an 
offender  for  some  offence  done,  and  then  it  is  also  called  a 
ransom. And sometimes it is taken for an income, or a sum of 
money  paid  at  the  entrance  of  a  tenant  into  his  land: 
[sometimes  as  a  sum  paid  for  the  renewal  of  a  lease,  and 
sometimes  as  a  sum  paid  for  the  renewal  of  a  lease  and 
denominated  a  fine  for  renewal:]  and  sometimes  it  is  taken 
for a final agreement or conveyance upon record, for setting 
and  securing  of  lands  and  tenements.”  1  Edward  Hilliard 
Sheppard’s  Touchstone  of  Common  Assurance  2B  (Richard 
Preston ed., 7th ed. 1820) (brackets in original)”  

22.   Compensation  under  Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  is  only  to  be 

given  in  case  of  unfair  trade  practice,  if  proved  after  holding  an  enquiry  by  the 

Authority.  However,  the  provision  of  Section  9  (3)  of  the  Act  imposes  restriction  to 

award  compensation  upon  the  Authority  only  to  the  extent  the  consumer  has  suffered 

any  damage  or  loss  through  the  act  of  unfair  trade  practice,  hence,  it  can  safely  be 

concluded  that  under  this  law  general  damages  cannot  be  awarded  rather  actually 

suffered loss or damage is to be considered as measuring factor to award the same only 

to the consumer.  

23. 

Consumer right to claim special or any other kind of damages under general law 

is  protected  notwithstanding  the  claim  awarded  by  the  Authority  under  Islamabad 

Consumer Protection Act, 1995, therefore, the consumer can file separate claim/suit  in 

the Court of general jurisdiction for his relief.  

24.  

It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  Article  10-A  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 

Republic of Pakistan, 1973 has to be applied and given effect in every statute whether it 

is  silent  on  the  said  aspect  but  the  same  is  fully  applicable,  Article  10-A  of  the 

Constitution is reproduced hereunder:- 

For  the  determination  of  his  civil  rights  and  obligations  or  in  any 
criminal charge against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial and 
due process.  

However, the term ‘due process of law’ referred in Article 10-A of the Constitution of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 can be summarized as follows:- 

(1)  A person shall have notice of proceedings which affect his rights. 
(2)  He shall be given reasonable opportunity to defend. 

 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Appeals No.05, 06, 11, 15, 40 of 2016 & 113, 185 of 2015  

23 

(3)  That    the  Tribunal  or  Court  before  which  his  rights  are 
adjudicated is so constituted as to give reasonable assurance of its 
honesty and impartiality, and  

(4)  That it  is a Court of competent  jurisdiction. Above are the basic 
requirements  of  the  doctrine  ‘due  process  of  law’  which  is 
enshrined,  inter  alia,  in  Article  4  of  the  Constitution.  It  is 
intrinsically linked with the right to have access to justice which 
is a fundamental right. This right, inter alia, includes the right to 
have a fair and proper trial and a right to have an impartial Court 
or  Tribunal.  A  person  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  given  a  fair 
and proper trial unless he is provided a reasonable opportunity to 
defend the allegation  made against him. Reliance is placed upon 
PLD 1999 SC 1126/1998 SCMR 1863 “New Jubilee Insurance 
Company  Limited  VS  National  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  Aftab 
Shahban Mirani VS President of Pakistan and others  

25.  

“Due  process  of  law”  clearly  imposes  a  duty  upon  the  Courts,  Authority, 

judicial  or  quasi  judicial  forums,  executives  to  give  fair  opportunity  to  everyone  to 

defend himself, afford a fair opportunity for submission of cases by means of pleadings, 

i.e. complaint, petition, replies, applications, statements, affidavits etc and allow them to 

appear in person, record their statements, cross-examine the witnesses against them and 

produce  the  record  in  terms  of  law  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  courts,  Administrative 

Tribunals, executive officers to follow the procedure available in relevant laws, statutes 

in a manner as provided and if the procedure is silent even then the minimum standard 

is to be followed on the touchstone of Art 10-A of the Constitution failing which entire 

edifice constructed will crumble down. However, all these ingredients are missing from 

the judgments assailed by the appellants before this Court.   

26. 

In nutshell, all the captioned consumer appeals are hereby dismissed and orders 

passed by the Authority are set-aside. The cases are remanded back to the Authority for 

proceeding  with  the  same  and  to  conclude  the  same  within  45  days  of  receipt  of  this 

judgment  and  pass  appropriate,  speaking  orders  after  adhering  the  procedure  in 

accordance with law.   

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on  

Ramzan 

Approved for reporting. 

           JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
