JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J.----Through this common judgment, I intend to decide 
both the captioned writ petitions as common question of law and facts are involved in both 
these writ petitions. 

2. 

In  W.P  No.4190/2019,  petitioner  Nadia  Asghar  claims  that  she  was  PhD  Scholar  in 
National  Defence  University  (NDU)  and  received  letter  dated  27.02.2019,  whereby  her 
admission in PhD was cancelled by respondent university, said order was assailed in appeal in 
terms of clause 'e' of Item No.6.3 of Student's Handbook, 2019, NDU as well as in terms of 
clause 'I', which is meant for procedure for processing Acts of indiscipline, as a result whereof 
the petitioner was summoned by respondent No.2/President NDU being appellate authority for 
personal  hearing  on  23.05.2019  and  she  presented  her  case,  however,  her  appeal  was  al so 
turned down vide impugned notification dated 19.08.2019. Hence, this writ petition . 

3. 

In W.P No.4427/2019, petitioner Anser Mahmood Chughtai was also PhD scholar of 
NDU,  received  letter  for  cancellation  of  his  admission  on  27.02.2019,  which  was  further  
assailed before appellate authority/respondent No.2 vide appeal dated 05.03.2019, however, 
appeal  of petitioner was  turned  down  by  the  appellate  authority  vide  impugned  notification 
dated 19.08.2019. 

4.  Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that respondent university passed the order 
without  observing  legal  requirements  and  in  violation  of  settled  principles  of  law;  that 
allegation of misconduct or indiscipline requires evidence to be confronted to the petitioners 
which was not confronted to the petitioners nor fair opportunity of hearing was given and as 
such  entire procedure  adopted by  respondent  university  is in violation  of its own  handbook 
referred in clause 'c' procedure for processing acts of indiscipline; that different show -cause 
notices  were  not  transmitted  to  the  petitioners  on  the  actual  dates,  resultantly  proper 
explanations have not been placed by the petitioners, even matter was transmitted to the FIA 
Cyber Crime Wing who exonerated the petitioners mainly on the ground that no incriminating 
material  came  on  record  against  suspects  as  alleged  by  complainant  and  even  complainant 
failed  to  provide  relevant  evidence  in  support  of  her  allegations;  that  cancellation  of 
admissions of petitioners effect entire carrier of the petitioners, who have been victimized due 
to mala fide of the officials of respondent university including Dr. Bashir; that impugned orders 
are not justiciable due to want of evidence; that an offer, was made to petitioner Nadia Asghar, 
who has no direct dispute with the complainant to withdraw all the cases against respondent 
university in order to reinstate her admission but the same was not concluded as petitioner is 
in legal process; that respondent No.3 while awarding penalty has imposed life time ban from 
entering into the premises of university and cancelled admission which is alien to the entire 
scheme of law and internal rules of university. 

5.  Conversely, learned counsel for the respondent university contend that fair opportunity 
of hearing was granted to the petitioners who have pleaded their case before all the forums, 
even  personal  hearing  was  granted  and  as  such  they  have  failed  to  prove  their  innocence 
especially when the allegations are with respect to dignity of a student who was harassed by 
petitioner Anser Mahmood Chughtai by sending her pictures to other petitioner Nadia Asghar, 
who  was  supervising  the  students  affairs  including  the  petitioner  who  was  also  student  of 
university; that both the petitioners have admitted their guilt before the authority and as su ch 
no exception could be taken in the internal affairs of the university as any order passed by this 
Court amounts to interference in the internal affairs of the university; that all the necessary 
steps have been followed before cancellation of admissions of the petitioners. 

6.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

7.  Perusal of record reveals that complaint was filed by Ms. Shahzadi Fatima, student of 
BS  (3rd  semester)  at  NDU  against  petitioner  Anser  Mahmood  Chughtai  visiting  faculty 
member of NDU who was also PhD scholar of the university with the following allegations:- 

  Mr.  Anser  Mahmood  took  advantage  of  this  situation  and  continued  with  pep  talk 
sessions  increasing  overtime.  Now  besides  presenting  resolution  to  my  situation  he 

 
 
started discussing and presenting his relegated family life affairs searching for pence 
of  soul  in  life.  His  kind  words  of  pretentiousness  got  me  into  a  state  of  so  called 
infatuation. He lured me into a trap of trust by seeking my inappropriate pictures which 
I being immature, disillusioned and under stress shared with him. 

8.  The complainant has also charged petitioner Nadia Asghar for abetment in the entire 
matter being visiting faculty member as well as she being PhD scholar with petitioner Anser 
Mahmood  Chughtai.  Show-cause  notices  were  issued  to  both  the  petitioners  by  respondent 
university on different dates which were replied by both the petitioners and they denied their 
involvement, however, record reflects that both the petitioners submitted their written apology 
dated 27.02.2018 in the following manner:- 

I, Nadia Asghar D/o Ali Asghar, that there is a conflict between Mr. Anser Mahmood 
mid Miss Fatima Ali. I tried to resolve the issue with good intention. Some messages 
sent to me by Mr. Anser which I forwarded to Miss Fatima Ali. I wish to resolve this 
matter  successfully  and  confidentially  as  it  was  not  appropriate  to  discuss  or 
disseminate. I don't know the level of interaction and communication between both of 
them. I tried to solve the conflict as Mr. Anser is my PhD fellow and I am the C.R of 
PhD class. Now due to sensitivity of the issue, I am separating myself from this issue. 
I have objectionable pictures Miss Fatima and will delete (received from Mr. Anser) I 
promise. 

I Mr. Anser Mahmood Chughtai son of Gul Ahmed Khan, solemnly declare that I have 
got some data (text and pics) of a girl (Fatima Ali Bs GPP-2nd Sem) which she shared 
with me with willingness and there was no undue influence involved in it but I will not 
share it with anybody and threaten her (which I didn't do ever) in any context. In case 
of  any  allegation  or  accusation,  I  am  completely  available  to  prove  my  innocence. 
Moreover, I have shared it with one of my class fellow Madam Nadia. 

  Why I asked her to leave the university or I'll leave, I would explain it the disciplinary 

committee. 

9.  Besides the above referred factual aspects it has been observed from the record with 
the able assistance of learned counsel for the parties that students' affairs have to be dealt under 
academic  regulations  notified  by  respondent  university  "Procedure  for  Processing  Acts  of 
Indiscipline" in the student's handbook of 2019 of the university, whereby acts of indiscipline 
are as under:- 

a.  Violation of public morals, such as the use of indecent and filthy language; undesirable 
remarks  and  gestures;  acts  of  moral  turpitude  disorderly  behavior  like  abusing, 
quarrelling, fighting, insolence towards others use of force.  

b. 

Indulgence in acts which may cause insult or physical injury to the students, teachers, 
officers, staff of the University or any other person. 

c.  Defiance of a University Authority. 

d.  Spreading by word of mouth or written material religious, sectarian, ethic, regional or 

linguistic conflicts/hatred. 

e. 

Impersonation, giving false information, willful suppression of information, cheating 
or deceiving. 

f.  Possession,  carrying  or  use  of  any  type  of  weapons/fire-arms  or  explosive  material 

within the university premises. 

g.  Damaging any University property, including building, equipment, vehicles etc. in any 

manner. 

h.  Using  any  University  property,  including  building,  equipment  vehicles  etc.  without 

 
 
 
 
lawful authority. 

i.  Sale, distribution or consumption of intoxicants on the campus. 

j.  Use of student organizations for furthering the cause of a political party. 

k.  Circulation by word of mouth or in written form material derogatory to Pakistan Armed 

Forces of Pakistan, Islam or any other religion. 

l.  Allowing  or  abetting  the  entry  to  the  premises  of  the  University  of  the  Expelled 

Students or anti-social elements. 

m.  Obstructing 

the 
teaching/research/other activities. 

functioning  of 

the  University  or  causing  disruption 

in 

10.  The  abovementioned  acts  were  dealt  in  terms  of  punishment  or  penalty  for  acts  of 
indiscipline in terms of clause '4', whereby major or minor penalty could be imposed. Similarly, 
procedure of processing acts on indiscipline requires constitution of Departmental Disciplinary 
Committee (DDC), which also provides concept of appeal, as such it is not the case of any of 
the petitioners  that  they  have  not  been  provided  opportunity  of  hearing  which  is  apparently 
demonstrated  by  respondent  university  on  record  that  petitioners  were  given  show -cause 
notices  which  were  replied  and  even  they  were  heard  in  appeal  through  personal  hearing. 
Similarly, their admissions were placed on record which reflect that respondent university had 
followed each and every step in accordance with their own handbook of regulations and Anser 
Mahmood Chughtari/petitioner is guilty of acts of indiscipline whereby he has managed certain 
compromising pictures of student along with text data which has been acknowledged by him 
in his confession dated 27.02.2018, although he has reiterated his stance to prove his innocence 
but the primary fact referred in his statement that "I have got some data (text and pics) of a girl 
(Fatima Ali- BS GPP-2nd Sem) which she shared with me with willingness and there was no 
undue  influence  involved  in  it",  this  aspect  left  nothing  in  favour  of  Anser  Mahmood 
Chughtai/petitioner,  who  is  visiting  faculty  member  of  NDU  as  well  as  PhD  scholar 
simultaneously but has not followed the code of conduct due to which threatening atmosphere 
was created for a young girl Fatima Ali. 

11.  On the other hand, I have also considered the statement of petitioner Nadia Asghar who 
tried to intervene into the matter to resolve the controversy being C.R of PhD class as Anser 
Mahmood/petitioner was her class fellow but at the same time she has referred in her statement 
that "I have objectionable pictures Miss Fatima and will delete (received from Mr. Anser) I 
promise", this aspect also reveals that she was not directly involved in the matter rather she 
received data from Anser Mahmood Chughtai, whether the same was used to malign the victim 
in the university or otherwise is a fact which was concluded by university authority in their 
departmental proceedings.  In this backdrop, this Court is exercising its authority of judicial 
review while applying the proportionality, suitability and necessity, test, whereby fair stance 
is required before cancellation of admission of any student. It is also expected from educational 
institutions to exercise parental jurisdiction with students and as such university authority has 
concluded the matter after adopting due procedure provided in their regulations a gainst both 
the petitioners and even imposed penalty in accordance with their regulations to the extent of 
petitioner/Anser  Mahmood  Chughtai,  who  is  harassing  a  young  girl,  student  being  visiting 
faculty Member which is the most unethical part, however, on the other hand penalty imposed 
upon petitioner/Nadia Asghar is considered to be harsh penalty, however, courts are reluctant 
to  interfere  into  the  affairs  of  university  and  the  policy  matters  of  educational  institution. 
Reliance is placed upon 2015 SCMR 445 (Government College University, Lahore v. Syeda 
Fiza Abbas), 2013 SCMR 1687 (Secretary Economic Affairs division, Islamabad v. Anwarul 
Haq Ahmed), 2016 SCMR 134 (University of Health Science, Lahore v. Arsalan Ali), PLD 
2006  SC  564  (Syed  Muhammad  Arif  v.  University  of  Balochistan),  2011  SCMR  1021 
(Muhammad Ishafaq Ahmad Sial v. Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan). 

12.  The purpose of judicial review was intended to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism and 
it  must  be  exercised in larger  public  interest.  Similarly,  test  was  to  see  any  infirmity  in  the 
decision making process, therefore, duty of the court to confine itself to the question of legality 
only.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2014  SCMR  676  (Asaf  Fasihuddin  Khan  v.  Government  of 

 
 
Pakistan). Hence, no instance has been came across or surfaced on record whereby it could be 
assumed that fair opportunity or due process of law in terms of Article 10-A of the Constitution 
of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 has not been adhered to in the present case. The conduct 
so  demonstrated  by  the  petitioner  Amer  Mahmood  Chughtai  deserves  no  leniency  whose 
admission has rightly been cancelled, whereas penalty imposed upon petitioner Nadia Asghar 
is on higher side. However, if university authority reviews the penalty of the said petitioner on 
parental  concept  while  differentiating  the  role  of  Nadia  Asghar  vis.  a  vis.  Anser  Mahmood 
Chughtai it would promote the concept of fairness, equity and justice on the part of university 
authorities while dealing with disciplinary matters of students of university. 

13.  Instant  writ  petitions  are  not  maintainable  and  the  same  are  hereby  dismissed.  Vice 
Chancellor, NDU is directed to reconsider the penalty of Nadia Asghar under their own scheme 
of regulations, if permissible. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
