W.P. No.4095-2017 

1 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.  : 

W.P. NO.4095-2017 

Abdul Sattar 
VS    
Salma Ramzan & Another 

Petitioner by         :  Mr. Zahid Ayub Rathore, Advocate  
Respondent by      :  Mr. Misbah ul Mustafa Safir, Advocate   
Date of hearing     : 

03.02.2021 

AAMER FAROOQ J.   Respondent  No.1  entered  into  Nikah 

with  the  petitioner  on  08.06.2016  against  the  dower  of  Rupees 

One Million, the payment of which, was to be made promptly on 

demand.  Respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage 

on  the  basis  of  Khula,  which  was  allowed  vide  judgment  and 

decree  dated  20.02.2017  with  the  condition  that  respondent  No.1 

shall relinquish the dower. Respondent No.1 filed an appeal before 

the learned District Judge, which was allowed vide judgment dated 

03.10.2017, whereby condition of relinquishment was removed.  

2.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner inter alia  contended  that 

petitioner  had  paid  dower  of  Rupees  One  Million  to  respondent 

No.1, hence she had to relinquish/payback the same for dissolution 

of marriage to be effective as required under the law.  

3.  Learned counsel for respondent No.1 inter alia contended that 

no  dower  was  paid  by  the  petitioner  to  respondent  No.1;  even-

otherwise,  respondent  No.1  now  has  contracted  Nikah;  that 

judgment  impugned  does  not  suffer  from  any  illegality  or 

jurisdictional error. 

 
 
 
W.P. No.4095-2017 

2 

4.  Arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties have 

been  heard  and  the  documents,  placed  on  record,  examined  with 

their able assistance. 

5.  The factual background, leading to filing of instant petition, is 

mentioned hereinabove therefore need not be reproduced.      

6.  The claim of respondent No.1 is that dower was never paid 

and in this behalf, during course of trial, she also led evidence.  

7.  The  assertion  of  respondent  No.1  remained  un-rebutted 

inasmuch  as  petitioner  was  proceeded  exparte  and  eventually, 

exparte  judgment  and  decree  was  passed  against  him  on 

20.02.2017.  

8.  There  is  nothing  on  record  to  controvert  the  position  of 

respondent No.1, whereby she had categorically stated in the plaint 

as  well  as  in  the  evidence  that  dower  amount  of  Rupees  One 

Million  had  not  been  paid  to  her.  The  petitioner,  though  in  the 

reply  to  the  suit,  asserted  that  dower  amount  had  been  paid  yet 

he was proceeded exparte and no evidence was led to the effect.  

9.  The  petitioner  never  made  any  attempt  to  have  the  exparte 

judgment  and  decree  set  aside  and  even  challenge  exparte 

judgment  and  decree  dated  20.02.2017.  Even,  in  the  instant 

petition, no such request was made.  

10.  Section  10  (4)  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act, 

1964 reads as follows:- 

“10(4)…… If no compromise or reconciliation is possible the 
Court shall frame the issues in the cases and fix a date for 
the recording of the evidence; 

  Provided that notwithstanding any decision or judgment 
of any Court of tribunal, the Family Court is a suit for 
dissolution  of  marriage,  if  reconciliation  fails,  shall  pass 
decree for dissolution of marriage forthwith and also restore 

 
W.P. No.4095-2017 

3 

the  husband  the  Haq  Mehr  received  by  the  wife  in 
consideration of marriage at the time of marriage”.    

Under  the  referred  provision,  where  the  Court  passes  the  decree 

for dissolution of marriage on the basis of Khula, the husband is 

to  be  restored  or  paid  back  Haq  Mehr  received  by  the  wife  in 

consideration of marriage at the time of marriage.  

11.  In the instant case, there is nothing on record that petitioner 

paid  the  dower  amount  hence  learned  appellate  court  rightly 

concluded that since no dower had been received, so the question 

of its relinquishment does not arise.     

12.  The judgment impugned does not suffer from any illegality or 

jurisdictional error warranting interference in the instant writ petition.  

13.  For the above reasons, instant petition is without merit and is 

accordingly dismissed.  

Announced in Open Court on 29.04.2021 

Zawar 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
   JUDGE  

   JUDGE  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
