JUDGMENT 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl. Appeal No.159/2016 
Rashid Mukhtar 
VS
The State, etc. 

Appellant by: 

Syed Mohammad Tayyab, Advocate 

Respondent No.2 by: 

Mr. Sabah Mohy-ud-Din Khan, Advocate 

State by: 

Ms. Hadiya Aziz, State Counsel 

Date of Hearing: 

21.04.2017 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  criminal  appeal  the 

appellant  has  assailed  the  judgment  dated  27.07.2016  passed  by  learned 

Additional Sessions Judge-IV (West), Islamabad, whereby the appellant has 

been convicted and sentenced U/S 302(B) PPC to undergo imprisonment for 

life  as  Tazir  with  direction  to  pay  an  amount  of  Rs.200,000/-  as 

compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  deceased  U/S  544-A  Cr.P.C.  The 

appellant has also been convicted and sentenced U/S 324 PPC to five years 

(RI)  with  fine  of  Rs.30,000/-  in  case  FIR  No.212/2014  dated  03.08.2014, 

U/S  302/337-A(i)  PPC,  Police  Station  Golra  Sharif,  Islamabad.  Benefit  of 

Section  382-B  Cr.P.C.  is  given  to  the  accused/appellant.  All  the  sentences 

shall run concurrently.  

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  instant  case  are  that  the  complainant,  Najam 

Iqbal/respondent  No.2,  got  lodged  a  criminal  complaint  on  03.08.2014 

against the appellant, Rashid Mukhtar, with the following allegations:- 

 میں گھر خترا یننسر یبیو یمیر روا نجم نیہا

 نمکا )لحا( لاوورا

ث ضلع ھ 

ی ج ب
ث بیٹی یمیر ، نجم لبلا بیٹا امیر روا میں تا ر 
گ شکر تحصیل لانیوخا کنسا گجر مقو حمدا رمختیا شدار یمسم

-/8 

 یباتقر خہرمو جٓا"

 دمااد امیر کہ

تھے دجومو

 اعذ سیانو روا بیٹی یمیر کےکر اجھگڑ سے ںلواو گھر پنےا ہی جٓا کہ جو دا

 ثٓا مسلاا

G-6/1-4

 پٓا کہ تھا ہار کہہ روا ۔لگا نےکراجھگڑ سے نیہا

ث بیٹی یمیر

میں ےکمر روا تھا 

 ثٓا گھر ےرا

 سیکٹر
مہ لیکر ہاہمر کو ہما
5

نمبر/B214
 رمع  ب شدار

 میں ےکمر نے سا ۔گا ںڑچھو نہیں ہندز کو اعذ بیٹی روا پکوٓا میں ہے اہو اجھگڑ سے ںلواو گھر ےمیر امیر سے جہو کی

 روا میں 

 ثبلا ہمیں روا کیا رشو سے روز روز کیلئے نےبچا نجا نے نیہا

ث تو لگا نےرما
کو 

 بیٹی یمیر کر ھا ا یھری ی ہو ی

پڑ

 جس یرما یھری نےشدار پر تھہا ںا

 ث کے بیٹی یمیر تو ئےٓا میں ےکمر سا کر گبھا نجم لبلا بیٹا روا یبیو یمیر
 ثا

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ا
 
 
ا
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[2]                            

 پر   

ر ر  ا  سا کر کڑ  سے ںگوںا

ث ں نوود 

کو اعذ سیانو یمیر یکھتےد ہی یکھتےد ارفو نے سا روا گیاہو خمیز تھہا سکاا سے

 بیٹے ےمیر روا نے میں گئیہو  بیہو سیانو یمیر ۔ااگںودرما کو ں نوود بیٹی ںما میں کہ لگا کہنے سے روز روز روا ارما

پہنچے لہسپتا 

 ج ۔گئے چلے کر لے لہسپتا ارفو گلو ہم لیکر کو بچی روا لیا سے سا ستید 
ث بیٹی یمیر نے رمختا شدار یمسم

ن کی قتل سے یھری پر نیہا

 بز کو بچی ارفو نے نجم لبلا

 ۔تھی چکیہو تفو اعذ بچی تو

 سیانو یمیر روا کیا حملہ سے 
 یمسم

 ۔گئیہو تفو ئےہو تےلا نہ با

ث کی ںخموز جو کیا خمیز کر پٹخ ر 

 سکاا پر   

ر سے 

ن کی نےرما سے نجا کو اعذ

"۔ئےجا کی 

ی اورا  نینوااقںہو راد

 یعود فخلا کے شدار

After submission of  the aforementioned complaint, FIR No.212/2014 dated 

03.08.2014,  U/S  302/337-A(i)  PPC,  Police  Station  Golra  Sharif,  Islamabad 

(Exh.PA)  was  registered.  The  Investigation  Officer  after  completion  of 

investigation  submitted  report  U/S  173  Cr.P.C.  against  the  appellant, 

whereupon the learned Trial Court framed the charge and after completion 

of entire evidence the appellant Rashid Mukhtar got recorded his statement 

U/S  342  Cr.P.C.  and  has  also  appeared  as  witness  in  his  own  defence 

U/S  340(2)  Cr.P.C.  whereafter  the  learned  Trial  Court  convicted  the 

appellant and awarded life imprisonment U/S 302(B) PPC and also awarded 

five  years  (RI)  imprisonment  with  fine  of  Rs.30,000/-  U/S  324  PPC  for 

causing injuries to Sania Najam. Hence, instant criminal appeal.  

3. 

Learned counsel for appellant contends that the impugned judgment 

is absolutely illegal, unlawful, unjust, improper and against the law; that the 

learned  Trial  Court  has  not  applied  its  judicial  mind  while  passing  the 

impugned judgment and the defence evidence has not been appreciated in 

its  true  perspective;  that  there  is  no  motive  on  the  part  of  appellant  is 

available  on  record  to  murder  the  deceased  and  there  are  serious 

contradictions  in  this  case;  that  it  is  a  case  of  two  versions  where  the 

motive referred by the prosecution has not been established; that even the 

recovery  is  not  credible,  therefore,  the  sentence  awarded  to  appellant  is 

contrary to law.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  as  well  as  the 

learned Standing Counsel argued that the prosecution has proved the case 

against  the  appellant  as  he  has  admitted  his  presence  at  the  scene  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ت
 
 
 
 
ت
 
 
ت
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[3]                            

occurrence  and  all  the  witnesses  are  natural  witnesses,  who  have  given 

ocular  account,  which  is  in  line  with  medical  evidence  and  there  is  not  an 

iota  of  discrepancy  among  the  statement  of  PWs  and  learned  Trial  Court 

has rightly convicted the appellant in accordance with law.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

From  the  perusal  of  record  it  has  been  observed  that  FIR 

No.212/2014 dated 03.08.2014, U/S 302/337-A(i) PPC, Police Station Golra 

Sharif, Islamabad was registered on the complaint (Exh.PB) of Najam Iqbal, 

PW-2,  whereas  the  complaint  reveals  that  appellant,  son-in-law  of 

complainant,  came  to  the  house  of  complainant  along  with  his  wife  and 

daughter  Izza  Rashid,  aged  5  months,  and  both  husband  and  wife  were 

quarreling  with  each  other  and  the  accused  allegedly  referred  the  reasons 

of  coming  to  the  complainant’s  house  that  he  had  a  clash  with  his  family 

due  to  Sania  Najam,  the  daughter  of  complainant,  and  on  this  score  he 

extended threats of killing both, Sania and minor daughter Izza, and all of a 

sudden he picked a knife “Churri” and attacked Sania, on which Sania made 

hue and cry and called her family members, whereupon complainant along 

with  his  wife  and  son  Bilal  Najam,  immediately  came  to  the  room  and 

witnessed that appellant was attacking Sania on her chest, but she has only 

received  injury  on  her  left  hand  while  defending  herself,  whereafter 

appellant immediately got hold of minor Izza from her legs and banged her 

head  against  a  carpeted  floor,  resultantly  the  minor  became  unconscious, 

whereafter  complainant  and  his  son  grabbed  the  minor  Izza  from  accused 

and  took  her  to  a  nearby  private  hospital  and  thereafter  went  to  PIMS 

Hospital  for  a  medical  treatment  though  the  minor  Izza  Rashid  in  the 

meantime succumbed to injuries, hence the criminal case has been lodged. 

7. 

The prosecution has produced nine witnesses in the trial of appellant. 

As per statement of PW-1, Ghulam Abbas (ASI), on the date of occurrence 

i.e.  03.08.2014,  he  was  serving  as  Moharrar  in  PS  Golra  Sharif  and  he 

chalked  out  the  FIR  Exh.PA.,  however  it  has  been  observed  from  the 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[4]                            

cross-examination  that  statement  of  said  witness  U/S  161  Cr.P.C.  has  not 

been  recorded  by  the  Investigation  Officer  and  he  has  not  joined  the 

investigation in the instant case.  

8. 

PW-2, complainant, Najam Iqbal s/o Abdul Karim, aged 65 years, is a 

retired civil servant, resident of House No.47, Street No.786, Sector G-13/4, 

Islamabad,  who  narrated  the  entire  incident  on  the  basis  of  his  own 

complaint (Exh.PB), whereby he specifically alleged the role of appellant of 

killing Izza Rashid by way of banging her head on a carpeted floor and also 

referred the Churri attack by the appellant upon Sania Najam.  

9. 

The  prosecution  has  produced  Bilal  Najam  as  PW-3,  son  of 

complainant  in  the  trial,  whereby  he  alleged  that  his  sister  Sania  Najam 

and  minor  Izza  were  present  in  a  room  of  our  house  on  03.08.2014  at 

around 8:00pm, when the appellant started shouting and threatened Sania 

Najam  that  he  would  not  spare  her  and  minor  Izza,  because  of  them  he 

has left his parents. PW-3 along with his father and mother, rushed to the 

said room and upon entrance  they witnessed that appellant while holding 

Churri in his hand tried to attack Sania Najam, whereupon, she in defence, 

received injury on her left hand. Thereafter appellant lifted the minor Izza 

deceased  from  her  legs  and  banged  her  head  against  a  carpeted  floor, 

Izza  got  unconscious,  whereafter  PW-3  snatched  minor  Izza  from  the 

appellant  and  took  her  to  a  nearby  hospital,  where  doctors  declared  the 

minor as dead.  

10. 

PW-4,  Sania  Najam,  wife  of  appellant,  stated  that  appellant  on 

03.08.2014  quarreled  with  his  parents  and  left  his  own  house  along  with 

her and minor Izza and came to complainant’s house. She further stated in 

her evidence that appellant started quarreling with her on the ground that 

due  to  her,  he  has  left  his  house  and  quarreled  with  his  parents.  PW-4 

stated  in  her  evidence  that  the  appellant  while  picking  up  a  fruit  cutting 

Churri from a dressing table aimed at her chest and attacked her and she in 

her defence got injury on her left hand, whereafter, her father and brother 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[5]                            

entered  in  the  room,  whereupon  appellant  dropped  the Churri  and  picked 

up minor Izza, who was lying on the bed and banged her head  with force 

against a carpeted floor, whereafter her father and brother snatched minor 

Izza from appellant’s hand, minor Izza was unconscious, so they took her to 

a nearby hospital, where doctors declared the minor Izza dead.  

11. 

Besides the above PWs, Ahsan Ullah (Police constable)  appeared as 

PW-5  and  got  recorded  his  statement  before  the  Court  that  he  has 

witnessed  the  arrest  of  appellant  and  during  the  physical  search,  got 

recovered  photocopy  of  NIC  (Ex.P1-2),  original  and  photocopy  of  driving 

license (Exh.P3 & P4), wallet (Exh.P5), one  currency note of denomination 

of  Rs.1000/-  (Exh.P6)  and  one  currency  note  of  denomination  of  Rs.500/- 

(Exh.P7)  and 

recovery  memo  was  prepared  with  his  signature 

(Exh.PW-5/A),  however  he stated  that  the  accused  while  in  police  custody 

on  07.08.2014  led  to  his  house,  i.e.,  House  No.42,  Street  No.85,  Sector 

G-13/1, Islamabad, where he got recovered Churri (Exh.P8) from a kitchen 

and the same was taken into possession vide recovery memo (Exh.PW-5/B) 

and  signed  the  recovery  memo.  He  further  stated  that  consequent  to 

postmortem of deceased, the doctor handed over Kurta (Exh.P9) and Nikkar 

(Exh.P10)  as  the  last  worn  clothes  of  the  deceased  and  the  same  were 

taken into possession vide recovery memo (Exh.PW-5/C).  

12. 

The  prosecution  further  produced  Aamir  Shahzad  (Draftsman)  as 

PW-7, who has prepared the  site plan  (Exh.PW-7/1) which is produced on 

the record.  

13. 

Finally,  Muhammad  Idrees,  Sub-Inspector  of  P.S.  Golra  Sharif 

appeared  as  PW-9  and  narrated  all  the  facts  of  the  previous  statements 

recorded by PWs and after completion of investigation, he submitted a final 

report U/S 173 Cr.P.C. wherein the appellant has been declared as accused. 

During  the  course  of cross-examination,  he  has  admitted  before  the  Court 

that at the time of recovery of Exh.P8 (Churri) he along with the appellant 

visited  the  house  whereupon  the  appellant  got  recovered  the Churri  from 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[6]                            

kitchen,  PW-9  answered  a  specific  question  regarding  the  incident  in  the 

following manner:- 

“It is correct that, as per statement of the accused baby Izza 
had fallen down during scuffle between him, Najam Iqbal 
and Bilal Najam PWs. As per statement of the accused, Mst. 
Sania Najam and her mother had tried to snatch baby Izza 
from him. After the statement of the accused, no other 
eyewitness had appeared before me to make statement. It is 
correct that there is no rebuttal of the statement of the 
accused except the statements of the eye witnesses.” 

The  Investigation  Officer  has  also  witnessed  the  recovery  of  the Churri  on 

07.08.2014 and the Churri is of common pattern which is easily available in 

the market.  

14. 

The  appellant  has  got  recorded  his  statement  U/S  342  Cr.P.C. 

whereas the prosecution/complainant asked particular questions in order to 

prove  the  reasons  of  motive.  Question  No.3  has  been  asked  by  the 

prosecution from appellant, regarding quarrel with his parents and shifting 

to  his  in-laws  house  along  with  his  wife  and  minor  daughter,  which  has 

properly  been  answered.  It  appears  that  it  is  a  case  of  two  versions,  in 

order  to  confirm  the  said  fact,  the  appellant  got  recorded  his  statement 

U/S 340(2) Cr.P.C., while stating therein that:- 

“On  03.08.2014,  I  was  present  in  the  house  of  the 
complainant Mst. Sania Najam PW, who was then my wife, 
started quarreling with me. Baby Izza deceased, at that 
time, was with Mst. Sania Najam, PW. The parents of Mst. 
Sania Najam PW started scuffled with me, and as a result, 
baby  Izza  deceased  fell  down  from  the  hands  of 
Mst. Sania Najam, PW. Baby Izza died later on. I did not kill 
her. I am innocent. I had great love for baby Izza deceased. 
It is a false case against me just to save their own skin.”  

The  appellant  has  also  been  cross-examined  but  he  never  agitated  the 

matter before the local police as well as before any authorities, therefore, at 

this  stage  appreciation  of  oral  evidence  has  to  be  seen  in  the  light  of 

judgment passed by the learned Trial Court.  

15. 

In order to prove the charge of murder it is necessary to peruse the 

evidence and to prove certain factors, however in order to understand the 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[7]                            

proposition,  it  is  necessary  to  first  discuss  the  ocular  account,  medical 

evidence for motive and recovery and finally the law. I have gone through 

the evidence and it is very much evident that PW-4 Sania Najam along with 

appellant  and  minor  Izza  Rashid,  aged  5  months,  came  to  the  house  of 

PW-2 Najam Iqbal (father), as per the contents of the FIR  (Exh.PA) it has 

specifically been referred that:- 

 روا تھا 

 ثٓا گھر ےرا

مہ لیکر ہاہمر کو ہما
5

 رمع  ب شدار اعذ سیانو روا بیٹی یمیر کےکر اجھگڑ سے ںلواو گھر پنےا ہی جٓا"

 اہو اجھگڑ سے ںلواو گھر ےمیر امیر سے جہو کی پٓا کہ تھا ہار کہہ روا ۔لگا نےکراجھگڑ سے نیہا

ث بیٹی یمیر

 میں ےکمر

"۔ہے 

This  statement  referred  in  Exh.PB  and  Exh.PA  clearly  demonstrates  the 

motive  part  of  the  entire  prosecution  case,  however  I  have  meticulously 

perused  every  statement  of  the  nine  witnesses,  but  I  could  not  find  any 

evidence  available  on  record  through  which  the  factor  referred  above  has 

been  proved  independently.  I  have  considered  the  above  mentioned 

statement as a motive part for this case, however complainant (PW-2), Bilal 

Najam  (PW-3)  and  Sania  Najam  (PW-4)  have  not  proved  the  said  motive 

through  an  independent  source,  although  all  three  witnesses  have 

categorically stated that this is the reason and notice of the entire case. All 

three  witnesses  are  related  and  interested  witnesses  in  this  matter  as 

Najam  Iqbal/complainant  is  the  father  of  Bilal  Najam  and  Sania  Najam, 

where Bilal Najam claimed to be an eye witness and Sania Najam allegedly 

claimed that she is an injured witness of the attack by appellant (husband), 

received  injury  on  her  left  hand  palm.  All  three  witnesses  narrated  the 

entire  incident  of  (Exh.PA)  and  (Exh.PB)  in  their  evidence,  but  they  have 

not  referred  any  reason  as  to  why  Sania  Najam  PW-4  had  frequent  fight 

with accused/appellant. Najam Iqbal PW-2 has stated before the Court that 

he  saw  the  accused  “holding in his right hand a Churri for cutting fruits” 

tried  assaulting  my  daughter  with  the  said  Churri,  the  Churri  blow  was 

aimed at her chest, however she with her right hand held the Churri blow, 

 
 
 
ا
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[8]                            

the  accused  could  not  succeed  in  inflicting  injuries  on  her  chest  and  she 

received injury on her left hand. 

16.  However, during the course of cross-examination of the said witness, 

it  has  been  observed  from  record  that  Exh.PB  has  been  confronted  to  the 

witness regarding non-availability of the word/object fruit cutter Churri, and 

“fruit  cutter”  has  not  been  mentioned  and  only  word  “Churri”  is  available. 

However,  during  the  cross-examination  the  defence  counsel  has  put  a 

question which is a part of defence, the same is reproduced as under:- 

“It is incorrect to suggest that I and my son Bilal Najam who 
had assaulted the accused with a Churri. It is incorrect to 
suggest that it was during the scuffle that baby Izza had 
fallen down when she was being hold by my daughter.” 

The  abovementioned  suggestion  has  been  referred  as  defence  of  the 

appellant on record.  

17. 

PW-3 Bilal Najam is also an eye-witness and claims that he witnessed 

appellant  assaulting  his  sister  with Churri  and  eventually  her  left  hand  got 

injured.  However,  he  stated  that  the  appellant  while  holding  baby  Izza 

deceased from her legs, lifted her from bed and banged her head against a 

carpeted  floor,  thereafter  he  and  his  father  snatched  baby  Izza  from 

accused and rushed to a nearby hospital, where doctors categorically stated 

that minor Izza has succumbed to injuries. Bilal Najam has not been cross-

examined  with  particular  reference  to  question,  however  Sania  Najam 

herself put appearance as PW-4 and during the course of cross-examination 

she admitted that:- 

“It is correct that the accused loved baby Izza.” 

This  shows  the  nature  and  affection  of  father/appellant  with  minor 

daughter.   

18. 

PW-5  Ahsan  Ullah  (Constable)  was  performing  his  duties  in 

Islamabad  Police  and  he  categorically  stated  before  the  Court  that  he 

witnessed the arrest of the appellant as well as the witness of recovery and 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[9]                            

his  name  has  also  been  referred  in  the  recovery  memo.  But  during  the 

course of cross-examination he stated that:- 

“We arrived at the house of the accused at about 12:30p.m. 
Nobody was present in the house. The main gate was open.” 

The  above  referred  statement  clearly  demonstrates  that  the  family  of 

accused was not  available and they left their house open, especially if the 

said factor is seen  while keeping the  conduct of different law enforcement 

agencies  in  mind,  it  appears  that  it  is  not  possible  rather  it  is  humanly 

impossible that any person who owns a house leave it open especially when 

the  owner/resident  intends  to  go  out,  therefore,  such  conduct  is  not 

believable  and  does  not  seem  to  be  true.  During  the  course  of 

cross-examination,  PW-5  also  admitted  that  such  kind  of  Churri  is  easily 

available in market and Investigation Officer has not associated any person 

from the locality, at the time of recovery of Churri, by the accused.  

19.  Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer,  Principal  and  Head  of  Department  Forensic 

Medicines,  PIMS,  Islamabad  appeared  as  PW-6,  who  examined  the  dead 

body of Izza Rashid, aged 5 months, and stated the reason of the injury:- 

“On palpation, right temporal, right prital and both occipital 
bones were fractured. There was no other visible injury 
noted.” 

However,  during  the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-6  admitted  the  fact 

that:- 

“I cannot say if the deceased had fallen on the ground or 
her head was banged down on the floor.” 

Though, such kind of evidence has been discarded. PW-6 has further been 

asked  a  specific  question  regarding  using  of  word  “forceful”  on  which  he 

stated that:- 

“It is correct to suggest that word “forcefully” mentioned 
in my medical post-mortem report is mentioned by me on 
the basis of information given by police and except that I 
had no other basis or reasons to mention such word in the 
report.” 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[10]                            

Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer  PW-6  while  answering  the  question  replied  the 

following as of final opinion:- 

“It is correct to suggest that the injury received by the 
deceased may be caused by falling on the floor herself.” 

20. 

Aamir  Shahzad  (Draftsman)  appeared  as  PW-7,  who  has  no  formal 

contract  with  Islamabad  Police  Department  to  render  his  services  being  a 

Draftsman,  he  is  not  approved  or  authorized  by  government,  he  is  not  a 

Forensic  Expert  and  has  no  qualification  to  work  as  Draftsman  specially  in 

murder  cases  or  in  police  investigation  and  he  is  not  an  eye-witness, 

therefore, there is no need to discuss the testimony of PW-7.  

21.  Dr. Niaz Ali, on the application of complainant, has been summoned 

through  Court,  got  recorded  his  statement  as  PW-8  and  stated  that  he 

medically examined Sania Najam for her wound on her left hand palm and 

referred her for Plastic Surgery Consultation (Exh.PW-8/A), however during 

the course of cross-examination he admitted that:- 

“It is correct to suggest that I did not form any opinion 
regarding the nature of the injury.” 

22. 

Lastly,  Investigation  Officer  tendered  his  evidence,  whereby  he  has 

confirmed the entire stance of prosecution at the initial level and submitted 

his final report U/S 173 Cr.P.C. However, in order to verify the contents, it is 

necessary  to  corroborate  the  testimony  of  Investigation  Officer  with  the 

eye-witnesses’  account.  The  Investigation  Officer  PW-9  has  stated  that  he 

arrested  the  appellant  and  also  got  recovered  the  knife  (Exh.P8)  on 

07.08.2014 from the kitchen of appellant’s house. The knife was placed in 

shelf  of  the  kitchen  and  it  was  taken  in  possession  vide  recovery  memo 

Exh.PW5/B.  The  Investigation  Officer  was  cross-examined  at  length, 

whereupon he admitted that he has not cleared the contradiction between 

PWs in his entire investigation nor he made any further investigation for the 

clarity  of  contradictions.  He  has  not  interrogated  Sania  Najam  in  the 

hospital as she was not in her state of mind. He also admits that he had not 

collected any incriminating articles from the place of occurrence. He further 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[11]                            

admitted that during the recovery of the crime weapon (Exh.P8), house of 

the  accused  was  already  opened,  therefore,  police  entered  into  the  house 

and searched the same; Police had not met any of the family members in 

the  said  premises  as  it  was  all  vacant.  However,  during  the  course  of 

cross-examination, the Investigation Officer has admitted that the Churri is 

of a common pattern and easily available in market.  

23. 

The  above  referred  PWs,  in  order  to  achieve  the  conviction  of  the 

appellant,  have  recorded  their  statements,  however  it  has  been  observed 

that:- 

(i) 

Najam  Iqbal  is  the  father  of  Sania  Najam  and  father-in-law  of  the 

appellant and has given the stance of the entire incident in Exh.PB.  

(ii) 

Najam Iqbal, Bilal Najam and Sania Najam are allegedly witnesses of 

the incident, however all three are interested witnesses.  

(iii)  House  No.47,  Street  No.786,  Sector  G-13/4,  Islamabad  is  the  place 

of incident and admitted by both the parties. 

(iv) 

All  three  eye-witnesses  have  denied  the  suggestion  that  during  the 

scuffle baby Izza deceased fell down from the hands of Sania Najam 

PW and due to the said fall, she died. 

(v) 

Churri  (Exh.P8)  is  a  fruit  cutting  knife,  which  was  allegedly  used by 

the  appellant,  however  the  recovery  memo  (Exh.PW5/B)  reveals 

otherwise as the size of the Churri (Exh.P8) is much bigger than of a 

normal fruit cutting knife.  

(vi) 

The Churri (Exh.P8), on the pointation of appellant was recovered on 

07.08.2014  from  the  kitchen  of  House  No.42,  Street  No.85,  Sector 

G-13/1,  Islamabad,  however,  the  said  house  and  its  gate  was 

opened and no one was available at the time of recovery of the said 

Churri. 

(vii) 

It is admitted that the Churri recovered from the House No.42, Street 

No.85,  Sector  G-13/1,  Islamabad  is  of  common  pattern  and  usually 

available in every house.  

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[12]                            

(viii) 

It has also been referred in the testimony of PW-4 Sania Najam that 

appellant  threw  down  the  Churri  and  picked  up  baby  Izza,  which 

means that the Churri was thrown and there is no evidence of any of 

the  witness  nor  it  is  the  case  of  the  prosecution  that  appellant 

grabbed the Churri again and left the place.  

(ix) 

All  three  PWs,  i.e.,  PW-2,  PW-3  and  PW-4  stated  in  their  evidence 

that  appellant  picked  up  baby  Izza  from  her  legs  and  banged  her 

head  with  force  on  a  carpeted  floor,  whereafter  PW-2  and  PW-3 

snatched  baby  Izza  from  the  appellant.  The  said  portion  of  the 

evidence  seems  to  be  unreasonable  as  if  the  appellant  banged  the 

head of the baby Izza on floor, then he has to leave baby Izza on the 

floor and there is no need to snatch Izza from the hands of appellant 

by PW-2 and PW-3.   

(x) 

It  has  been  observed  from  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer 

PW-6 that injuries received by the deceased may be caused by falling 

on the floor herself and nature of injury does not suggest that it was 

inflicted upon the deceased or Izza deceased has received injury due 

to falling on the ground. 

(xi)  Whereas,  Dr.  Niaz  Ali,  PW-8  has  not  form  any  opinion  regarding 

nature of injury of Sania Najam PW-4 even there is no MLR available 

on record and the document referred as Exh.PW8/A (outdoor ticket) 

bears no details regarding the size of the injury or treatment.   

(xii)  The  Investigation  Officer  PW-9  Muhammad  Idrees  (Sub-Inspector) 

and  recovery  witness  PW-5  Ahsan  Ullah  (Constable),  who  have 

arrested  the  appellant  and  witnessed  the  recovery,  stated  that  the 

house  from  where  the  recovery  has  been  made  was  vacant  and  no 

one  was  living  in  the  said  house  and  Churri  (Exh.P8)  on  the 

pointation of appellant has been recovered from kitchen.  

All  the  above  referred  evidence  is  to  be  seen  in  juxtaposition  with  the 

testimony of the appellant who himself recorded his statement U/S 342 Cr.P.C. 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[13]                            

and  has  also  appeared  as  defence  witness  in  his  own  defence  and  got 

recorded  his  statement  U/S  340(2)  Cr.P.C,  the  same  is hereby  reproduced 

as under:- 

“On  03.08.2014,  I  was  present  in  the  house  of  the 
complainant Mst. Sania Najam PW, who was then my wife, 
started quarreling with me. Baby Izza deceased, at that 
time, was with Mst. Sania Najam, PW. The parents of Mst. 
Sania Najam PW started scuffled with me, and as a result, 
baby Izza deceased fell down from the hands of Mst. Sania 
Najam, PW. Baby Izza died later on. I did not kill her. I am 
innocent. I had great love for baby Izza deceased. It is a 
false case against me just to save their own skin.”  

However, his statement if seen in context of other eye-witnesses’ account, 

i.e.  PW-2,  PW-3  and  PW-4,  it  seems  that  at  the  place  of  occurrence, 

presence of the witnesses and accused/appellant as well as the baby Izza is 

admitted; the scuffle between parents and Sania Najam is admitted and the 

only disputed point is as to whether baby Izza died due to fall on the floor 

or her head was banged against a carpeted floor. Moreover, the prosecution 

in the entire evidence has never produced the carpet to justify their stance, 

even the star witness Sania Najam PW-4 who claims that she had received 

a  Churri  blow  on  her  left  hand  explained  the  incident  with  the  following 

words:- 

“He while picking up fruit cutting Churri from dressing table 
aimed Churri blow at my chest, I saved myself by holding 
the Churri by my right hand. I was slightly injured on my left 
hand.” 

The  above  referred  portion  of  the  testimony  seems  to  be  unnatural  as  if 

Sania  Najam  holds  the Churri  with  her  right  hand,  how  she  got  injured  or 

received injury on her left hand? That portion of the statement is silent and 

even Sania Najam has not explained the injury as it seems irrational that if 

one  holds  the Churri  with  right  hand  and  receives  injury  on  the  left  hand. 

Even  if  this  statement  is  seen  in  the  light  of  testimony  of  PW-8  and  the 

document  (Exh.PW8),  where  the  only  injury  referred  by  the  doctor  is 

“linear laceration”,  however  there  is  no  treatment  in  shape  of  stitches  nor 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[14]                            

even  the  dimensions  have  been  referred  by  the  doctor  except  he  has 

referred  the  patient  to  Surgery  Consultation  and  there  is  no  document 

available  which  confirms  as  to  whether  the  surgery  department  has  ever 

given consultation to the patient/Sania Najam. Therefore, it is not believable 

that  she  has  ever  received  any  injury  on  the  left  hand.  Even  I  have  gone 

through the record, which clearly reveals that PW-8 Dr. Niaz Ali at the initial 

stage  was  not  referred  as  witness  in  calendar  of  witnesses,  however,  the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-IV  (West)  Islamabad  on  the  application 

of complainant, summoned PW-8 vide order dated 15.10.2015, though the 

said PW has not produced any MLR and even there is no MLR available on 

record. 

24. 

The  Investigation  Officer,  in  order  to  verify  the  versions,  has  been 

cross-examined by the defence, but the only thing which came on record is 

the  testimony  of  PW-9  that  he  has  not  prepared  any  injury  statement  of 

Sania Najam and he has not even recorded or interrogated Sania Najam in 

the hospital on the ground that she was not in fit state of mind. Though, he 

stated that statement of injury was prepared and it is referred in Para-20 of 

the Case Diary No.1 that Sania Najam PW’s presence in the hospital is not 

recorded. The Investigation Officer has also not confirmed that who is the 

owner  of  the  house  from  where  Churri  (Exh.P8)  was  recovered  and  not 

made any inquiry about the ownership of the said house, even he did not 

see any male/female or child in the said house and main gate of the house 

was open.  

25. 

All these factors lead to an irresistible conclusion especially when the 

said Churri has not been sent for chemical examination for determination of 

human blood, which positively confirms the stance that no Churri has been 

used  in  the  alleged  incident  as  the  same  has  not  been  corroborated  from 

any  independent  source,  therefore,  the  circumstances  referred  by  the 

Investigation  Officer  and  the  recovery  witness  in  their  testimony,  clearly 

demonstrate  that  recovery  is  not  believable  and  has  been  managed 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[15]                            

subsequently  especially  when  the  PW-4  Sania  Najam  in  her  testimony 

stated  before  the  Court  that  the  appellant  threw  down  the  Churri  and 

picked  up  the  minor  from  her  legs.  This  statement,  if  seen  and  placed  in 

juxtaposition with the statement of the recovery witnesses, it is clear that, it 

is not the case of prosecution that appellant has taken the Churri again and 

left the place, therefore, the entire recovery proceedings  are not plausible. 

Even, there is no medical report available on record which proves that Sania 

Najam has received any injury and, the laceration if, acknowledged as per 

the  statement  of  PW-8  referred  in  Exh.PW8,  is  considered  to  be  simple  in 

nature  and  the  same  does  not  cover  the  requirement  of  Sec.324  PPC  and 

hence the punishment awarded U/S 324 PPC is not justified.  

26. 

I have gone  through the defence version  taken by the appellant,  in 

which  he  stated  that  he  and  his  wife  Sania  Najam  were  quarrelling  and 

baby Izza deceased  at that time was with Sania Najam PW-4, her parents 

started scuffle with him, resultantly baby Izza fell down from the hands of 

Sania  Najam.  This  part  of  the  statement  if  put  in  juxtaposition  with  the 

opinion  given  by  PW-6  Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer,  where  he  stated  that  it  is 

not affirmed that deceased had fallen on the ground or her head banged on 

the floor, however he acknowledged that injuries received by the deceased 

may be caused by falling on the floor herself. Even he has admitted that the 

word  “forcefully”  mentioned  in  the  post-mortem  prepared  by  him  was  on 

the  basis  of  information  given  to  him  by  the  police  and  the  final  opinion 

referred by him is as under:-   

“It is correct to suggest that the nature of injury does not 
suggest that it was inflicted upon or the deceased herself 
fallen on the ground.” 

The  above  referred  opinion  given  by  the  doctor  during  the  postmortem, 

gives  rise  to  a  situation  where  the  technical  expert  like,  Dr.  Muhammad 

Naseer,  PW-6,  could  not  confirm  the  real  cause  of  death.  It  is  settled 

principle  of  law  that,  the  medical  evidence  is  supportive  evidence  through 

which the prosecution can confirm the ocular account with regard to receipt 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[16]                            

of injury, but it did not give the identification of accused. Reliance is placed 

on 2015 PCr.LJ 820 [Lah] (Saif Ullah and 2 others VS The State), 

wherein it is held that:- 

“….it is by now well settled law that medical evidence is a 
type of supporting evidence, which may confirm the ocular 
account with regard to receipt of injury, nature of the injury, 
kind of weapon used in the occurrence but it would not 
identify the assailant. Reference in this context may be 
made  to  the  cases  of  ‘Muhammad  Tasaweer  v.  Hafiz 
Zulkarnain and 2 others’ (PLD 2009 SC 53), ‘Altaf Hussain v. 
Fakhar Hussain and another’ (2008 SCMR 1103) and ‘Mursal 
Kazmi alias Qamar Shah and another v. The State’ (2009 
SCMR 1410)” 

It  is  also  held  in  2015 PCr.LJ 838 [Peshawar](Azmat Ullah alias 

Daddi VS Pir Badshah and another), that:- 

“13.  As regards medical evidence, the same can only 
confirm the ocular evidence with regard to the seat of injury, 
nature of the injury, kind of weapon used in the incident, but 
in absence of substantive evidence, the same would not be 
enough to connect the accused with commission of offence.” 

Similarly, when the medical evidence suggests other view, which creates a 

contradiction  between  ocular  evidence,  then  benefit  of  doubt  comes  on 

record and it is also settled proposition of law that, when two versions come 

on  record  while  interpreting  the  medical  and  ocular  account,  the  version 

supported  with  medical  evidence  can  be  appreciated,  but  where  it  is  not 

certain, then benefit goes to accused. Reliance in this regard is placed upon 

2015 PCr.LJ 1800 [Lah] (Muhammad Mushtaq VS The State), 

wherein it is held that:- 

“15.  ….In view of the statement of the Medical Officer 
wherein  a  definite  opinion  has  been  given,  the  ocular 
account is belied by medical evidence. Such contradiction 
makes the prosecution case doubtful. Reliance in this regard 
is placed upon the dictum of law laid down by the august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of ‘Abdul Majid alias 
Jaidu, etc. v. The State’ (1996 SCMR 333)”, wherein it has 
been held as under:- 

“Ocular  evidence  that  injuries  to  deceased  were 
inflicted by three convicts, would be reliable when it 
stands corroborated by medical evidence.” 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[17]                            

Similar view was affirmed by the august Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the case of ‘Mst. Jallan v. Muhammad Riaz and 
others’ (PLD 2003 SC 644), wherein it was observed:- 

“Contradiction between ocular evidence and medical 
evidence would create doubt prosecution case benefit 
of which would go to no one except the accused.” 

19.  The nutshell of the above discussion is that the 
prosecution has badly failed to substantiate its case against 
the appellant to the hilt and the learned trial Court was not 
justified  in  convicting  him  while  basin  upon  such 
untrustworthy/uncorroborated  evidence,  which  even 
otherwise is full of material contradictions and conviction 
passed by the learned trial court in the circumstances is 
against all canons of law recognized for the dispensation of 
criminal justice. As per dictates of law benefit of every doubt 
is to be extended in favour of the accused.” 

The  aforementioned  scenario  clearly  demonstrates  that  it  is  a  case  of  two 

versions and while assuming this fact to decide the instant matter, reliance 

is placed upon 2013 PCr.LJ 345 (Lal Bux VS Dhani Bux, etc.), 2012 PCr.LJ 

1139 (Iqbal Khan, etc. VS Inayat Ullah, etc.) and 2010 PCr.LJ 1850 

(Ghulam Rasool Shah VS State through SHO PS Garhi Doputta, 

etc.) whereas in the latter, it is held that:- 

“It  is  well  settled  principle  of  law  that  where  two 
interpretations  of  evidence  are  possible,  then  the  one 
favourable to accused should be adopted. This view finds 
support from the cases reported as Khushal and another v. 
The  State  [1971  SCMR  357],  State  through  Advocate-
General v. Farman Hussain and others [PLD 1995 SC 1], 
Karim Dad v. Zahir and others [2004 SC 36] and Tufail 
Hussain Shah v. The State [1994 SCR 275]. 

In Khushal and another v. The State [1971 SCMR 

357] it was held as under:-- 

“….. Where there are two possibilities open upon the 
evidence, the possibility which is more favourable to the 
accused must be accepted, if it otherwise fits in with the 
facts and circumstances of the case.”.  

In State through Advocate-General v. Farman Hussain 

and others [PLD 1995 SC 1] it was held that as under:-- 

“If any legal provision, which is to be relied upon in 
the  appraisement  of  evidence  and  is  open  to  two 
interpretations,  one  beneficial  to  the  accused  is  to  be 
adopted.” 

In Karim Dad v. Zahir and others [2004 SCR 36] it 

was held as under:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[18]                            

“…. When there be two possibilities open upon the 
evidence of the prosecution, the possibility which goes in 
favour of the accused should be accepted.”” 

27. 

It is the duty of the prosecution to prove the motive if the motive has 

been suggested in the alleged complaint, however from the bare reading of 

the Exh.PB, the motive referred is:- 

"۔

ہے اہو اجھگڑ سے ںلواو گھر ےمیر امیر سے جہو کی پٓا

"

However,  the  said  portion  which  reflects  the  motive  part  has  never  been 

corroborated  by  the  prosecution  through  any  independent  source  even  no 

witness  has  been  called  to  prove  this  factor  that  appellant  had  ever 

quarreled with his parents. Even the Inspector/Investigation Officer has not 

taken 

this  portion  very  seriously  nor  suggested  any 

independent 

corroboration, therefore, if the motive suggested by the prosecution has not 

been proved or onus has not been discharged by the prosecution, the same 

is  not  to  be  taken  into  account  while  convicting  any  accused.  Reliance  is 

placed  upon 2015 Cr.LJ 424 (Zafar VS The State), 2017 YLR 469 (Tanvir 

Ahmad VS The State)  and 2013 Cr.LJ 1560 (Muhammad Ramzan VS 

The State) wherein it is held that:-  

“The prosecution failed to prove the motive against the 
appellant beyond shadow of doubt and as such the motive 
remained shrouded in mystery. No doubt the prosecution is 
not obliged to suggest motive in each and every case which 
admittedly involves the element of assessment but once it is 
alleged, it has to be proved by the prosecution by producing 
convincing  and  corroborative  evidence  which  admittedly 
could not be produced by the prosecution as discussed 
earlier.  Even  otherwise,  the  motive  alleged  does  not 
correspond  with  the  mode  and  manner  of  occurrence, 
number of injuries sustained by the deceased which clearly 
suggests that there were some other circumstances resulting 
in occurrence but not disclosed” 

28. 

In order to reach at a just and fair conclusion, it has to be seen that 

whether minor Izza was fallen on the floor or her head was banged against 

carpeted floor. The only testimony available from the independent source is 

the  evidence  of  the  doctor,  who  has  not  suggested  that  injury  has  been 

caused due to forceful bang of the head on a floor and neither rule out the 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[19]                            

other  view,  therefore,  a  serious  doubt  emerges  from  such  situation,  even 

otherwise all the three witnesses, Najam Iqbal PW-2, Bilal Najam PW-3 and 

Sania Najam PW-4, are against the appellant to prove the incident and are 

interested witnesses, hence, the medical evidence give rise to another view 

wherein  the  value  of  medical  evidence  has  been  explained  in  judgments 

passed by different Courts in 2015 PCr.LJ 838 (Azmat Ullah alias Daddi VS 

Pir Badshah and another), 2015 PCr.LJ 820 (Saif Ullah and 2 others VS The 

State) and 2015 PCr.LJ 1800 (Muhammad Mushtaq VS The State) 

wherein as per dictum laid down by the High Court in the latter judgment, it 

is held that:- 

“15.  Though as per contents of the crime report, the 
stance of the prosecution is that the deceased was done to 
death by the appellant along with his co-accused (since 
acquitted) while causing hatchets/chhuras blows, but it is 
worth mentioning here that Lady Dr. Farzana Shaheen 
(P.W.6) who conducted postmortem on the dead body of the 
deseased has opined in categorical terms that the injuries 
were result of blunt weapon. In view of the statement of the 
Medical Officer wherein a definite opinion has been given, 
the ocular account is belied by medical evidence. Such 
contradiction makes the prosecution case doubtful. Reliance 
in this regard is placed upon the dictum of law laid down by 
the august Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of ‘Abdul 
Majid alias Jaidu, etc. v. The State’ (1996 SCMR 333).” 

29. 

This Court, while considering the entire aspect of the case, is of the 

view  that,  it  is  a  case  of  two  versions,  motive  has  not  been  proved  and 

recovery has been disbelieved, especially in the circumstance when the star 

witness  PW-4,  who  claims  to  be  a  recipient  of  injury,  her  injury  has  not 

been  clearly  proved  from  the  record,  rather  the  same  was  suppressed  as 

the attack of Churri, has not been clearly demonstrated from her statement 

especially when she defended the attack by her right hand and received the 

injury  on  the  left  hand,  therefore,  the  entire  alleged  incident  comes  under 

doubt.  

30. 

At  last,  I  have  gone  through  the  statement  of  appellant  recorded 

U/S  340(2)  Cr.P.C.  and  the  cross-examination  by  the  prosecution,  the 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[20]                            

appellant  has  denied  all  the  suggestions  put  forward  by  the  prosecution 

especially  picking  up  of  a  fruit  cutting  Churri  from  a  dressing  table,  the 

attack and picking up of baby Izza who was lying on the bed and the act of 

banging of her head against a carpeted floor. I have also gone through the 

statement of appellant got recorded U/S 342 Cr.P.C. where question No.10 

has  specifically  been  asked  by  the  prosecution  as  to  “why this case has 

been registered against you and why these PWs have deposed against 

you?”  In  reply  to  these  questions  the  appellant  stated  that  he  was  not 

arrested from the house shown by the police nor any recovery was effected 

on his pointation, the recovery is fabricated and planted one to make a false 

case against him in the police proceeding shown to have been made in this 

behalf  are  allegedly  incorrect  and  bogus.  However,  when  question  No.13 

has  been  asked  as  to  “whether you want to say anything else”,  he  has 

repeated his version which was got recorded by him U/S 340(2) Cr.P.C. that 

minor  had  fallen  on  the  ground  from  the  hands  of  Sania  Najam  during  a 

scuffle,  which  took  place  because  he  wanted  to  go  to  his  parents’  house 

with his family but Sania Najam and her family refused to  agree  to it. For 

the aforesaid rationale, it has been observed from record that appellant has 

raised his defence plea on record by way of his statement U/S 342 Cr.P.C. 

r/w 340(2) Cr.P.C., such statement which falls under defence plea give rise 

to a reasonable possibility of appellant’s innocence, however the concept of 

appreciation  of  defence  plea  has  been  referred  in  2013 PCr.LJ 1858 

(Taj Muhammad VS Bacha Muhammad and another) and 2013 SCMR 106 

(Mehboob-ur-Rehman VS The State), wherein in the latter judgment, it 

has been held that:- 

“…..it is well settled that the accused while raising a defence 
plea is only required to show that there is a reasonable 
possibility of his innocence and the standard of proof is not 
similar to that as expected of the prosecution which must 
prove its case beyond any reasonable doubt.” 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[21]                            

31. 

The  entire  evidence  referred  above  clearly  demonstrates  that  it  is a 

case  of  serious  doubt  and  a  matter  of  two  versions,  where  a  substantial 

doubt  emerges  on  record,  in  such  like  situation  when  there  is  a  serious 

doubt,  the  benefit  of  doubt  ultimately  goes  to  accused.  Reliance  in  this 

regard  is  placed  upon 2014 PCr.LJ 928 (Muhammad Hanif alias Pocho VS 

The State),  2014 PCr.LJ 783 (Ali Haider, etc. VS The State), 2014 PCr.LJ 

885 (Nawab Ali VS The State), 2014 PCr.LJ 669 (Muhammad Ali alias Faisal 

VS The State), 2014 PCr.LJ 1123 (Hajan, etc. VS The State), 2014 PCr.LJ 

1707 (Muhammad Bux alias Papoo Shar VS The State), 2015 PCr.LJ 369 

(Ayub VS Munsif, etc.), 2015 PCr.LJ 735 (Iqbal VS The State, etc.), 2015 

PCr.LJ 416 (Sami Ullah, etc. VS The State, etc.), 2014 PCr.LJ 1727 (Mir 

Muhammad VS The State, etc.), 2014 PCr.LJ 354 (Siyar Muhammad VS The 

State, etc.) and 2014 PCr.LJ 69 (Nawaz alias Najee VS The State, etc.). 

Similarly, it has been observed from record that learned Trial Court has not 

appreciated  the  evidence  in  its  true  perspective,  rather  reproduced  the 

testimony  of  PW-2,  Najam  Iqbal,  PW-3,  Bilal  Najam  and  PW-4,  Mst.  Sania 

Najam, even the learned Trial Court failed to appreciate the evidence as no 

discussion  has  been  made  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  to  corroborate  the 

testimonies  from  any  independent  source.  It  has  further  been  observed 

from  judgment  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  that  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge, has not considered the relationship of all the three witnesses, rather 

excluded  the  concept  of  interested  witnesses,  although  there  is  a  serious 

contradiction available in the evidence of PW-4, Sania Najam, regarding her 

injury,  which  creates  doubt  upon  the  entire  prosecution  case.  The  learned 

Trial  Court  while  relying  upon  the  testimony  of  PW-9,  Muhammad  Idrees, 

Sub-Inspector,  PW-5  Ahsan  Ullah,  Constable,  regarding  recovery  of Churri 

Exh.P8, from the kitchen of ground floor of House No.42, Street 85, G-13/1 

Islamabad, as well as while considering the evidence of Sania Najam PW-4, 

Bilal  Najam  PW-3  an  Najam  Iqbal  PW-2,  convicted  the  appellant,  wherein 

the  corroboration  is  absent  in  the  entire  prosecution  evidence,  even 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[22]                            

otherwise  the  recovery  is  not  believable,  especially,  when  the  place  of 

recovery was not locked, rather the Churri was taken up from kitchen, being 

a common fruit cutting Churri, which is easily available in the market. These 

factors clearly demonstrate that the learned Trial Court has not appreciated 

the  evidence  in  accordance  with  the  principles  laid  down  by  different 

authoritative  judgments  of  the  High  Courts  as  well  as  Supreme  Court,  the 

main  principle  of  appreciation  of  evidence  has  been  referred  in  2013 

PCr.LJ 1650 (Jafar and 6 others VS The State) wherein it is held that:- 

“The proper and legal way of dealing with a criminal case is 
that the Court should first discuss the prosecution case 
evidence in order to come to an independent finding with 
regard  to  the  reliability  of  the  prosecution  witnesses, 
particularly the eyewitnesses and the probability of the story 
told by them, and then examine the statement of the 
accused under section 342, Cr.P.C., statement under section 
340(2), Cr.P.C. and the defence evidence. If the Court 
disbelieves/rejects/excludes  from  consideration  the 
prosecution  evidence,  then  the  Court  must  accept  the 
statement of the accused as a whole without scrutiny. If the 
statement under section 342, Cr.P.C. is exculpatory, then he 
must be acquitted. If the statement under section 342 
Cr.P.C.  believed  as  a  whole,  constitutes  some  offence 
punishable under the Code/law, then the accused should be 
convicted for that offence only. In case of counter versions, 
if  the  Court  believes  prosecution  evidence  and  is  not 
prepared to exclude the same from consideration, it will not 
straightaway convict the accused but will review the entire 
evidence including the circumstances appearing in the case 
at close before reaching at a conclusion regarding the truth 
or  falsity  of  the  defence  plea/version.  All  the  factors 
favouring  belief  in  the  accusation  must  be  placed  in 
juxtaposition to the corresponding factors favouring the plea 
in defence and the total effect should be estimated in 
relation to the question, viz is the plea/version raised by the 
accused  satisfactorily  established  by  the  evidence  and 
circumstances appearing in the case? If the answer be in the 
affirmative, then the Court must accept the plea of the 
accused and act accordingly. If the answer to the question 
be in the negative, then the Court will not reject the defence 
plea as being false but will go a step further to find out 
whether or not there is yet a reasonable possibility of 
defence plea/version being true. If the Court finds that 
although the accused has failed to establish his plea/version 
to the satisfaction of the Court but his plea might reasonably 
be true, even then the Court must accept his plea and acquit 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[23]                            

or convict him accordingly. [PLD 1994 SC 879 (Ashiq Hussain 
VS The State)]”  

32. 

In view of above background and reasons noted above, I am of the 

view that the entire murder case is of two versions, which was brought on 

record  by  the  prosecution  as  well  as  by  the  defence  side,  recovery  is 

disbelieved  on  the  ground  that  the  place  of  recovery  was  open  and  no 

person  was  in  occupation  of  the  said  house  from  where  the  Churri  was 

recovered, although the recovered Churri has been taken into custody from 

a kitchen of the said house, even without the presence of the residents of 

the said house. The entire case brought on record by the prosecution give 

rise  to  a  different  view  in  the  light  of  evidence  got  recorded  by 

Dr. Muhammad Naseer, PW-6, wherein he has not ruled out the possibility 

of the injury caused to deceased Izza due to fall on the floor and even not 

confirmed that the injury was caused by banging the head of deceased Izza 

on  the  carpeted  floor,  hence,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  instant  matter 

created a doubt in the mind of a prudent man, where a possibility of falling 

on  floor  could  not  be  excluded  but  all  these  factors  have  not  been 

appreciated by the learned Trial Court. In last, the motive which has been 

specifically  framed  in  the  instant  matter  has  not  been  confirmed  from  any 

independent source, even the Investigation Agency has not investigated the 

same,  therefore,  the  minimum  threshold  of  doubt  emerges  from  record 

gives possibility of defence plea, therefore, capital punishment could not be 

awarded. 

33. 

It  is  a  settled  law  that  if  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  the 

entire  case  without  any  minor  contradiction  and  the  chain  of  evidence  is 

complete  in  entire  manner  then  the  conviction  sustains,  whereas  I  am  of 

the  clear  view  that  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  the  case  against  the 

appellant  with  entire  clarity  and  benefit  of  doubt  goes  to  the  appellant. 

Therefore,  the  conviction  awarded  under  section  302(b)  PPC  read  with 

324  PPC  along  with  fine  to  the  appellant  vide  judgment  dated  27.07.2016 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.159/16  

[24]                            

passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-IV  (West),  Islamabad, 

is  hereby  set-aside  on  the  basis  of  benefit  of  doubt  and  the  appeal  is 

allowed. The appellant is acquitted and be released forthwith if not required 

in  any  other  case.  Record  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  as  well  as  judgment 

passed  by  this  Court,  be  sent  to  the  learned  Trial  Court  for  further 

necessary action.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 23rd May, 2017. 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting. 

Khalid Z. 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
