ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 4501/2021 

Aqeel Ahmed 
VS    
Mst. Zunaira Amjad and others  

Petitioner by       : 

Mr. Sultan Ahmed Jamshed, Advocate. 

Respondents by  : 

Syed Adil Safdar Gardezi, Advocate. 

Date of hearing     : 

10.01.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.   Through the instant writ petition, the  Petitioner 

(Aqeel  Ahmed)  assailed  Order  &  Decree  dated  27.11.2021,  passed  by  learned 

Judge  Family  Court-West,  Islamabad  whereby  Respondent  No.1’s  suit  for 

dissolution of marriage on the basis of Khullah has been decreed.  

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  inter alia,  submitted  that  the  impugned 

order  has  been  passed  in  a  slipshod  manner  without  adopting  legal  process;  that 

Petitioner was technically knocked out and fair trial has not been conducted by the 

learned  trial  Court.  The  main  contention  was  that  on  30.09.2021,  the  Petitioner 

produced  his  counsel  and  sought  time  for  written  statement  which  was  filed  on 

11.10.2021  along  with  a  separate  suit  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights.  Learned 

Trial Court fixed the case for personal attendance of the parties on 03.11.2021 but 

unfortunately,  he  got  burned  and,  therefore,  could  not  appear  due  to  which  he 

sought  an  adjournment;  and  that  on  19.11.2021,  the  Petitioner  could  not  appear 

because of his own incapacity due to burns coupled with the ailment of his mother 

who got seriously ill. On 26.11.2021, due to hospitalization of his mother, he filed 

another  application  for  adjournment,  however,  learned  Trial  Court  adjourned  the 

case to the very next day and on the said day, passed the Impugned Order without 

affording  any  opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  Petitioner.  Learned  counsel  for 

Petitioner has relied on the cases of Mst. Dilshad Sultana VS Noor Muhammad, 

etc  PLD  1993  Quetta  1,  Muhammad  lahrashib  VS  ghulam  Ahmed  Choudhary 

through  legal  heirs  and  others  PLD  2019  Islamabad  544  and  Muhammad 

Andleeb Raza VS Muhammad nazar and another 2019 YLR 1974.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P. No.4501/2021 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents  opposed  the  arguments  of  the 

Petitioner  and  submitted  that  the  impugned  order  was  passed  after  taking  into 

consideration  all the facts  and  record  and does  not suffer  from  any  illegality  and 

that the order of Khullah is neither revocable nor appealable. Learned counsel for 

the Respondent No. 1 submitted that the Petitioner filed his suit for restitution of 

conjugal rights on 31.07.2021, however, he failed to appear on even a single date 

in  such  proceedings  nor  did  he  appear  in  the  suit  filed  by  Respondent  No.1  for 

dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of  Khullah  despite  abundant  opportunities, 

which  shows  his  non-seriousness  and  disinterest  in  reconciliation.  As  such,  he 

contended that the learned Family Court rightly declared the pre-trial reconciliation 

proceedings as having failed.  

4. 

Arguments advanced on behalf of learned counsel for the parties have been 

heard and record perused with their able assistance.  

5. 

There  is  no  dispute  that  the  decree  passed  on  the  basis  of  Khullah  is  not 

appealable  in  terms  of  Section  14(2)  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  (“Act  of 

1964”) apparently for the reasons that a wife cannot be compelled to live with the 

husband  against  her wishes  and  secondly  to  protect  her  from cost  and  prolonged 

litigation.   

6. 

It appears that the only cause of grievance agitated by the Petitioner in this 

Petition against the Impugned Judgment & Decree is that the learned Family Court 

did  not  allow  his  request  for  adjournment  of  pre-trial  reconciliation  proceedings 

despite cogent reasons. 

7. 

It is trite law that where a statute does not provide appeal against decision of 

a Court, constitutional jurisdiction is not amenable only on the ground to reassess 

the evidence or record.  Therefore, this Court will not go into appraisal of facts as 

to  whether  or  not  the  Petitioner  had  made  out  a  case  for  adjournment  before  the 

learned Family Court.  

8.  What is relevant is that the learned Family Court gave the Petitioner several 

opportunities  to  appear  before  the  Court  for  reconciliation  proceedings.  The 

Respondent No. 1 was present on each and every date, however, the Petitioner was 

unable  to  appear  on  any  date  for  one  reason  or  another.  The  Respondent  No.  1 

recorded her statement before the learned Family Court wherein she categorically 

submitted in no uncertain terms that she has developed hatred toward her husband 

and that it is now not possible for her to live with him within the limits prescribed 

 
 
3 

W.P. No.4501/2021 

by  Allah.  She  expressed  her  willingness  to  return  the  dower  amount  already 

received by her and requested for her marriage with the Petitioner to be dissolved 

on the basis of Khullah.  In such circumstances, the learned Family Court reached 

the correct decision by granting Khullah to the Respondent No. 1.   

9. 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Saddiq  Hussain  VS  Khurshid  Fatima,  1978 

SCMR 130, the apex Court held that as the petitioner had not shown any interest in 

the suit, the fact that the petitioner’s [husband] father was questioned on behalf of 

the  petitioner  at  the  pre-trial  reconciliation  proceedings  would  at  best  be  an 

irregularity which in no event changed the outcome of the suit, therefore, the High 

Court would not have been justified in interfering with the family court’s judgment 

on this limited ground in exercise of Constitutional Jurisdiction.  In light of such 

ruling, I find that no irregularity has been pointed out by the learned counsel for 

the  Petitioner,  which  would  vitiate  the  proceedings  before  the  learned  Family 

Court when multiple opportunities had been given to the Petitioner to participate in 

the  pre-trial  reconciliation  proceedings  after  which  the  Respondent  No.  1’s 

statement  was  recorded  by  the  learned  Family  Court,  whereby  she  made  it 

abundantly clear that she has developed a deep aversion to the Petitioner.  In such 

circumstances, no Court is empowered to compel a wife to continue with a hateful 

union.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  material 

irregularity  or  jurisdictional  defect  in  the  Impugned  Judgment  &  Decree  which 

would warrant interference by this Court in its Constitutional Jurisdiction.   

10.  The case of Haji Muhammad Ismail VS Judge, Family Court, Jhang and 

another,  1981  CLC  243  cited  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  does  not 

advance  his  case  as  the  Honorable  Lahore  Court  held  that  no  further  indulgence 

can  be  given  to  the  petitioner  in  such  case  after  he  had  failed  to  appear  despite 

being  given  six  opportunities  for  personal  appearance  for  pre-trial  reconciliation 

proceedings between the parties. As such, his non-appearance was deemed to have 

proved  his  disinterest  in  the  reconciliation  proceedings.  Therefore,  to  this  extent 

this case does not aid the Petitioner in his case before this Court. 

11.  However, the Honorable Lahore High Court set aside the ex-parte decree of 

Khullah  in  this  case  and  remanded  the  matter  back  to  the  Family  Court  with  a 

direction to proceed further in accordance with 10(4) of the Act of 1964. However, 

it is important to observe that the law has undergone amendments since the time of 

 
4 

W.P. No.4501/2021 

the said ruling. The following proviso has been added to Section 10(4) of the Act 
of 1964 by way of Family Courts (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002:-  

“Provided that  notwithstanding  any  decision or judgment 

of  any  court  or  tribunal,  the  Family  Court  in  a  suit  for 

dissolution  of  marriage,  if  reconciliation  fails,  shall  pass 

decree for dissolution of marriage forthwith and shall also 

restore to the husband the Haq Mehr received by the  wife 

in consideration of marriage at the time of marriage” 

12. 

It is now settled law that in a case for Khullah, the Family Court is required 

to pass decree for Khullah forthwith under the proviso to Section 10(4) of the Act 

of  1964  in  the  event  of  failure  of  pre-trial  reconciliation  proceedings.  It  is  only 

when  dissolution  is  sought  on  the  basis  of  any  ground  other  than  by  way  of 

Khullah  that  the  provisions  of  Section  10(4)  of  the  Act  of  1964  are  resorted  to, 

after failure of pre-trial reconciliation proceedings. Be that as it may, the Petitioner 

in the instant case has not prayed for proceedings to take place in accordance with 

Section 10(4) of the Act. The facts of the other cases cited by the learned counsel 

for the Petitioner are altogether different and as such are not relevant to the case at 

hand. 

12.  Having  said  that  it  is  also  settled  law  that  Khullah  constitutes  a  single 

divorce. As such, the parties are free to remarry each other by performing Nikah, if 

they wish to reunite even after a decree of Khullah has been passed by Court. In 

such case the parties do not need a pronouncement from this Court in exercise of 

its  Constitutional  Jurisdiction  nor  can  this  Court  direct  the  parties  to  do  so.  

However,  it  may  be  seen  that  the  Respondent  No.  1  is  contesting  the  instant 

petition, which further indicates that there is no injustice caused to the Petitioner 

warranting interference by this Court in the Impugned Judgment & Decree passed 

by the learned Family Court.  

13.  Consequently, I see no force in this Petition, which is accordingly dismissed.  

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 19th of January, 2022. 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
