ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT  PETITION  NO.  3087  OF  2019 

Ch.  Muhammad  Shakoor 
VS 
Mst.  Raheela  Bibi, etc 

Petitioner by 

Mr.  Khurram  Mahmood  Qureshi,  Advocate. 

Respondent  by 

Mr. Ahmad  Nawaz  Bhatti,  Advocate. 

Date  of hearing 

15.07.2020. 

LUBNA SALEEM  PERVEZ,  J. 

Through this petition, Petitioner has invoked the 

jurisdiction  of this  Court  under  Article  199 of the  Constitution  of Pakistan,  1973, for 

seeking following prayer:- 

"Jn view of the above circumstances, it is most respectfully prayed  that the 
impugned order dated 05.07.2019 may kindly be set aside and the plaint  of 
the plaintiff may kindly ordered to be rejected being barred by law  in the 
interest of justice. 

Any other relief in favour  of appellant which this Honorable  Court 

deems just and proper  may also be granted  in the interest of justice.  ". 

2. 

Facts  of the  case  are  that  the  marriage  between  the  petitioner  and  respondent 

was  solemnized  on  21.07.2018  against  the  dower  of Rs.  1,50,000/- and  2 tolas  gold 

ornaments  to  be  given  by  the  petitioner,  however,  due  to  unpleasant  and  strained 

relations,  parties  were  constrained  to  live  apart.  The  respondent  then  filed  suit  for 

recovery  of dower  and  maintenance  allowance  as  per  Nikhanama.  The  petitioner  in 

return challenged the maintainability of the suit under Muslim Family Law Ordinance, 

1961  by filing application for rejection of plaint u/o 7  Rule  11  CPC on the ground that 

both  the  parties  are  nationals  of Azad  Jammu  &  Kashmir,  hence,  ousted  from  the 

jurisdiction  of  Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

Ordinance,  1961 ).  Learned  Judge,  Family  Court  dismissed  the  said  application  vide 

order dated 05.07.2019, hence, present petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  assailing  the  impugned  order  dated 

05.07.2019  submitted  that  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court  has  not  appreciated  the 

important aspect that both the parties are nationals of Azad Jammu & Kashmir having 

permanent  residence  at  Post  office  Chikothi,  Tehsil  &  District  Hatianbala  AJK, 

therefore, they cannot be considered as residents of Pakistan. Learned counsel referred 

Section 1(2) of the Ordinance,  1961  and submitted that according to its Section  1  it is 

Page  2  of 6 

W.P.No.  3087/2019 

only  applicable  to  Muslim  citizens  of Pakistan;  that  to  determine  the jurisdiction  of 

Courts in Pakistan,  Section 5  along with  schedule and sections 6, 7  &  26( 1 )(2) of the 

Family Courts Act,  1964 (hereinafter referred to as Act,  1964) are to be read together. 

He then referred to Section 5  of the Act,  1964 which defines the jurisdiction  of Family 

Court.  He  further  argued  that  Nikahnama  and  CNIC,  issued  by  Government  of 

Pakistan on  16.12.2014, also  contains petitioner's  National  Identity  Card  number  i.e. 

82202-5649633-3  and  family  No.  X634N2  and  also  reflects  petitioner's  permanent 

address  as  of AJK;  that  learned  Judge  Family  Court  has  exercised  its  jurisdiction 

arbitrarily and has passed the impugned order without applying his judicious  mind and 

therefore, the impugned  order  is liable to be  set-aside. Learned  counsel  for petitioner 

in  support  of  his  contentions  relied  on  judgments  reported  as  Majid  Hussain  VS 

Farrah Naz nd others  (2017 YLR 84 (Islamabad) and Rehmat  Ullah  VS  Mst. Shamim 

Akhtar and another (1997 CLC 2019 (Peshawar). 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the  marriage 

between  the  parties  has  been  solemnized  and  registered  with  Union  Council  Bhara 

Kahu,  Islamabad;  that  the  petitioner's  CNIC  has  also  been  issued  by  NADRA, 

Government  of  Pakistan  for  Azad  Hakoomat  Riasat  Jammu  &  Kashmir;  that  the 

parties  are  living  in  Bhara  Kahu,  Islamabad  before  their  marriage  and  have  same 

residential address  in their  official  documents, hence, the  laws of Pakistan  relating to 

family matters are  duly  applicable to  their  dispute  as such the  learned Judge,  Family 

Court  competently  exercised  the jurisdiction  in  Pakistan  under  the  Act,  1964 in  the 

matter. He lastly submitted that the learned Judge, Family Court has rightly and legally 

dismissed  the  application  for  rejection  of  plaint  filed  u/o  7  Rule  11  CPC  as  the 

intention behind filing of this application was to harass the present respondent/plaintiff 

in the suit. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard. Record perused. 

The  case  of the  petitioner  is  that  since  both  the  parties  are  citizens  of Azad 

Jammu & Kashmir, therefore, the case of the parties is  outside the scope of the family 

laws prevailing in Pakistan  namely The Muslim Family Law Ordinance,  1961  and the 

Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  etc..  Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  in  this  regard 

emphasized  on  section  1  (2)  of  the  Ordinance,  1961,  according  to  which  the 

Ordinance, 1961, extends  to the whole of Pakistan, and applied to all Muslim citizens 

of Pakistan,  wherever  they may be. As per his arguments the  subject of Azad Jammu 

& Kashmir being not citizens of Pakistan are out of the ambit of Ordinance,  1961  and 

Act,  1964.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  pressed  the  following  sections  of 

Ordinance,  1961  and Act,  1964 to explain the extent of jurisdiction  of Family Courts 

! 

Page  3  of 6 

W.P.No.  3087/2019 

in Pakistan:- 

The Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961: 

1.  Short  title, extent,  application  and  commencement.-  (1)  This Ordinance 

may be called the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961. 

(2)  It  extends  to  the  whole  of Pakistan,  and  applies  to  all  Muslim  citizens 

of Pakistan,  wherever they may be. 

5.  Jurisdiction.-[(l)]  Subject to the provisions  Jf the Muslim Family Laws 
Ordinance, 1961, and the Conciliation Courts Ordinance, 1961, the Family  Courts 
shall  have  exclusive jurisdiction  to  entertain,  hear  and  adjudicate  upon  matters 
specified in [Part I of the Schedule]. 

(2)  Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 (Act  V of 1898),  the Family Court shall  have jurisdiction  to  try  the  offences 
specified in Part II of the Schedule,  where one of the spouses is victim of an offence 
committed by the other. 

(3) The High Court may with the approval of the Government,  amend the 

Schedule so as to alter, delete or add any entry thereto.] 

26. Power to make  rules.  (1) Government may,  by notification in the official 

Gazette, make rules to carry into effect the provisions  of this Act. 

(2)  Without prejudice  to  the generality  of the provisions  contained  in sub  
section (1),  the rules so made may, among other matters, provide for the procedure, 
which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions  of this Act,  to be followed  by the 
Family Courts. 

Schedule  to Section  5 

{Part I] 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 

Dissolution of marriage including Khula. 
Dower. 
Maintenance. 
Restitution of conjugal rights. 
Custody of children and the visitation rights of parents  to meet them. 
Guardianship. 

The  West Pakistan  Family  Courts Rules,  1965: 

6. 

The  Court  which  shall  have jurisdiction  to  try  a  suit  will  be  that 

within the local limits of which- 

(a)  the cause of action wholly or in part  has arisen, or 
(b) where the parties  reside or last resided together: 

Provided  that  in  suits for  dissolution  of  marriage  or  dower,  the  Court 
within  the  local  limits  of  which  the  wife  ordinarily  resides  shall  also  have 
jurisdiction. 

7.  (1)  Suits  triable  under  the  act  shall  be  instituted,  and  be  heard  and 
tried by,  the Court of the civil judge,  havingjurisdiction  as provided  in rule 6,  and 
where in any district  there  is no such  Court,  such suits shall  be instituted  in and 
be  heard and  tried  by  the  Court of the District Judge  or  the Additional  District 
Judge. 

(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-rules  (1)  the  Court  of 
District Judge  may  send for  the record  and proceedings  of any suit pending for 

Page  4  of  6 

W.P.No.  3087/2019 

trial  in the  Court of the any  court  and  hear and  try  the·  suit  itself  or  refer  it for 
trial  to any  other  Court  within  the  District,  and  thereupon  the  court  of District 
Judge or the Court to which such suit  is so transferred, as the case may be,  shall 
have jurisdiction  to hear and try the suit. ", 

7. 

All the above provisions  of law have  already been  discussed  at  length  in various 

judgments  of the Hon'ble  Supreme Court as well as Hon'ble  High Courts. This Court in 

the case titled as Majid  Hussain  VS  Farrah  Naz  (2017  YLR  84) has  also elaborated all 

the above provisions  as well as all the case law concerning the issue. The facts of Majid 

Hussain's  case  ibid  are  that  both  husband  and  wife  were  citizens  of Azad  Jammu  & 

Kashmir; got married  in Azad  Jammu  & Kashmir;  when relations  turned  sour the wife 

filed  suit  for  Dissolution  of Marriage  by  way  of Khula  before  the  Senior  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad; the husband filed application u/s  1  (2) and 5  of Family Courts Act,  1964, read 

with Rule 5  of Family  Courts Rules,  1965, to contest the Khu/a  case  on the ground that 

parties are permanent  resident  of AJ&K and their marriage is solemnized over there and 

the suit for conjugal rights by the Husband is  also pending at Rawalakot. His application 

was dismissed by the learned Judge Family Court which order was challenged by way of 

Petition  before  this  Court.  This  Hon'ble  Court,  on  the  above  facts,  relied  on  Hon'ble 

Supreme Court's judgment  passed in lnamul  Haq VS  Chairman, FPSC, Islamabad  (2005 

SCMR 622) held that since  the wife came from  AJ&K  after her marriage  broke down to 

live in Islamabad  would  not make her the citizen of Pakistan  u/s  14B ibid. The Hon'ble 

High Court while concluding the judgment  held as under:- 

"25.  Now,  if any  one  or  both  the parties  to  a  suit  under  the provisions  of the  West 
Pakistan  Family  Courts Act,  1964, are not citizens  of Pakistan,  that may  not  be reason 
enough to return the plaint  or to dismiss the suit if a part  of the cause  of action  accrued 
to  the  plaintiff within  the jurisdiction  of  the  Family  Court  where  the  suit  has  been 
instituted,  or  the  defendant  resides  within  the jurisdiction  of such  a  Court.  This,  in  my 
view is the ratio in the cases of Masood Ahmad Malik v.  Fouzia Farhana Quddus (supra) 
and Anil  Mussarat  Hussain  v.  Muhammad Anwar  Naseem  (supra). If we are to proceed 
on  hypothesis  and  imagine  a foreign  Muslim  couple getting  married  abroad  under  the 
laws  of a foreign  country  and  then  the  wife  coming  to  Pakistan  and filing  a  suit for 
dissolution  of marriage  before  a  Family  Court  in  Pakistan  -  would  the  Family  Court 
assume jurisdiction  simply  because wife happens to be here. In my opinion not, unless a 
cause  of action  recognized  by law accrues within  the jurisdiction  of the  local  courts  or 
the husband submits to the jurisdiction  of such local courts. " 

Thus accruing of cause of action or residence of the parties  or their last residence within 

the local limits of any  Court are necessary  factors under Rule  6  of Family  Court Rules, 

1965, for  assuming jurisdiction  to  try  the  suit under  the  provisions  of Ordinance,  1961 

and Act, 1964. 

8. 

Latest judgment  on the  issue  under  consideration  is  in the  case  titled  as Di/shad 

Bibi  VS  The State  (PLD 2019 Islamabad  476) wherein the parties to the case admittedly 

belonged to  AJ&K  but  got  married  in  Islamabad  which  was  registered  with  the  Union 

Council Islamabad; the wife holds CNIC issued under section  14  of NADRA  Ordinance, 

2000; when  husband  contracted  second  marriage  without  obtaining  her  permission,  the 
• 

Page  5  of  6 

W.P.No.  3087/2019 

wife  filed  complaint  against  her  husband  under  section  6  (5)  of the  Ordinance,  1961, 

which  was  allowed;  he  was  found  guilty  of  the  offence  and  was  then  convicted  and 

sentenced. The  appeal  of the  husband  was  allowed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge on the sole ground of lack of jurisdiction  by holding that being the citizen of AJK, 

the  husband  could  not  be  treated  as  citizen  of Pakistan,  hence,  out  of the  purview  of 

section 1  (2) of the Ordinance,  1961. This Court set-aside the judgment  of the Additional 

Sessions  Judge  while  dilating  upon  the  aspect  of  issuance  of CINC  to  the  citizens  of 

AJ&K and held as under:- 

"A  National  Identity  Card  is,  therefore,  an acknowledgement  or a certification  by the 
State  of Pakistan  that  the person  to whom  it  is  issued  is  a citizen  of Pakistan  and  has 
to  be treated  as  such  unless  his  or  her  citizenship  is revoked  or  acknowledged  under 
the  Ordinance  of  1951  by  the  competent  authority  and  in  the  manner  prescribed 
therein.  It  is  noted  that  the  question  whether  or  not  a  person  holding  a  National 
Identity  Card  is  a  citizen  of Pakistan  can  only  be dealt  with  under  the  Ordinance  of 
1951 because  the  Ordinance  of 2000 does not empower  the Authority  to decide  such  a 
status. 

It has been further observed in the said judgment  that:- 

"13. 
In  the facts  and  circumstances  of the  case  in  hand,  it  is  an  admitted  position 
that  the  respondent,  regardless  of his place  of residence,  holds  a  National  Identity 
Card  issued  to  him  by  the  Authority  under  the  Ordinance  of 2000.  As  long  as  the 
National  Identity  Card  remains  valid  and  subsisting,  the  respondent  cannot  claim  to 
be  a person  who  is  not  a  citizen  of Pakistan.  The  marriage  was  contracted  between 
to  the  extent  of  the 
the  parties  and  duly  registered  in  Islamabad  and,  therefore, 
petitioner  the cause  of action  in the  context  of section  6 of the  Ordinance  of 1961 has 
arisen  in Islamabad.  ". 

9. 

The  facts  and  circumstances  of the  present  case  has  been  examined  keeping  in 

view  the  dictums  laid  down,  vide  above  cited judgments  of this  Court.  Admittedly  the 

parties  are  citizens  of  Azad  Jammu  &  Kashmir  and  the  respondent  was  living  in 

Islamabad prior  to  her  marriage  which  was  solemnized  and  registered  on  21.07.2018, 

with the Union Council Bhara Kahu, Islamabad, thus the cause of action arisen within the 

territorial limits of Islamabad.  There  is no denial of the  fact that the petitioner  has been 

issued  CNIC  bearing  No.  82202-5649633-3,  family  No.  X634N2,  under  the  NADRA 

Ordinance,  2000,  as  such,  in  view  of the  principle  laid  down  in Di/shad's  case  supra 

(PLD 2019 Islamabad  476), he has to be treated as citizen of Pakistan.  Majid Hussain's 

case  (2017  YLR  484)  relied  upon  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  is 

distinguishable on the ground that marriage of the parties in the said case solemnized and 

registered in Azad Jammu & Kashmir, as such, the cause of action to the petitioner arose 

in AJ&K and not in Pakistan.  Thus, In view of the admitted facts and the principles laid 

down in the above referred judgments  of this Court, I  am of the opinion that the learned 

Judge  Family  Court-III,·  Islamabad,  vide  her  order  dated  05.07.2019,  has  rightly 

dismissed  the  application  for  rejection  of  plaint  u/o  VII  rule  11  CPC  filed  by  the 

petitioner. 

Page  6  of  6 

W.P.No.  3087/2019 

10. 

For the foregoing reasons, impugned order dated 05.07.2019 passed by the learned 

Judge,  Family  Court,  East-Islamabad,  is based  on proper  appreciation  of facts  and  law 

and does not  suffer  from any  illegality,  infirmity or  irregularity,  hence,  same  is  upheld. 

Resultantly, instant petition, being devoid of any merit, is dismissed. 

Announced  in the Open Court on 28. 07.2020. 

(LUBNA SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

