ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.4476/2019 
Dr. Aamna Saleem Khan 
VS 
National University of Sciences & Technology, Islamabad & 4 others  

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Aaqib Siddique, Advocate.  

Respondents by: 

Mr. Aasim Shafi, Advocate.  

Date of Hearing: 

10.09.2020. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-    Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  called  in  question  Office  Order  as  well  as  letter  of  the  National 

University of Sciences & Technology, Islamabad, dated 15.10.2019 and 08.10.2019 

respectively, whereby services of the petitioner have been discontinued.  

2. 

Succinctly, Dr. Aamna Saleem Khan (petitioner) had been performing her 

services as Associate  Professor in  the School of Social Sciences and Humanities, 

National  University  of  Sciences  &  Technology,  Islamabad  since  03.12.2015.  The 

petitioner  verbally 

informed  HOD  Department  of  Behavioral  Sciences 

(Respondent  No.4)  that  she  is  expecting  in  early  August  of  2019,  the  doctor 

advised  her  to  take  rest  and  accordingly,  the  petitioner  applied  for  maternity 

leave  w.e.f.  05.08.2019  to  05.11.2019.  However,  on  08.10.2019,  the  Principal, 

School  of  Social  Sciences  and  Humanities  (Respondent  No.3)  advised  the 

petitioner through e-mail to resign before 20.10.2019 so as to provide a graceful 

exit,  else  termination  process  against  the  petitioner  would  be  initiated,  as  such, 

services of the petitioner have been terminated vide impugned office order, dated 

15.10.2019. Hence, the instant writ petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contended  that  as  per  the  rules  of 

respondent  University,  the  petitioner  is  entitled  for  maternity  leave  on  full  pay 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 2 

for a period of three (03) months,  but petitioner has been deprived of said right 

without  any  lawful  justification;  that  petitioner’s  pregnancy  was  free  from  any 

complications, though the constant stress at the hands of respondent University 

resulted into delivery through C-Section of the petitioner; that petitioner having 

been  an  employee  of  respondent  University  had  every  right  of  benefits  in 

accordance  with  law,  but  petitioner  has  been  subjected  to  injustice  in  shape  of 

passing of the impugned office orders, dated 15.10.2019 and 08.10.2019, which are 

liable  to  be  set-aside  and  respondent  University  may  be  directed  to  allow  the 

petitioner to perform her duties.  

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent University opposed the filing 

of  instant  writ  petition  on  the  grounds  that  services  of  petitioner  have  been 

discontinued keeping in view her poor performance and lack of interest towards 

her  profession;  that  petitioner  being  a  contract  employee  is  debarred  from 

approaching  this  Court  in  constitutional  jurisdiction,  as  such,  petitioner  has 

concealed  material  facts  from  this  Court,  therefore,  instant  writ  petition  is  not 

maintainable.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  was  appointed  as  Associate 

Professor in the School of Social Sciences and Humanities, National University of 

Science and Technology, Islamabad, whose  services  have been terminated vide 

order dated 15.10.2019 by the respondent University, however, the petitioner was 

on leave as she was expecting, due to the said reason Doctor advised her to take 

rest and accordingly respondent University has granted a maternity leave to the 

petitioner w.e.f 05.08.2019 to 05.11.2019, but her services were terminated during 

the said period. 

7.  While  considering  this  background,  the  primary  question  raised  before 

this  Court  in  constitutional  jurisdiction  is  as  to  whether  the  services  of  the 

petitioner could be terminated as she was on maternity leave. In order to resolve 

 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 3 

the controversy, I  have gone through the initial status of National University of 

Science  and  Technology,  which  was  established  under  University  of  Science  and 

Technology Act, 1997  and  as  such  the  employee  contract  dated  03.12.2015  of  the 

petitioner also refers Clause 2(II) in the following manner:- 

by 

“The aforesaid  appointment and employment shall be subject to  and 
governed 
NUST’s 
Statutes/Regulations/Policies etc prevailing at the time, as applicable 
to  NUST’s  employees,  and  by  Government  rules,  regulations  and 
policies etc.”  

Agreement 

and 

this 

8. 

  Similarly,  Clause  13(VIII)  deals  with  the  leave  in  the  terms  of  contract, 

which is as under:- 

“Leave  shall  be  admissible  in  accordance  with  NUST  Leave  Rules 
2013.  The  leave  at  FM”s  credit  shall  be  carried  forward  in  case  the 
contract is extended without any interruption. However, all leave at 
FM’s  credit  shall  lapse  on  the  date  of  final  expiry  or  termination  of 
leave  shall  be 
the  contract.  No  encashment  against  earned 
admissible.” 

9.  While  considering  the  above  position,  it  is  necessary  to  dilate  upon  the 

issue of status of these rules as to whether the National University of Science and 

Technology  Act,  1997  creates  an  exception  regarding  the  status  of  rules  of  the 

University, whereby this Court is persuaded by the unreported judgment of the 

apex  Court  passed  in  C.P  No.  495  of  2010  titled  as  “The  Rector  National 

University  of  Science  &  Technology  (NUST),  Islamabad  and  others  VS  Driver 

Muhammad  Akhtar,  whereby  it  has  been  held  that  the  Court  was,  therefore, 

interpreting the particular rule making power, while holding and as a matter of 

fact such requirements were fulfilled and the regulations were statutory.  I have 

no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  National  University  of  Sciences  and  Technology 

(Enforcement  of  Academic,  Service,  and  Financial  Matters)  Statutes,  2005)  are 

statutory  in  nature  and  they  were  framed  in  accordance  with  the  procedure 

prescribed in the statute. 

10. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  University  has  taken  the  stance  that 

petitioner  being  contract  employee  is  debarred  from  approaching  this  Court, 

 
 
 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 4 

hence, instant petition is not maintainable. However, the instant writ petition has 

been taken up by this Court while keeping in view the violation of fundamental 

rights of a woman and it is the primary duty of the constitutional Court to protect 

the fundamental rights of a citizen, especially a woman, who is going to become 

mother and she has been penalized for availing maternity leave, which otherwise 

is a condemnable act on the part of an employer and that too after granting her 

such  leave.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Court  while  exercising  extraordinary 

constitutional  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 

Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  cannot  throwaway  the  prayer  of  the  petitioner  on 

mere  technicalities.  In  this  regard,  I  am  fortified  with  the  view  rendered  by  the 

apex Court in a case reported as 2019 SCMR 84 (Tajwali Shah VS Bakhti Zaman) 

that  any  right  vested  in  a  person  to  seek  his  remedy  under  the  law  should  be 

liberally construed as it would bolster his recognized fundamental right of access 

to justice. 

11.  While  considering  the  statutes  of  the  NUST  Leave  Rules,  the  concept  of 

maternity leave has been referred at Para-28 in the following manner:- 

a.  A female employee shall be entitled to Maternity Leave on full pay for 
a period not exceeding three months (90 days), provided that the date 
of her confinement falls within the period of the leave does not exceed 
six weeks beyond the date of confinement.  

b.  Such leave may not be granted for more than three (03) times in the 

entire service of a female employee. 

c.  For  confinements  beyond  the  third  one,  the  female  employee  would 

have to take leave from her normal leave account of EL. 

d.  Maternity Leave may be granted in continuation of or in combination 
with  any  other  kind  of  leave  including  EOL  as  may  be  due  and 
admissible to a female employee. 

12.  Hence,  there  is  no  cavil  to  the  proposition  that  the  concept  of  maternity 

leave is available to the female staff of the NUST University and as such there is 

no  distinction  regarding  the  Temporary,  Adhoc,  Contractual  or  Permanent 

employees  or  faculty  members,  hence,  all  female  employees  are  entitled  to 

maternity leave on full pay for period not exceeding 90 days, which confirms the 

rights of the petitioner by all means. 

 
 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 5 

13. 

Similarly,  I  have  also  gone  through  the  West  Pakistan  Maternity  Benefit 

Ordinance, 1958, first ever legislation created in Pakistan for the protection of the 

rights  of  female  workers  in  the  commercial  industrial  establishments,  whereas 

Section 7 of the said ordinance gives rights to an employee for protection of her 

job, whereby it was specifically settled that no notice of dismissal can be given to 

a  woman  in  certain  cases.  This  Court  is  also  guided  by  the  International 

Conventions  referred  as  ILO  Convention  No.183  on  Maternity  Protection,  2000, 

whereby  maternity  benefits  have  been  given  across  the  board  without  any 

distinction  or  classification,  as  such  the  international  labour  standards  are  also 

applicable  in  Pakistan,  whereby  no  legislation  could  be  formulated,  where  the 

woman have been discriminated on the basis of their gender, similarly, Pakistan 

has  also  ratified  the  Convention  On  Elimination  Of Discrimination  Against  Woman 

1979  (CEDAW),  whereby  in  terms  of  Article  2,  the  State  is  under  obligation  to 

adopt appropriate legislative and other measures, to establish legal protection of 

the  rights  of  women  and  shall  refrain  from  engaging  in  any  act  or  practice  of 

discrimination  against  the  woman  and  to  ensure  that  the  public  authority  and 

institution shall act in conformity with the obligation referred in the convention. 

In this backdrop the Government of Pakistan has already taken necessary steps in 

shape  of  West  Pakistan  Maternity  Benefit  Ordinance,  1958,  but  the  same  does  not 

fulfill  the  requirements  of  present  times  as  it  has  been  argued  on  behalf  of  the 

respondents that the ordinance referred is applicable to the workers only.  

14. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  Article  23  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of 

Human Rights, which is as under:- 

(1)  Everyone  has  the  right  to  work,  to  free  choice  of  employment,  to  just  and 
favourable  conditions  of  work  and  to  protection  against  unemployment. 
(2)  Everyone,  without  any  discrimination,  has  the  right  to  equal  pay  for  equal 
work. 
(3)  Everyone  who  works  has  the  right  to  just  and  favourable  remuneration 
ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and 
supplemented, 
social  protection. 
(4) Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of 
his interests. 

if  necessary,  by 

other  means 

of 

 
 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 6 

15.  While  considering  the  above  national  law,  it  is  the  obligation  of  the 

Government  to  provide  a  favourable  working  atmosphere,  which  in  ordinary 

sense, includes the security, protection, remuneration, leave, right of dignity, self-

respect  and  other  economic  and  social  rights  with  job  hierarchy,  therefore, 

cancellation of already granted maternity leave amounts to denial of favourable 

condition which is warranted under the said instruments.  

16. 

In  view  of  international  obligation  and  commitment  imposed  upon  the 

State  of  Pakistan,  which  has  already  been  acknowledged  in  the  Constitution  of 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  in  terms  of  Article  18  for  freedom  of  trade, 

business  or  profession  and  protection  thereon  and  similarly  Article  27  of  the 

Constitution provides safeguard against discrimination in services. 

17. 

The  Constitution also imposes a  State  obligation in terms of Article 38 to 

secure the wellbeing of the people, irrespective of sex, caste, creed or race. It also 

ensures the fundamental security to all citizens, within the available resources of 

the country, facilities for work and adequate livelihood with reasonable rest and 

leisure  including  social  security  by  compulsory  social  insurance  or  other  means 

alongwith basic necessities of life, such as food, clothing, housing, education and 

medical relief, irrespective of sex, caste, creed or race.    

18. 

The  above  referred  provisions  of  social  and  economic  wellbeing  are  the 

part of international commitments embodied in the Constitution. In terms of all 

these  obligations  and  constitutional  guarantees  under  West  Pakistan  Maternity 

Benefit Ordinance, 1958, the impugned action of respondent University dismissing 

the  petitioner  from  service,  who  was  already  on  maternity  leave,  is  neither 

justifiable nor sustainable in the eye of law. The State has also provided another 

beneficial  legislation  on  The  Mines  Maternity  Benefit  Act,  1941  to  regulate  the 

employment in mines to safeguard their maternity benefits and extended them a 

right to obtain a leave of absence in a pregnancy or after pregnancy in terms of 

 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 7 

Section  4,  even  their  financial  benefits  are  also  protected  and  they  have  been 

granted leave with pay. 

19.  Another  legislation  known  as  West  Pakistan  Employees  Social  Security 

Ordinance, 1965 ensures the medical care during sickness and maternity in terms 

of Section 38 during six calendar months proceedings her claim, contributions in 

respect  of  her,  were  paid  or  payable  for  not  less  than  ninety  days,  whereby  a 

secured woman is entitled for maternity benefits as such right as may be fixed by 

the Government through notification for six weeks. All these aspects left nothing 

in favour of NUST University respondent to supersede the labour laws discussed 

above  alongwith  constitutional  guarantees  read  with  International  covenant  in 

any manner, especially, when the employment contract specifically provides the 

protection in terms of Medical Leave Rules, 2013, even otherwise, the statutes of 

the National University of Sciences and Technology (Enforcement of Academic, Service, 

and  Financial  Matters)  Statutes,  2005)  are  statutory  in  nature  and  there  is  no 

distinction  to  exclude  any  of  the  female  worker  employee  or  a  woman  on  the 

basis of status of her job. 

20. 

I have attended the case law reported as 2009 PLC (C.S) 928 (Rupa Sayed 

VS Pakistan International Airlines Corporation), whereby the regularization of 

service of the petitioner has been deferred by the PIA on account of her maternity 

leave, the said deferment was declared a discriminatory action by the Sindh High 

Court, the similar proposition has also been considered in the light of Air India v. 

Nergesh Meerza reported  as (1981) 4 SCC 335, whereby Supreme Court of India 

held  that  employment  regulations  requiring  airhostesses  to  retire  on  their  first 

pregnancy violated their right to equality under Article 14 of the Constitution. It 

was  also  held  by  the  Kerala  High  Court  in  the  case  of  Neetu  Bala  v.  Union  of 

India  reported  as  2016  SCC  Online  P&H  602  that  denial  of  employment  to  a 

woman  solely  on  grounds  of  pregnancy  was  arbitrary  and  illegal  and  thus 

violative of Articles 14, 16 and 42 of the Indian Constitution.  

 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 8 

21.  While  considering  the  above  concepts,  there  is  no  other  view  except  that 

the  maternity  benefits  could  not  be  stopped  in  any  manner  nor  any  female 

employee or a woman worker could be deprived of her right to livelihood and if 

any  female  employee  has  been  terminated  from  her  services/job,  it  amounts  to 

violation  of  Article  9  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973, 

hence the maternity benefits including the maternity leave as a facet of guarantee 

of  equality  and  non-discrimination  could  not  be  denied,  especially  when 

Constitution of Pakistan provides a protection in terms of Article 35, imposes an 

obligation upon the State to protect the marriage, the family, the mother and the 

child, so that all necessary steps be taken to ensure full participation of a woman 

in  all  spheres  of  national  life  being  its  State  policy.  The West Pakistan Maternity 

Benefit  Ordinance,  1958  as  well  as  The  Mines  Maternity  Benefit  Act,  1941  aims  at 

achieving a just social order by providing  all the facilities to women employees 

that  they  are  entitled  to  be  dealt  with  state  of  motherhood  in  a  dignified  and 

peaceful  manner,  without  fearing  penalties  for  forced  absence  during  the  

pre-natal or post-natal period. The Court is of the view that principles referred in 

Article  11  of  CEDAW  on  the  right  to  non-discrimination  on  grounds  of  marital 

status, pregnancy, child birth, or family care obligations, should be read into the 

employees’ contract of service.  

22. 

Similar view has been settled by Delhi High Court in Seema Gupta v. Guru 

Nanak  Institute  Management  2006  SCC  Online  Del  1421,  whereby  it  was  held 

that  provisions  providing  for  maternity  benefits  under  the  employment  and 

service  regulations  should  be  construed  in  the  light  of  Articles  15,  41  and  42  of 

the  Constitution  and  the  obligations  under  UDHR  and  CEDAW.  It  was  further 

held that the case of the employee seeking extension of her maternity leave in line 

with  employment  regulations  is  not  to  be  construed  as  a  traditional  case  of 

enforcement of contract of service, but an exercise of her fundamental rights. 

 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 9 

23. 

The  order  of  termination  passed  by  respondent  University  has  been 

considered  a  forcible  act  imposed  upon  the  petitioner  to  choose  between 

motherhood  and  employment,  which  itself  violates  the  fundamental  rights 

enshrined in the Constitution of Pakistan, especially in violation of Article 35 of 

the Constitution, whereby it is the State obligation to ensure the commitment to 

provide all circumstances conducive to a woman for exercise of her right to give 

birth  to  a  child  in  a  dignified  manner,  free  from  any  threat  that  she  could  be 

thrown out from her  job, which adversely affects her wellbeing, being a mother 

as  well  as  endangering  the  life  of  a  new  born.  Any  penalization  of  woman 

employees,  where  unable  to  attend  the  work  due  to  compelling  family 

responsibilities  of  child  care  is  to  be  eliminated.  It  is  very  important  to 

understand that pregnancy is not a medical condition, which arose unexpectedly 

and same requires the preferential and humanly treatment to be given to a female 

employee, who is going through the said life cycle.             

24. 

The Quranic injunctions referred in Sureh Baqarah verse 232, 233 provides a 

complete mechanism of protection to a lactating mother, whereby, no harm could 

be  given  to  such  mother  and  even  the  father  of  a  child  has  been  directed  to 

provide due care and maintenance. The concept of provision of maintenance has 

also been referred in Sureh Talaq verse 65 and such obligations if not fulfilled are 

considerable to be a sin and violation of almighty Hukam.  

25. 

From  the  above  referred  discussion,  following  principles  are  highlighted 

to be followed in such type of cases. 

a.  All  Departments,  Corporations, 

Institutions,  Divisions, 
Companies,  Public  Sector  Companies  are  under  obligation  to 
protect 
female 
workers/employees  whether  provided  in  their  rules  or  regulations 
or otherwise.  

provide  maternity 

leave/pay 

and 

to 

b.  Every female worker, employee whether temporary or contract, ad-
hoc, daily wages, contingent paid, domestic worker or permanent is 
entitled for maternity leave benefits with pay and job protection. 
c.  No one is allowed to terminate the female employee/worker due to 
her pregnancy or deprive her from her paid leave rights, any such 
order  under  the  law,  constitutional  guarantee  or  International 

 
W.P. No.4476/2019  

        Page 10 

Covenant is considered to be illegal and such employee, worker is 
entitled for compensation in addition to their substantive financial 
rights.     

d.  No notice of termination from a job or employment would be given 
by 
female 
worker/employee nor notice period will be considered valid during 
pregnancy.  

employer  during  maternity 

to  a 

leave 

the 

26. 

In view of above reasons, instant writ petition is ALLOWED, Office Order 

dated  15.10.2019  and  letter  dated  08.10.2019  are  declared  illegal  and  same  are 

hereby  SET-ASIDE.  The  petitioner  shall  be  reinstated  in  her  services  with  the 

respondent University w.e.f. the date of termination with all back benefits.   

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)          

 JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 23.09.2020. 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting 

RAMZAN 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
