ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P.No.4269/2019 

MST.  ULFAT  RANI  AND  ANOTHER. 

VS

NASIR  MEHMOOD  AND  ANOTHER. 

Petitioners  by: 

Mr. Ansar Mahmood Kiani, Advocate 

Respondents  by: 

Raja M. Kamran Alam Satti,  Advocate. 

Date  of Hearing: 
------------------------------------------------~------------------------------------- 

20. 02.2020. 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ; J: 

Petitioners,  being  dissatisfied  with 

the judgment  and  decree  dated  24.10.2019  as  well as  17.09.2019,  passed  by 

learned  Additional District Judge,  and  learned  Judge,  Family Court,  Islamabad 

(East) have assailed  the  same  by way of filing instant  writ petition  under  Article 

199 of the  Constitution  of Pakistan,  1973. 

2. 

Facts  necessary  for the  disposal  of the  case  are  that  after  dissolution  of 

marriage  Petitioner  No.1 filed suit  for maintenance  and  dowry article  as  well as 

recovery  of  Rs.  50,000/-  before  Family Court  East-Islamabad,  whereby,  the 

following relief  was  allowed while  passing  the  impugned  order  after  prolong 

trial. 

"In  view  of my  issue  wise finding,  the suit  of the plaintiff  is hereby 
decreed  in  her favour  and  the  sum  of Rs.  4500/ -  (Four thousand 
five  hundred  only) per  month  is  hereby  fixed  as  maintenance  of 
plaintiff from  date  of desertion  i.e.  07.:05.2016  till expiry  of iddat 
period  i.e.  10.10.2017  and  a  sum  of Rs.  4500/-  (four  thousand 
five  hundred  only)  is  hereby  fixed  as  monthly  maintenance  of 
minor  namely  Zaka  Ullah from  date  of  desertion  i.e.  07. 05.2016 
till  date  and  future  maintenance  at  the  same  rate  with  1 0% 
annual  increase.  Moreover,  the  suit  ..,of  plaintiff  for  recovery  of 
dowry  articles  as  per  her  list  Ex-P3  or  in  alternate  35% 
depreciated  value  of dowry  article excluding  the  expense  incurred 
on  construction  of  house  and  monthly  expenses  of  minor  is  also 
decided  her favour  and  suit  of plaintiff for  recovery of Rs.  42000/  
is  also  decree  in  her  favor.  Parties  shall  bear  their  own  cost. 
Decree  sheet  be  prepared  accordingly.  File  be  consigned  to  the 
record room after its due  completion". 

W.P.No. 42691201912 

Mst.  Ulfat Rani  v.  Nasir Mehmood 

3.  Against  the  above order,  both  the  parties  filed appeals  under  Section  14 

of  Muslim Family Law before the  learned: Additional District  Judge,  MCAC 

(East), Islamabad,  who  after  deliberating  upon  all  the  issues  in  detail  and 

considering  the  record  dismissed  both  the  appeals,  vide consolidated judgment 

dated  24.10.2019  in the  following manner:- 

"For what  has  been  discussed  above,  no  misreading  or  non  
reading  of  evidence,  illegality or  irregularity has  been  found  in 
impugned  judgment  and  decree;  hence,  same  are  upheld. 
Consequently thereupon, both the appeals  are dismissed." 

Hence, present  writ petition. 

4. 

Learned  Counsel  for Petitioner  submitted  that  the  impugned  judgments 

are  not  only  against  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  but  result  of 

misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence produced  before  the  learned  trial 

Court. Learned  Counsel  further  submitted  that  both  the  impugned  judgments 

are  arbitrary  which  have  been  passed  in a  hasty  manner  and  are  prejudicial  to 

the interest  of Petitioner  as  Respondent  No.jl is a man  of means  who can  easily 

afford the  maintenance  claimed.  Learned Counsel  lastly  contended  that  the 

both  the  learned  Courts  below not  only failed to  consider  the  valuable  rights 

and  interest  of the  Petitioner  but  also  failed to  appreciate  the  documentary 

evidence produced  before the  learned  trial  Court.  Learned  Counsel  prayed  for 

' 

setting  aside  of both  the  impugned judgments. 

5. 

Learned  Counsel  for  the  Respondent  No. l  vehemently  contested  the 

contentions  of the  Petitioner  and  submitted- that  he  works  in a  furniture  shop 

and  earn  Rs.  12,000/-  per  month.  Learned  Counsel  stated  that  after  taking 

into  consideration 

the  financial  position  of  the  Respondent  No.1  the 

maintenance  of  Rs.  4500 / -  was  fixed; whereas,  during  the  trial,  Petitioner 

failed to  prove her  contention  that  the  Respondent  is  earning  more than  Rs. 

40,000/-  per month.  Learned Counsel  submitted  that  Respondent  has  no other 

income except salary  drawing from the  furniture  shop  where he works. Learned 

Counsel  admitted  that,  being a  father,  it  is  his  duty  to take  care  of his  child, 

however, being  a  man  of low income cannot  afford to pay  the  maintenance  as 

' 

claimed by the  Petitioner.  Learned Counsel lastly contended  that  Petitioner  has 

not  pointed  out  any  irregularity  or illegality in the  above judgments  except that 

the  maintenance  fixed  at  Rs.  4500 /-  is ~not sufficient,  hence,  prayed  for 

dismissal  of the  petition  as  having no force. 

6.  Arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of learned  Counsel  for the  parties  have 

been heard  and  the  documents,  placed on record have also been  examined with 

~ 

their  able assistance. 

W.P.No. 42691201913 

Mst.  Ulfat Rani  v.  Nasir Mehmood 

7. 

Perusal  of  the  record  shows  that  the  Petitioner  is  aggrieved with  the 

impugned 

judgments 

dated  17.09.2019  &  24.10.2019,  whereby, 

the 

maintenance  of  the  minor  has  been  fixed at  Rs.4,500/-  per  month  which 

statedly  is  insufficient  in  view  of  the  prevailing  inflation  and  economic 

conditions.  On the  other  hand,  the  Respondent,  pleads  his  incapacity  to afford 

the  maintenance  amount  more than  what  has  been  fixed by the  Courts  below 

on  the  ground  of having  limited means.  It  has  now been  well settled  by the 

Courts  that  though  it is the  responsibility ofrthe father  to take  care of the  needs 

of  his  child,  however, the  capacity  and  ability  of  the  father  is  also  to  be 

considered  while fixing maintenance  by the  trial  as  well as  appellate  Courts 

which  could  only  be  ascertained  after  scrutinizing  the  material  evidence 

produced  by  the  parties  before the  trial  Court  in  this  regard,  as  such,  the 

\ 

question  that  how much  a  father  can  afford to  bear  the  expenditure  of his 

children  is a  question  of fact and  cannot  be determined  in the  writ jurisdiction 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  Through  present  petition,  learned 

~ 

Counsel  for the  Petitioner  has  agitated  the  impugned judgments  on account  of 

misreading  and  non-reading  of evidence however, failed to  identify any  legal 

error  in the  concurrent  findings  of the  learned  Courts  below. It has  been  held 

time and  again  by the  superior  courts  of the country  in  a  number  of cases  that 

factual  controversies  are  not  to  be  decided  while  exercising  constitutional 

jurisdiction.  Reliance, in  this  regard  can  safely be  placed  on  the  case  law 

reported  as  Pakistan  Wapda  Employees  Peaham  Union  VS

Member, National  Industrial  Relatioris  Commission,  Islamabad  and 

others  (2015  PLC  45},  Faiz  Bakhsh  and  others  VS Deputy 

Commissioner/Land  Acquisition  Officer,  Bahawalpur  and  others 

(2006  SCMR  219}. 

8. 

For the  reasons  mentioned  hereinabove,  I  am  of the  considered  view that 

the concurrent  findings of the  learned  Courts  below given vide judgments  dated 

17.09.2019  and  24.10.2019  do  not  suffer  from any  illegality or  irregularity 

~ 

warranting  any  interference  by this  Court,  whereas,  the  points  raised  by the 

Petitioner  side are  purely  factual  in nature  thus,  instant  petition,  being devoid 

of any merit,  is hereby dismissed. 

Adnan/" 

- 

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

