ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 440 OF 2022 

MUHAMMAD TANVEER AHMAD. 
VS    
EX-OFFICIO JUSTICE OF PEACE/ADDITIONAL SESSIONS 
JUDGE-III, ISLAMABAD-EAST AND OTHERS. 

Petitioner by       : 

Malik Irfan Asif, Advocate. 

Respondents by  : 

Hazrat Younas, State Counsel. 
Mr. Tanveer Hussain, A.S.I.  

Date of hearing     : 

30.03.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.    

The  Petitioner  has 

invoked 

the 

Constitutional  Jurisdiction  of  this  Court  by  filing  the  instant  writ  petition 

seeking setting aside of the order dated 14.01.2022 (“Impugned Order”) 

passed  by  the  Ex-Officio  Justice  of  Peace/Additional  Sessions  Judge-III, 

Islamabad-East, whereby his petition under Section 22-A Cr.P.C. has been 

dismissed.  The  Petitioner  further  seeks  direction  for  Respondent  No.4 

(Station  House  Officer,  Police  Station  Sihala,  Islamabad)  to  register  FIR 

against Proposed Accused. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  as  per  the  Memo  of  Petition  are  that  the 

Petitioner filed a petition under sections 22-A/B Cr.P.C. before Respondent 

No.1  for  issuance  of  direction  to  Respondents  No.  2  to  4  to  register  FIR 

against the Proposed Accused alleging therein that his wife in connivance 

with  her  father  and  brother  committed  theft  of  the  precious  household 

items,  car,  cash,  gold  ornaments  and  9MM  pistol  of  the  Petitioner  . 

Respondent  No.1  dismissed  the  Petition  vide  Impugned  Order  dated 

14.01.2021 with the observation that  Proposed Accused is the wife of the 

Petitioner  and  a  civil  case  of  maintenance  is  pending  between  the  parties 

before the learned Judge Family Court and from the contents of application 

and report submitted by police, no cognizable offence is made out. Feeling 

aggrieved, Petitioner filed instant petition.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2|W.P No. 440/2022 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the 

Impugned Order is against law and facts hence not sustainable and liable to 

be  set  aside;  that  from  bare  perusal  of  the  application  submitted  by  the 

Petitioner  for  registration  of  FIR  cognizable  offence  is  made  out  from  its 

contents,  and  Respondent  No.4  is  under  obligation  to  register  FIR  as 

envisaged  in  section  154  Cr.P.C.;  that  the  Respondents  have  failed  to 

follow  the  guidelines  given  in  famous  cases  PLD  2016  SC  581  &  PLD 

2007  SC  539;  that  Respondent  No.1  ignored  the  fact  that  Proposed 

Accused persons illegally, unlawfully stole the precious household items of 

the Petitioner; that Respondent No.1 also ignored that evidence is available 

to  the  Petitioner  in  shape  of  voice  messages  of  the  accused  persons  who 

threatened  the  Petitioner  of  dire  consequences  and  also  demanded  illegal 

money/bhata from the Petitioner; that there is no bar on concurrent running 

of  civil  and  criminal  proceedings;  that  Respondent  No.1  has  ignored  that 

Petitioner has divorced the Proposed Accused when he came to  know that 

said Proposed Accused in connivance with her father and brother has stolen 

from  the Petitioner and prior to marriage with Petitioner, they looted many 

other innocent people as they are professional thieves; that the Respondent 

No.1  has  failed  to  exercise  jurisdiction  vested  in  it;  that  the  Impugned 

Order  is  patently  illegal,  factually  incorrect  and  suffers  from  legal 

perversity  resulting  in  miscarriage  of  justice;  that  the  Impugned  Order  is 

violation  of  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 

Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973;  that  refusal  to  register  FIR  amounts  to 

depriving the  Petitioner  for a right to approach to the court for redress of 

his grievance; that the Petitioner has no other efficacious, speedy and less 

expensive  remedy  available  to  him  except  to  invoke  the  Constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court.  Learned  counsel  prayed  for  acceptance  of  the 

instant writ petition, set aside Impugned Order dated 14.01.2022 passed by 

Respondent No.1 and issue a direction to Respondent No.4 to register FIR 

on the application of the Petitioner. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  State  counsel  vehemently  opposed  the 

arguments  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  and  supported 

the Impugned Order and prayed for dismissal of instant writ petition. 

 
 
3|W.P No. 440/2022 

5. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as learned 

State  Counsel  and  have  also  perused  the  available  record  including  the 

Impugned Order. 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  complaints  filed  with  the  Respondents  No.  2  &  4  as 

well as the Memo of Petition clearly shows that admittedly the Flat in Zaraj 

Society,  Islamabad  was  purchased  by  the  Petitioner  after  marriage  in  the 

name  of  the  Proposed  Accused  where  the  Petitioner  and  the  Proposed 

Accused both shifted and started living together. In addition, the Petitioner 

also bought for the Proposed Accused a Coure car.  It was further alleged 

that the Petitioner fully furnished the said Flat and bought for the Proposed 

Accused  household  items  including  furniture,  LED,  AC,  dishes,  electric 

cooler,  electronics,  carpets,  jewelry  (approx.  2-3  tola),  and  expensive 

dresses  which have  allegedly  been  stolen by  the Proposed  Accused  along 

with the said car, 2-3 lacs in cash, title documents of properties, and 9mm 

pistol.  

7. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  informed  this  Court  during 

arguments and laid great stress on the fact that benami Suit has been filed 

by the Petitioner in respect of the said Flat.  Be that as it may, what is not 

controverted is that on the date of the alleged occurrence  said Flat was in 

the name of Proposed Accused herself not to mention that it still is, to date, 

as  the  Petitioner’s  suit  for  benami  has  not  been  finally  adjudicated  upon 

yet.    Therefore,  the  question  arises  whether  a  person  can  commit  theft  in 

their own home. 

8. 

In this regard, Section 378, P.P.C., is reproduced hereunder: 

“378. Theft. Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property 
out of the possession of any person without that person's consent,  moves 
that property in order to such taking is said to commit theft. 

 Explanation  1.  A  thing  so  long  as  it  is  attached  to  the  earth,  not  being 
movable  property,  is  not  the  subject  of  theft  but  it  becomes  capable  of 
being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed from the earth. 

 Explanation  2.  A  moving  effected  by  the  same  act  which  effects  the 
severance may be a theft. 

 Explanation 3. A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an 
obstacle  which  prevented  it  from  moving  or  by  separating  it  from  any 
other thing, as well as by actually moving it. 

 
 
4|W.P No. 440/2022 

 Explanation 4. A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is 
said to move that animal, and to move everything which, in consequence 
of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal. 

 Explanation 5. The consent mentioned in the definition may be expressed 
or implied, and may be given either by the person in possession, or by any 
person having for that purpose authority either express or implied.” 

9. 

The elements of Section 378, PPC were laid out in the case of Abdul 

Aziz  Sattar  alias  Abdul  Aziz  Abdul  Sattar  VS Khaja  M.  Ashraf  and 

another, PLD 1965 Dhaka 315 as follows:- 

"(1) There must be an intention to take some movable property, 

(2) The intended taking must be dishonest, 

(3)  It  must  be  from  the  possession  of  another  person  without  his 
consent, and 

(4)  There  must  be  a  moving  of  the  property  in  order  to  such  taking." 
[Emphasis added]. 

10.  The basic element of Section 378, PPC as enumerated in Abdul Aziz 

Sattar  (Supra)  which  is  relevant  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 

instant case is that movable property must be taken out of the possession of 

a person without such person’s consent.  Whereas, in the instant case, the 

movable property alleged to have been taken by the Proposed Accused was 

admittedly in the house belonging to such Proposed Accused.  As such, it 

was in her possession and cannot be described as having been taken from 

the possession of the Petitioner.    

11.  Another  element  of Section  378,  PPC  as  enumerated in  Abdul  Aziz 

Sattar  (Supra)  which  is  relevant  in  the  instant  case  is  that  the  intended 

taking  must  be  dishonest.    The  Court  in  Abdul  Aziz  Sattar  (Supra)  found 

that the petitioner therein had a bona fide claim of right on the property in 

question.  In such circumstances, the Court held that removal of property 

on a bona fide claim of right does not constitute theft.  In the instant case, 

admittedly, the household items and car were bought by the Petitioner for 

the  Proposed  Accused.    In  view  of  the  foregoing,  the  Proposed  Accused 

had a bona fide claim of right on the property, removal of which does not 

therefore constitute theft.  

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
5|W.P No. 440/2022 

12. 

In  view  of  the  foregoing,  the  allegation  that  the  Proposed  Accused 

committed  theft  of  the  movable  property  to  which  she  had  a  bona  fide 

claim of right from the Flat admittedly belonging to her does not spell out 

any  cognizable  offence.  The  Respondent  No.  1  has  reached  the  correct 

conclusion vide the Impugned Order.  Hence, present petition being devoid 

of any merit is hereby dismissed.  

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 07.04.2022.  

JUDGE 

Approved for Reporting  
Blue Slip added. 

Adnan. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
