ORDER SHEET

IN THE

T\4ABAD  HIGH COURT,
TUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

BAD

Writ Petition No.1278/2020.

Anwar Baig

VS

F'ederation  of Pakistan, etc.

S. No. of
orde{

Date of
order/

Order with signature  of ]udge and that of parties or
counsel  where necessary.

07.07.2020.  Raja Muhammad  Farooq, Advocate for petitioner

Through this writ petition,  the petitioner has

prayed for the following  relief:-

'lhat  by  allouing/accepting  the  instant
constitutional petition that the act of respondents
reflecting and recording place of birth of the

petitioner  as Pnkistan  instend of UK as recorded  in

all documents (as UK born)  forming part of the
instant petition may aery graciously  be declared

illegal with  direction  to the respondents to effict

correction  in their record in the interest of iustice.

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner  inter-alia

contends  that petitioner is British citizen and he was

born in Luton England (UK), and he has applied  for his

Pakistani  passport in the lligh Commission  London in

which his place  of birth  is referred as Luton U.K but due

to some  cutting in the relevant  column of place of birth

"Swa{'  was initially referred  but same was cancelled

and all of his record  contains  the place of birth  as Luton,

however, when his family members  applied for their

British passport  before Foreign  and Common  Wealth

Office, UK, an objection  was raised due to the previous

record of Pakistani  passport  although  he was born in

UK (Luton).

W.P. No.127812020

2

3. 

Learned  counsel for the petitioner has  been

confronted as to whether  he has ever aPProached  the

Director General  Immigration  & Passports  as well as

NADRA  authorities for verification of his status from

the record, whereby  learned  counsel contends  that

petitioner  feels satisfied  if a direction is issued to the

relevant respondents  by converting  the instant  writ

petition into representation.

4. 

Be that as it may, instant writ petition  stands

disposed  of with direction  to the office to transmit the

copy of instant petition  alongwith its annexures  to the

Director  General Immigration & Passports/respondent

No.3 and Chairman NADRA/respondent  No.2, who

shall treat the same  as representation  and look into the

matter, pass speaking order  after scrutiny of record at

their ends or through  their relevant offices within

period of 30 days regarding  place of birth of the

petitioner.

Zahid

JUDGE

