ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO.2165 OF 2020 

Mst. Maria Munir and another. 
VS
Ghulam Haider and 2 others. 

 ===== 

03.02.2021. 
Date of Decision  : 
Petitioner by 
Malik Aamir Saleem, Advocate.  
: 
Respondents by  :       Ms. Noshaba Anjum, Advocate. 

FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM  JANDRAN,  J.-  Through 

instant  writ  petition,  petitioners  impugn  judgments  and 

decrees dated 09.04.2019 and 28.09.2019, passed by the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  and  Learned  Additional 

District Judge, Islamabad-East, respectively, whereby suit 

for dissolution of marriage on the basis of Khula, recovery 

of  maintenance  and  dowry  articles  was  decreed  while 

appeal  filed  by  the  respondent  No.  1  was  dismissed  and 

that of petitioner No. 1 was partly allowed.    

2. 

Vide judgment-in-original, petitioner No. 1 was held 

entitled  to  maintenance  allowance  @  Rs.  5,000/-  per 

month from June, 2017 till period of Iddat, petitioner No. 

2  (minor)  at  the  rate  of  Rs.  8,000/-  per  month  from  the 

said  date  till  her  legal  entitlement  with  10%  annual 

increase.  The  claim  of  petitioner  No.  1  to  the  extent  of 

recovery  of  dowry  articles  was  also  decreed  excluding 

gold ornaments mentioned at serial No. 1 & 2 of the list 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.2165 of 2020 

-2- 

of  dowry  articles  which  are  “4-bangles, 2-big bangles (Karry) 

and Mala Set”. 

3. 

In-appeal,  judgment  and  decree  ibid  were  slightly 

modified  to  the  extent  of  maintenance  allowance  of 

petitioner  No.  1  for  the  period  of  Iddat  which  was 

enhanced from Rs. 5,000/- to Rs. 10,000/- per month.  

4. 

Essential  and  relevant  facts  for  the  disposal  of 

instant  writ  petition  are  that  petitioner  filed  subject  suit 

against  the  respondent  No.  1  which  was  duly  contested 

by  the  latter  through  written  statement,  learned  Trial 

Court  framed  necessary  issues  and  recorded evidence of 

the parties that includes statement of petitioner No. 1 as 

PW-1 and that of respondent No. 1 as DW-1. The learned 

Trial  Court  after  hearing  the  parties  decreed  the  suit  in 

terms  noted  in  para-2  ibid  while  appeal  was  partly 

allowed  only 

to 

the  extent  of  enhancement  of 

maintenance  allowance  for  the  period  of  Iddat.  Hence, 

instant writ petition.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  argued  that 

findings  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  and  affirmed  by  the 

learned  Appellate Court  are  contrary  to  the provisions  of 

Oaths  Act,  1873,  which  provides  specific  procedure  for 

decision  of  the  issue  on  oath;  that  application  of  the 

petitioners  for  additional  evidence  remained  unattended 

at  appellate  stage  and  that  the  petitioners  have  taken 

specific  stance  that  the  gold  ornaments  given  in  lieu  of 

dower,  were  snatched  by  respondent  No.  1,  therefore, 

impugned 

judgments  and  decrees  being  result  of 

misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence  and  contrary  to 

law on the subject, are liable to be set aside to the extent 

 
W.P.No.2165 of 2020 

-3- 

of  claim  of  gold  ornaments.  Learned  counsel  placed 

reliance  upon  case 

law 

reported  as  PLD  2008 

(Peshawar) 95.  

6.  On the other hand, learned counsel  for respondent 

No. 1 argued that concurrent findings of the two learned 

Courts,  in  absence  of  any  misreading  or  non-ready  of 

evidence,  cannot  be  interfered  with  in  constitutional 

jurisdiction  particularly  when  the  documentary  evidence 

in  the  shape  of  Nikahnama  remained  un-rebutted 

whereby  it  is  established  and  admitted  that  the  gold 

ornaments were given to the bride/petitioner No. 1 at the 

time  of  marriage  and  that  any  interlocutory  application 

would  be  deemed  to  have  been  decided  by  way  of  final 

judgment, therefore, petition is liable to be dismissed.  

7. 

Heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 

examined the record with their able assistance.  

8. 

The contest in  the instant writ petition is restricted 

to  the  extent  of  claim  of  gold  ornaments,  given  to  the 

petitioner No. 1 in lieu of dower. Ex. P-2 is Nikah-nama of 

the  parties  which  is  an  admitted  document  as  petitioner 

No. 1 in the beginning of her cross-examination admitted 

its entries as correct. In column No. 13 of Ex. P-2, dower 

was  fixed  as  4-Tola  gold  ornaments  while  in  the  next 

column No. 14, it is mentioned that entire dower amount 

has been paid at the spot. Although petitioner No.1 in her 

affidavit  Ex.  P-1  alleged  that  at  the  time  of  desertion, 

respondent  No.  1  snatched  dower,  gold  ornaments  and 

dowry  articles  but  no  evidence  has  been  produced  to 

substantiate  the  said  allegation.  More  so,  paternal  uncle 

of petitioner No. 1 in cross-examination admitted that no 

 
W.P.No.2165 of 2020 

-4- 

event of snatching of gold ornaments and dowry articles 

have  taken  place  in  his  presence  and  that  he  was  only 

informed about it. The assertion of the petitioner No. 1 in 

affidavit  Ex.P-1 in presence of  evidence  on  record would 

not  be  considered  enough  to  discard  and  disbelieve  the 

documentary  evidence  Ex.  P-2,  contents  whereof  have 

been  admitted  by  the  petitioner  No.  1  herself.  Mere  a 

vague  and  omnibus  assertion  by  alleging  that  the  entire 

belongings have been snatched by the respondent No. 1 

is  not  confidence  inspiring.  There  are  also  no  details  of 

the  alleged  episode  of  snatching  of  gold  ornaments  and 

other belongings.  

9. 

It  is  settled  principle  that  to  rebut  a  document, 

strong  and  confidence  inspiring  evidence  is  required 

particularly where the same retains status of an admitted 

document.  The  inference  drawn  by  the  learned  Court  of 

first  instance  is  not  exclusively  based  upon  the  offer  of 

oath  which  the  respondent  No.1  had  placed,  rather  it  is 

also  observed  under  issue  No.2  that  “dower in shape of 4-

tola has been paid”.    The  learned  Appellate  Court  also  re-

appreciated this aspect by observing that “nothing could be 

brought  on  record  to  deny  the  correctness  of  an  admitted 

Nikahnama Ex.P-2”.    Hence,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the 

impugned 

judgments  and  decrees  are 

result  of 

misreading or non-reading of evidence and are exclusively 

based  upon  the  offer  of  special  oath,  so  made  by  the 

respondent No. 1.  

10.  The  contention  of 

learned  counsel 

for 

the 

petitioners  that  application  for  decision  on  special  oath 

was  not  attended  to  by  the  learned  Appellate  Court,  is 

devoid of force for the reasons that the matter remained 

 
W.P.No.2165 of 2020 

-5- 

pending for considerable time before the learned Court of 

first  instance  but  no  such  application  was  made  earlier 

while  alike  offer  made  by  the  respondent  No.  1  was 

refused  by  the  petitioner.    Even  otherwise,  when  the 

entire  evidence  of  the  parties  is  on  record,  interest  of 

justice demand that the matter should be decided on the 

basis  of  evidence, pro and contra,  particularly  when  the 

decision  sought  to  be  made  on  special  oath,  has  been 

refused by one or the other side. 

11.  The  case  law  relied  upon  by  learned  counsel  does 

not  extend  any  help  to  the  petitioners  due  to  having 

distinct facts and circumstances.  

12.  Having  examined  the  case  from  every  angle,  it  is 

observed that the concurrent findings on facts arrived at 

by  the  two  learned  Courts  are  based  upon  correct 

appreciation of evidence, no misreading or non-reading of 

the evidence is surfaced and no exceptional circumstance 

has  even  been  alleged  to  interfere  in  the  concurrent 

findings  in  constitutional  jurisdiction  where  scope  is  only 

to  question  the  illegality  or  jurisdictional  defect  of  any 

order of inferior court. Consequently, instant writ petition 

fails and is accordingly dismissed.  

A.R.Ansari 

(FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN)  

JUDGE 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
