ORDER SHEET

IN THE IsLAMABAD HIGH COURT.
ENT

JUDIC IAL DEP

D

Crl.  M isc. No.463-Bl2O19
Umair Khan
VS
The State and another

S. No. oforder/
proceedings

Order with signature  of Judge  and that of parties or counsel
Date of order/
where  necessary
Proceedinqs
29.07.2019 Chaudhry  Tanveer Akhtar, Advocate for the

petitioner
Mr. Sadaqat Ali Jahanglr, learned State  Counsel
wlth Ch. Naeem Tahir, A.S.l.
Qazi Rehan Shabbir, Advocate  for  the
complainanuresPondent  No.2

Through the instant petition, the petitioner,
Umair  Khan seeks  post-arrest  bail in case F.l.R.
No.424, dated 27.09.2018, offences under Sections
420,468  and 471 P.P.C. registered at Police Station

Kohsar, lslamabad.
2.  Earlier the petitioner's similar petitions seeking
post-arrest bail were dismissed  vide orders dated
16.04.2019 and 01.06.2019  passed by the learned
Judicial Magistrate  Section-30 and Additional
Sessions Judge, lslamabad, respectively.
3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner  submits that
the petitioner has falsely been implicated  in the
F.l.R. in qu.estion  with malafide  intentions  and
ulterior motives; that the petitioner  has nothing to
do with the commission of alleged crime as the main
culprit is Ati Raza who telephonically  called the
complainant,  Adeela  lmran, to come lslamabad  and
give an amount  of Rs.4,71 ,7841'through  cheque in
advance for the import of a  Suzuki car and
harvester machine; that the petitioner was an
employee of accused  Ali Raza and on his direction,
he encashed the cheques  in question  and deposited
the above-said  amount in the account of Ali Raza;
that the petitioner  has already cooperated with the
investigating officer and provided him the address

2

Crl.Misc.No  .463 -B 12019

of the said Ali Raza; that the offences  alleged to
have been committed  by the petitioner do not fall
within the ambit of prohibitory  clause of Section  497
Cr.P.C.; and that the petitioner  is behind  bars for
quite long time and is no more required for further
investigation.  Learned  counsel has prayed for the
petition to be allowed  and for the petitioner to be
released on bail.
4.  On the other hand, learned  counsel for the
complainant,  assisted  by the learned  State  Counsel,
vehemently opposed the bail petition by stating that
the petitioner  is nominated  in the F.l.R. with specific
role of committing  fraud with the complainant and
depriving  her of an amount of Rs.4,71 ,7841-; that
according to the statement  of the manager of the
guest  house, it was the petitioner who booked the
room in the guest house in the name of Geneva Car
Leasing Private Limited; that the petitioner  had
received the cheques in  question from the
complainant  and got the same encashed from the
bank as revealed  through the CCTV footage;  that
the said Goneva Gar Leasing  Private Limited
Company was not registered with the SECP;  that the
amount received from the complainant under the
pretext of booking a car and a harvester  machine
from abroad had been equally divided by the
petitioner and co-accused, Ali Raza; and that both
the accused in  connivance with each other
committed fraud with the complainant.  Learned
counsel prayed for the bail petition  to be dismissed.
5.  I have heard the contentions of the learned
counsel for the contesting parties and have perused

the record  with their able assistance.
6.  Brief facts as stated in the F.l.R. are that the
complainant was the resident of House  No.E/70
College Chowk  Fareed Town, Sahiwal. lt  was

J

Crl.Misc.No  .463 -B / 20 19

reported in the F.l.R. that the complainant while
searching on OLX had read the publication  of a
private  limited company  namely, Geneva Car
Leasing, which provides  car leasing financial
assistance  and contact No.03004986643 was
provided on its website  to avail the said leasing
facility. On reading the said publication, the
comptainant  called on the said mobile number and
showed interest in purchasing a Suzuki Wagon-R
car and a harvester  machine to a person,  namely,
Hussain  alias Ali Raza,  who also tried to convince
her with regard to the purchase of the same. ln the
report,  it was also provided  that the said accused
Husaain got in touch with the complainant  and
offered her to come lslamabad.  Pursuant to the said
offer, when the complainant  along with her husband
reached at Daewoo bus stand at lslamabad on
25.06.2018, a person namely, Umair came there  and
brought  them to Amyls Garden House  No.55,  Main
School  Road, Sector F'612, lslamabad in Room
No.108 for stay. On reaching the said guest house,
they asked  the accused Umair about the car and a
harvester machine.  Upon this, accused Umair gave
them assurance with regard to purchasing the car
etc, and as a result, the complainant  issued/gave
two cheques valuing  Rs.4,71  ,7841' to  him as
advanced  money  for the import  of the said car and
harvester  machine. The said cheques  were
encashed on their presentation  before the bank
concerned by  the  accused/petitioner.  After
receiving/encashment  of the above-said cheques
when the complainant asked about a car, the said
accused Umair left the spot and later he did not
return. Consequently,  the F.l.R. in question  was
lodged against the accused  persons,  namely, Umair
and Hussain, who in connivance  with each other,

4

Crl.Misc.No  .463 -B I 20 19

cheated the complainant  and deprived  her of the
above-said  amount.
7.  Apparently,  it was the petitioner  who received
the complainant  and her husband from the Daewoo
bus stand and brought them to a guest  house called
Amyls Garden for their stay. The room was booked
by the petitioner in the said guest house with fake
company name, i.e. Geneva  Car Leasing Private
Limited. Furthermore, the record shows the
petitioner's  involvement  in the encashment of the
cheques in question as advance money from the
complainant on the pretext of booking a car and a
harvester machine from abroad.  The recovery
memo appended  with the record shows that CCTV
footage had been obtained from the Operational
Manager Bank Al-falah  Main Branch F-6 Nazim  ud
Din Road, lslamabad, which shows the petitioner's
presence  in the said Bank on 25.09.2018  and the
cheques in question had been encashed  by him.
Booking of a room with fake company name in the
above-said guest house  for stay of the complainant
and her family,  admission with regard to receiving
the cheques in question from the complainant  under
the garb of advance money for booking  of a car and
a harvester machine, encashment  of the cheques  in
question from the concerned bank, prima-facie,
connects the petitioner  with the commission of
alleged crime. The record also shows that the
petitioner  had dealt with the complainant  and her
husband on the matter regarding  purchasing  of a
car and a harvester  machine. Given the fact that the
cheques  in question  had been encashed by the
petitioner,  he cannot  claim to have no knowledge of
the transactions.  Even otherwise, the record shows
the petitioner's  connivance  with the co-accused,  Ali

5

Crl.Misc.No  .463 -B  120 L9

Raza alias Hussain in cheating the complainant  and

depriving her of a huge amount.
8.  ln view of the above tentative  assessment, the
petitioner has failed to make out a case of further
inquiry. Consequently,  the instant bail is dismissed.
Since the co-accused  Ali Raza had gone into hiding
since 27.09.2018 and had been declared
absconder,  therefore, to the extent of the present
petitioner, the learned Trial Court is directed  to
conclude  the trial at the earliest.

Qamar Khan*

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZAIB)
JUDGE

