,* ,r= ,r.orffio*, *r*r.,r.oro"or.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

S. No. of
order/
proceedlngs

Date of
orderl
Proceedlnss

15.09.2020

Criminal Misc. No. 930-8l2O2O
Ghulam Qadir
VS
The State etc

Order wlth slgnature of Judge and that of partles or
counsel  where necessary.

Petitioner Ghulam Qadir alongwith  Mr. Shahid
Akbar Abbasi,  Advocate.
Syed Shahbaz Shah, State Counsel,
Mr Muhammad lnam, Advocate for complainant,
Zahid Hussain Shah  Sl with record.

Through the instant petition, petitioner
(Ghulam Qadi) has prayed for pre-arrest bail in
F.l.R No 280, dated  10.06.2020,  under Section

376 PPC, Police  Station Bharakahu,  lslamabad.
2. 
Briefly,  allegations  set-forth in the F.l.R
lodged by respondent  No.2 are that the her
nephew/petitioner  took her daughter Mst.
Zeenat Bibi at a Form House at Baigwal, Bhara
Kahu, lslamabad  on the pretext to provide her a
job of maid on 01.01 .2O2O and when her
daughter  came back on 23.O5.2O2O, informed
that petitioner  had been committing  Zina with
her for 4-5 months;  that during the said period,
she kept Mst. Zeenat Bibi confined in a room;
that she became pregnant but the petitioner got

aborted  the child and that during the absence of
her daughter,  she had been inquiring from
Ghulam Qadir but the latter did not pay any heed

to her complaint.
3. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner
contends  that the petitioner  is innocent;  that the

Criminal Misc. No. 930-8/ 2020

-2-

victim is wife of the petitioner,  with whom he
contracted  marriage on 10.01 .2020 with the
consent  of her father and other relatives,  who
sworn affidavits  in this respect;  that the very
registration  of the instant F.l.R is result of family
rift inter-se father and mother of the victim; that
the police found the petitioner innocent; that
petitioner  had already  filed suit for restitution  of
conjugal rights against the alleged victim and
that in presence of malice and malafide on the
part of the complainant, petitioner is entitled to
the concession  of pre-arrest bai!.
4. 
On the other hand, learned State
Counsel assisted by learned counsel  for the
complainant contends  that the petitioner  is
specifically  nominated  in the F.l.R: that there  is
no proof of the alleged  marriage; that the victim
in her statement  specifically implicated  the
petitioner to have kept her in illegal confinement
for five months and committed  zina with her;
that the offence alleged is heinous and falls
within the ambit of prohibitory  clause, therefore,
in  absence of  malafide on the part of
complai  nant or pol ice extra-ord  inary concessiorl
of pre-arrest bail cannot be extended to thd
petitioner.
5. 

Arguments  heard, record  perused.

6. 
Perusal of record reveals that the
parties are closely  related with each other ds
petitioner and the victim are real cousins. The
petitioner has consistently ctaimed  himself  to be
the husband of the victim pursuant to a Shdri

Criminal Misc. No. 930-8/ 2020

J

Nikah that solemnized on 10.01 .2O2O against
consideration/Maher  of Rs. 5,000/-.

It is also a matter of record  that during
investigation  not only father of the victim namely
Muhammad  Yaqoob  but paternal  aunt Mariam
Bibi, paterna! uncle Noor Alam and other
witnesses  Nasreen Bibi, Asad Munir, lmad Muni,
lmran Khan, and Ghulam Rabbani  sworn
affidavits testifying the factum of Nikah of the
petitioner  with the victim  on 10.01 .2020 against

dower  consideration  of Rs. 5,000/-.
' ln addition, it  also emerged  during
7. 
investigation that on 01 .O1.2O2O the victim  with
the consent of her father went to the Naval Form
House for  having job; subsequently, the
petitioner contracted  marriage  with the victim in
presence  of witnesses  that includes  their uncles
and aunts; that father of the victim gave  her
hand in the hand of petitioner with her consent
and that on coming to know about the said
marriage,  the owner  of the house where  she had
been working,  also gifted  her certaln household
articles. Further, the victim had been working at
the house of one Dr. Ambreen in Sector  F-10
during the month of Ramdan and that no
incriminating  material  had come on record to
support  the allegation of zina as alleged by the

victim.
8. 
The above facts, prima facie, makes the
case of the petitioner  one of further inquiry and
fit for exercise  of extra-ordinary discretion of
pre-arrest bail.

Criminal Misc. No. 930-8/ 2020

-4-

9. Moreover,  There is no denial of the fact that
the complainant,  who is real mother of the
victim, has strained relations  with her husband
Muhammad Yaqoob,  thus element of malice  or
malafide cannot be ruled out particularly  when
the witnesses including  the father  of the victim
had sworn affidavits to support  the version of
the petitioner  regarding  marriage  which,
otherwise, is also apparent as the petitioner  has
moved  the learned  Family Court through a suit
for restitution of conjugal  rights.
10. 
The another  aspect of the matter is that
the victim had allegedly  been away from the
house for about  five months but the complainant
despite  having knowledge  that the victim  has
gone with the petitioner, did not move the police
with any complaint about her missing, which,
prima facie, reflect foul attitude of  the
complainant.  The Hon'ble Sindh High Court  in
"Akhtar Ahmad and another V. The Steteo (zota
P.Cr.L.J. Note-4 extended concession of pre-
arrest bail in offence under Section 376 PPC
where  the victim remained quiet for noticeable
period of 4-5 months as in the present  case
there is an allegation  that she was kept in illegal
confinement for  about 5  months by the
petitioner,  while during investigation it emerged
that during  the said period the victim had been
working at a house in Sector F-10, and the
petitioner  used to pick and drop her, therefore,
the allegation of illegal confinement, apparently

is non existent.

Criminal Misc. No. 930-8/ 2020

5

11.  Moreover, police also concluded  that
no tengible  evidence has come on record
against the petitioner and in such eventuality
when the accused was found to have not been
involved in the commission of offence, case of
the accused would become  one of further
inquiry in this score too, particularly  when the
other factors  highlighted  above lend support to
his defence  plea. Reliance is placed upon " Nagi
Hussaln thah V. the Stete' (1992 SCMR 60Ot
wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court extended
concession  of pre-arrest  bail in offence under
section 376 PPC where accused was found
innocent during police investigation by
observing that in such circumstances  the case
is one of further inquiry.
12.  Consequently, the instant bail petition is
allowed. Ad-interim bail granted to the
petitioner (Ghulam Qadir) vide order  dated
24.08.2020  is confirmed subject to furnishing
bail bonds  in the sum of Rs.100.000/-  (Rupees
One Lac) with one surety in the like amount  to
the satisfaction  of the learned Trial Court.
13.  Needless to  mention that this is
tentative assessment  for the purpose of this
petition  only, which shall not affecUinfluence
trial of this case in any manner.

A.R. Ansari

(Ftpz. AHMAD  ANJUM JANDRAN)
JUDGE

