Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No. 3925 of 2021 

Mst. Tayyaba Siddiqa Bukhari 
VS 
Syed Junaid ul Hassan and others 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  
03) 

Date of order/ 
proceedings  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

17.10.2022.  Ch.  Saad  Bin  Shafique  Advocate, 

for 

the 

petitioner. 
Syed  Faizan  Ali  Gardezi  Advocate, 
respondents.  

for 

the 

 ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.- Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  invoked  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this 

Court  vested  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  [hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  “Constitution”]  assailing  judgment,  dated  11.10.20221, 

passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad 

(East).  

2. 

The  petitioner  and  respondent  no.  1,  Syed  Junaid  ul 

Hassan,  entered  into  a  marriage  contract  on  26.11.2016. 

Nikah  was  executed  at  Islamabad.  However,  on  account  of 

matrimonial  disputes,  respondent  no.  1  served  a  divorce 

notice  on  07.11.2017.  The  divorce  had  also  taken  effect  at 

Islamabad.  The  petitioner  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of 

maintenance  allowance  and  had  also  sought  other  prayers. 

However, the suit was dismissed by the learned trial court as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Page - 2 
W.P. No.3925/2021. 

well as the learned Additional District Judge, Islamabad (East) 

for want of jurisdiction.  

3. 

It  is  an  admitted  fact  that  the  parties  are  citizens  of 

Pakistan  and  they  have  been  registered  as  such  by  the 

National  Database  and  Registration  Authority  since  their 

respective computerized National Identity Cards are valid and 

effective.  It  is  also  not  disputed  that  Nikah  was  registered  at 

Islamabad  and  the  divorce  had  also  taken  effect  within  the 

limits of the Islamabad Capital Territory.  Perusal of the plaint 

shows  that  the  petitioner  asserts  that  she  resides  in 

Islamabad. The cause of action has definitely arisen within the 

jurisdiction of the learned court at Islamabad.  

4. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  has  placed 

reliance  on  the  judgment  rendered  in  the  case  titled  “Majid 

Hussain v. Farrah Naz and others” [2017 YLR 84 Islamabad] in 

support of his contention that family court at Islamabad is not 

vested  with 

jurisdiction. 

Perusal  of 

the 

judgment 

unambiguously  shows 

that 

the  determining 

factor 

for 

assuming  jurisdiction  is  the  place  where  the  cause  of  action 

has arisen. The assertions regarding the cause of action in the 

plaint  filed  by  the  petitioner  undoubtedly  affirm  that  it  had 

arisen in Islamabad. These crucial factors were not taken into 

consideration by the learned trial court as well as the learned 

Additional District Judge, Islamabad (East).  

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.3925/2021. 

5. 

The  impugned  judgment,  dated  11.10.2021  has  been 

passed  without  taking  into  consideration  the  material  facts. 

The petitioner resides at Islamabad; Nikah was registered and 

the divorce had taken effect in Islamabad. The petitioner also 

resides  in  Islamabad  as  has  been  asserted  in  the  plaint.  The 

court at Islamabad is, therefore, vested with jurisdiction. 

6. 

For the above reasons, the petition is allowed and the 

impugned  judgment,  dated  11.01.2021  is  hereby  set  aside. 

The learned trial court is expected to proceed with the matter 

in  accordance  with  law  and  conclude  the  proceedings  at  the 

earliest.     

Tanveer  Ahmed/* 

       (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

 
 
 
 
    
     
