JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  1HE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ  Petition  No.  3915/2017. 

Atif  Rais  Khan 

VS

The  State,  etc. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr.  M.  Shoaib  Razzaq,  Advocate 

Respondents  by:  Mr.  M. Aftab  Ahmed,  AAG. 

Mr.  Ghulam  Shabbir  Akbar,  Advocate. 
Shakeel  Ahmed  Durrani,  Director  FIA,  Islamabad 
Zone. 
Qaiser  Masood,  Additional  Director  (Law)  FIA. 
Malik  Khizar  Hayat,  Dy.  Director  (Law)  FIA. 
Ahmed  Ali,  Dy.  Director,  FIA/ACC. 
Tahir  Khan,  Inspector,  FIA. 
Muhammad  Jameel  Mushtaq,  PD  (E-office),  NITB. 
Rifat  Ali  Khan,  Dy.  Director  I.T.,  CDA. 

Date  of  Hearing: 

20.12.2018. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  J:-  Through 

this  writ  petition, 

the 

petitioner  has  prayed  for  quashment  of FIR No.22,  dated  11.10.2017, U/S  409, 109 

PPC  read  with  Section  5(2)47  of  PCA,  P.S.  FI A  Anti-Corruption  Circle, 

Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief facts  referred  in  the  instant  case  are  that respondent  No.2  got  lodged 

the  FIR with  the  following  allegations:- 

"Dr.  Jamal  Yousaf  Joint  Secretary  (Admin)  Ministry  of  Information  & 

Technology,  Islamabad,  allegi.ng  therein  that huge financial  loss  has  been 

occurred to  the  Govt.  exchequer in  13  different  PSDP funded  projects  E, 

Services  at  CDA  was  one  of  the  projects.  Electronic  Government 

Directorate (EGD )/now  NITB  was responsible for  execution  of the project 

E  Services at  CDA  at a  cost of Rs.175.618  million  under  the  sponsoring 

Ministry  of Information  & Technology.  During  the  course of enquiry  and 

technical inspection and physical verification of all hardware and software 

W.P  No. 3915/2017 

2  fl 

conducted  by  FIA  computer forensic  experts  at  the  premises  of  CDA,  it 

revealed  that  all  hardware/equipment  supplied  by  vendors  namely  M/S 

Inbox  Business  Technology  (Pvt.)  Ltd.,  Infotech  (Pvt.)  Ltd.,  Gerrys 

Softlogic  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  and  Voxel  Communication  (Pvt)  Ltd  were  delivered 

to  CDA.  The main  lacuna  was found  that M/S  LMKR  (Pvt.)  Ltd  which 

had  to  deliver  the  application  software  consists  of number  of modules as 

per  agreement  dated  27.12.2006  worth  Rs.57575106/-  out  of  which 

Rs.43171327/-  were  made  to  the  vendor  M/s  LMKR  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  w.e.f 

2007  to  2009.  These  payments  were  made  to  M/s  LMKR  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  by 

Project  Director  Faisal  Kamran,  Executive  Director  Syed  Raza  Abbas 

Shah and  Dr.  Athar  Manzoor,  I.T  Consultant,  CDA  without  observance 

of  TO Rs  of  the agreement in  the  absence  of project view  committee  there 

was  no  criteria  left  to  act upon  regarding payments  to  the  vendor  (Faisal 

Kamran)  and  Executive  Director  (Syed  Raza  Abbas  Shah  EGD/NITB). 

During 

the  course  of  enquiry  and  technical  inspection  and  physical 

verification  of  M/s  LMKR  application  software  conducted  by  FIA 

Computer  Forensic  Experts  at  the  premises  of  CDA  revealed  that  M/s 

LMKR  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  did  not  get final  acceptance  certificate from  CDA  till 

date  after lapse  of ten  years  approx.  Thus M/s  LMKR  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  caused 

loss  to  the  tune  of  Rs.43171327/-  to  the  National  Exchequer  without 

providing  complete application software to  CDA  thus  committed  criminal 

breach  of  trust.  During  enquiry,  it  also  come  on  record  that  certain 

hardware  equipments  including  computer  systems,  printers,  servers,  etc. 

were found  missing  and  misappropriated  by  CDA  officers  and  officials. 

Prima Facie  case  is  registered  U/S  409  & 109  PPC R,IVV 5(2)  1947 PCA 

against  accused persons/s  (i)  Syed  Raza Abbas  Shah,  Executive  Director 

EGD/NITB  (E  Services  at  CDA),  (ii)  Faisal  Kamran  Project  Director 

EGD/NITB  (E  Services  at  CDA)  &  Project  Director at  CDA,  (iii)  Dr. 

Athar  Manzoor,  Consultant  IT  & Management  Division,  CDA  and  (iv) 

Atif Raees,  CEO, M/s  LMKR  Pvt.  Ltd  with  the  permission  of competent 

authority.  The  role  of  others  alongwith  officials/officers  of  executing 

agency  CDA  Ministry  of IT  would  be  thrashed out  during  the  course  of 

investigation." 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that allegations leveled in the 

FIR are  dependent  upon  the  contract, which  has  to  be  scrutinize prior  to 

registration of said  FIR as CD A is responsible for the  non-compliance of the 

W.P  No.  3915/2017 

3 

./  0 

terms of the agreement dated 11.12.2006 and the agreement provides the process 

of  settlement  of  dispute  in  Section 3  through  alternate  dispute  resolution 

mechanism and  petitioner has already filed Arbitration Petition U /S  20 of the 

Arbitration Act, 1940, which was decided ex-parte  vide order dated 02.03.2018 in 

favour of petitioner and matter was referred to Secretary, LT for settlement of the 

claim under  arbitration clause; that  the  petitioner is not  a  public servant, nor 

banker,  merchant,  factory, broker,  attorney  or  agent,  therefore, ingredient  of 

Section 409 PPC are not  applicable to the extent of petitioner and  petitioner is 

only  supplier  of  services under  the  terms  of  agreement  and  any  service or 

amount has to be settled through arbitration mechanism and as such provision of 

Section 5(2) 47 PCA is also not applicable as petitioner is not a public servant and 

High Court in terms of Section 561-A Cr.P.C. has inherent powers to make any 

order to prevent the abuse of process of law and the FIR is liable to be quashed 

especially when there is case of no offence or case is proved to be malafide and 

based upon facts, which are purely of civil nature and  of serious defect, which 

are apparent in this case; that during the proceedings of this Court, the petitioner 

has demonstrated  the application of software under the terms of agreement in 

the  office of  CDA and  as  such  number  of  functional tests  and  performance 

evaluation  as  well  as  software  activities  were  conducted  and  project  was 

successfully completed  with  the  implementation phase  test  and  as  such  no 

offence has  been committed by  the  petitioner; that  number  of project review 

committee meetings were held that CDA to conclude the software completeness 

test process. 

4. 

Conversely, learned  counsel for  the  CDA as  well  as  FIA officials and 

Director, l.T contend that petitioner/ company has not provided the due service 

as required under the terms of agreement and as such caused huge financial loss 

to  the  public  exchequer; that  initially  case  was  registered  due  to  criminal 

W.P  No. 3915/2017 

4 ...,,,0 

misconduct  of the public servant  of LT department  of CDA as well as NITB, who 

are responsible  for the  implementation  of E-services project of CDA, which was 

to be provided  by  the  petitioner's  company  M/s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd. and  despite 

clear direction  of this Court  on number  of occasions the performance  evaluation 

test  of  E-services software  could  not  succeed;  that  all  the  functional  tests  and 

verification  process  although  were  performed  but  the  complete  satisfaction  has 

not been achieved and  10 years old software resulted  into complete failure due to 

negligence  of CDA officials and  NITB and  loss of million  rupees  was  caused  to 

the public exchequer. The Director, NITB present  before the Court  has stated that 

more than 95% of function tests have been performed  successfully by M/s LMKR 

(Pvt.) Ltd. in the CDA office except few rectifications which were required  for the 

complete implementation  of E-services project. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record perused. 

From the  perusal  of record,  it has been  observed  that  petitioner  has been 

charged  in case FIR No.22, dated  11.10.2017, U /S  409, 109 PPC read with 5(2) 47 

PCA,  P.S. FIA  Anti-Corruption,  Islamabad,  which  was  registered  consequent 

upon  the  inquiry  No.97 /2015  initiated  upon  the  complaint  of Dr. Jamal Yousaf, 

Joint  Secretary  (Admin),  Ministry  of  Information  &  Technology  alleging  huge 

loss  caused  to  the  public  exchequer  in  different  projects  of  E-services at  CDA 

whereas,  NITB was  responsible  for  the  execution  of  project  of  E-services and 

during  the  process  of verification  M/ s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd.  has  not  delivered  the 

application  software  consist  of  number  of  modules  as  per  agreement  dated 

27.12.2006 of  total  worth  of  Rs.57575106/- out  of  which  Rs.43171327 /-  were 

already  paid  to  the  M/s  LMKR (Pvt.)  Ltd.,  which  was  cleared  by  the  Project 

Director  Faisal  Kamran,  Executive  Director  Syed  Raza  Abbas  Shah,  Dr.  Athar 

Manzoor,  Executive  Consultant  and  caused  financial  loss  to  the  public 

exchequer. 

W.P  No. 3915/2017 

5  ./0 

7. 

The petitioner  is  the  Chief Executive Officer of M/s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd., 

who filed quashment  petition against the above mentioned FIR on the grounds 

that no offence U /S 409 PPC read with Section 5(2)47 PCA were attracted in case 

as  petitioner  is not  a  public servant, nor  is responsible in  this  regard  and  the 

relationship of petitioner with  the Electronic Government Directorate, Ministry 

of Technology is based upon the agreement dated  11.12.2006 and  in case of any 

dispute  matter  could  only  be  resolved  through  alternate  dispute  resolution 

mechanism. 

8. 

I have gone through the agreement dated 11.12.2006, which was executed 

by the President of Pakistan and M/s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd. vendor, which is meant 

for  implementation of provision of E-services at  CDA, Islamabad.  The project 

includes gap analysis, licensed software, data entry/ scanning & data migration 

and  development  of  software  applications  at  CDA,  Islamabad.  The  terms 

referred in the agreement were duly defined in the definition clause 1  and as per 

clause 1.9  contract price was fixed at  Rs.57,575,106/-, which  is payable by the 

vendee to the vendor for the successful implementation, test of project by vendor 

and performance of all its obligations in accordance with terms & conditions of 

this agreement. The agreement also contains the term and  effective date as per 

clause 4, which is as under:- 

This  Agreement  shall  become effective on  the  date  of acceptance by  the 

Vendee of the Bank Guarantee furnished  by the Vendor in accordance with 

Schedule-A  and shall continue  in full  force and effect for  a period of forty 

eight  (48)  weeks  (the  "Term")  unless  terminated  earlier  or  extended 

further  in accordance with  the terms and conditions hereof 

9. 

Similarly, the Vendor i.e. M/s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd. shares the responsibility 

in the following manner:- 

The  Vendor shall provide, deliver, render, perform,  test,  commission  and 

transfer, as  applicable,  the  services relating  to  the  Project in  accordance 

with: 

W.P  No.  3915/2017 

Gfl 

(i) 

This Agreement  along with  the  Schedules and its  Technical 

(ii) 

(iii) 

Proposal in response to the RFP; 

All  applicable Laws of Pakistan; and 

Sound,  internationally  recognized and acceptable standards 

and  practices  as  modified,  amended  or  recommended from 

time  to  time  by  the  relevant  Pakistani  or  international 

agency, as  the case may be; 

The  Vendor  shall  ensure  that  each  milestone  in  the  Project  Plan  is 

achieved  on  or  before  its  schedule  date.  The  Vendor  covenants  that  the 

Scope  of  Services  shall  be  delivered,  supplied,  provided,  completed, 

performed,  commissioned,  tested,  and/or  rendered,  as  the  case  may  be,  in 

accordance with  the  applicable  specifications  contained  in  this Agreement 

and the Schedules, and in a good,  workmanlike manner,  and in accordance 

with  sound practices that are internationally  recognized and acceptable. 

10. 

The  agreement  further  provided  the  supply,  inspection,  test  and 

acceptance of the project in terms of clause 12.1  &  12.2  and  Project Director is 

responsible for the approval of every submissions even the concept of accepting 

and  testing includes the  integration test and  system integration and  software 

development  authority  who  is  responsible  for  security  acceptance  test, 

performance and  capacity test,  Penetration and  vulnerability test  as  well  as 

operational acceptance test in terms of clause 14.1. The agreement also provide 

the  defect  liability  period  of  two  years  from  the  date  of  issuance of  final 

certificate by the vendee alongwith the concept of termination in terms of clause 

24, which includes the notice of termination, however, remedy portion provides 

dispute  resolution  mechanism provided  in  terms  of  clause  26.3 as  well  as 

resolution by  parties  in  terms  of clause 3.1  and  referral of the  matter  to  the 

standing committee. 

11. 

This entire concept and terms of the agreement were agitated by the M/s 

LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd. through  application/petition  U/S  20 of the  Arbitration Act, 

1940 before the  Civil Court  at  Islamabad on  08.09.2017 and  the  learned Civil 

W.P  No. 3915/2017 

7 _,.,O 

Judge  seized  with  the  matter  has  passed  ex-parte  order  dated  02.03.2018 and 

referred the  matter  to  Secretary LT  in  terms  of clause 26.3.2 under  arbitration 

mechanism and at present arbitration proceedings have not yet been concluded. 

12. 

Besides  the  above  referred  background,  the  CDA  authorities  have 

submitted their written report as well as Director NITB has also submitted their 

point of view before this Court and as such the Director NITB states that 95%  of 

the  implementation  test  of  E-services  software  was  conducted  which  is 

satisfactory, however, FIA authorities states that M/s LMKR (Pvt.)  Ltd.  has failed 

to demonstrate the implementation of software in presence of CDA officials in 

the  CDA  premises,  even  the  Cyber  Crime  Circle  FIA  has  also  assisted  the 

technical aspect of the matter and two computer technical experts have verified 

the  in  question  software  but  the  modules  of  the  software  have  not  been 

completed till  date  despite  the  fact that  all servers, hardware  are  in  working 

condition which could be used for demonstration purposes as CDA has provided 

congenial  environment,  even  sufficient  time  was  given  to  the  petitioner's 

company who  has  failed to  demonstrate the  software in  three  previous  audit 

conducted by the NITB and Ministry of Technology and as such the terms of the 

agreement were violated. 

13.  At this stage, petitioner's company has received Rs.43 million out of Rs.57 

million w.e.f. 2007 to 2009 under the terms of agreement but no final acceptance 

certificate from CDA was issued in the last ten years. At this stage this Court has 

to observe as to whether the role of petitioner could be segregated in any manner 

from the other co-accused who are public servants and  directly responsible for 

the  criminal  misconduct  of  non-compliance  of  their  official  duties,  which 

resulted into causing loss to the public exchequer especially when the deliverable 

of M/s  LMKR (Pvt.)  Ltd. have not been received within the time frame, neither 

the same were supplied and as such citizens of Pakistan are suffering in the office 

W.P  No.  3915/2017 

8 /  .'.) 

of  CDA  due  to  their  orthodox  working  environment,  which  could  have  been 

transposed  by  way  of  implementation  of  E-services  project,  if  concluded, 

submitted  in time and  as such at this stage  the petitioner  has initiated  the process 

of alternate  dispute  resolution  and  arbitration  is under  way  through  which  the 

responsibility  could  be  fixed  to  the  extent  of  loss  and  recoveries  but  the 

criminality  in such  type  of cases is different  from  the  civil dispute  and  the  public 

officials involved  in this case could  have been thrashed  out  by the FIA authorities 

under  FIA  Act,  1974  being  the  competent  authority,  although 

the  FIR  was 

registered  but  the  matter  is under  investigation  and  as such  the  technical  reports 

were  submitted  with  the  NITB  for  their  final  conclusion  where-after,  FIA 

authorities  will be able to conclude  the investigation. 

14. 

I  have  considered  the  each  and  every  aspect  of  the  case  including  the 

exercise of remedy  by  the  petitioner's  side by invoking  the  arbitration  clause but 

under  the  garb  of  arbitration  proceedings  the  public  officials  of  CDA  and 

Ministry  of NITB could  not  be excluded  or  exempted  in  any  manner,  therefore, 

criminal  misconduct  in  terms  of  Section  5(2)47 PCA  has  to  be  thrashed  out 

whether  M/s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd.  could  be  held  responsible  or  otherwise,  as  it  is 

the  duty  of public  servant  on behalf  of government  of Pakistan  to protect  public 

money  used  in such  projects  although  the case of the  petitioner  prima-facie  comes 

under  the  civil  dispute  but  at  this  stage,  I  have  gone  through  the  judgments 

referred  as  2007 MLD  1535 (Muhammad  Afzal  VS  Muhammad  Bashir),  2005 

CLC 1673 (Rehmat  Ali  VS Dilawar  Shah), 2006 CLC 289 (Nazim  Ali  VS Rashid 

Qamar), 2006 MDL  491  (Haji  Muhammad  Ashiq  VS  State),  PLD  1968 SC  281 

(Muhammad  Akbar VS State),  2006 SCMR  1192 (Haji Sardar Khalid  Saleem VS 

Muhammad  AshraO,  2008 YLR  2505 (Rehan  Nasir  VS  SHO  P.S.  Rail  Bazar, 

Faisalabad),  PLD  2009 Karachi  65 (Maqsood  Ahmed  Qureshi  VS  Muhammad 

Azam Ali  Siddiqui),  2015 SCMR  1575 (Rafiq  Haji  Usman  VS Chairman, NAB), 

•. 

W.P  No. 3915/2017 

9  /0 

therefore,  while  relying  upon  these case laws  it is settled  that  criminal  and  civil 

proceedings  can go side by side and  they have  their  own  sphere  to conclude the 

contractual  liability under the terms of breach of agreement  as well as mens  rea in 

criminal cases, whether  the same is emanating  from  same  dispute  of contractual 

nature,  which  prima-facie  falls  within  the  civil  dispute  but  the  role  of  public 

servant  is separate,  which  does not  fall under any  mandate  of arbitration  clause 

referred  in the  agreement,  which was invoked  by M/s  LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd., even if 

the  Arbitrator  gives  an  award  against  the  government  of Pakistan  in  this  case, 

even  then  the  role  of public  servant  could  not  be excluded  and  FIA authorities 

are well within  the powers  to identify the role of public servants  who committed 

misconducs,which caused  loss to the public exchequer and  the authority  given to 

those  public  servants  on  behalf  of Federation  of Pakistan  has  been  exercised in 

capacity  of  agent/ servants  of  federation  and  as  such  any  loss  caused  to  the 

Federation  due  to  the  criminal  negligence  and  in their  official working  is liable 

U/5409 PPC. 

15. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  judgment  reported  as  2015 P.Cr.L.l  1592 

[Lahorel (Naeem Abbas  VS  D.G.  FIA, Islamabad),  2018 P.Cr.L.l  565 [Lahorel ( 

Syed  Nayab  Hussain  Sherazi  VS SHO  P.S.  Sabzazar,  Lahore),  wherein  it  was 

held  that  FIR could  not  be  quashed  in  piecemeal  manner  and  it  will  affect the 

entire case even otherwise,  the investigation  has not yet been concluded  and  FIA 

authorities  have to conclude  the investigation  and  if they  reach to the conclusion 

that no offence has been committed  in terms of Section 409 PPC read with 5(2) 47 

PCA to the extent of M/s LMKR (Pvt.) Ltd. or its Chief Executive Officer/present 

petitioner  they  may  exclude  the  petitioner  from  criminal  prosecution  under  the 

law, therefore, while considering  all these aspects, I am not inclined to quash  this 

FIR as the minimum  requirement  for quashment  of FIR could  not  be established 

by the  petitioner  with  reference to 2011SCMR1937  (Rana  Shahid Ahmad  Khan 

W.P  No.  3915/2017 

10 ..,.0 

VS  Tanveer Ahmed),  2016 P.Cr.L.T 67 (Sher Afzal Khan  VS State), 2008 SCMR  76 

(Dr.  Ghulam Mustafa  VS  State), 2014 YLR 429 (Bashir Ahmed  VS VIIIth  Family 

Tudge,  District  West,  Karachi),  2014 MLD  795  (Aftab  Ahmed  VS  State),  2014 

P.Cr.L.T  1361  (Haji  Zeri  Gul  VS  Ahmad  Tan  Khan),  2015  P.Cr.L.T  576 

(Muhammad  Zubair  VS  SSP), PLD 2016 SC 55  (Muhammad  Farooq VS  Ahmed 

Nawaz  lagirani),  2010 SCMR  1835 (Akhlaq  Hussain  Kayani  VS  Zafar  Iqbal 

Kiyani),  PLD 2007 SC 48 (The State  through Prosecutor  General Punjab, Lahore 

VS Sultan Ahmed). 

16. 

Keeping in view  the above principles laid  down  by the  superior  Courts, I 

am  not  inclined  to  accept  this  writ  petition  at  this  stage,  therefore,  the  same  is 

hereby dismissed. 

17. 

Before parting  with  the  said  judgment,  FIA  authorities  are  directed  to 

conclude  the  investigation  and  formulate  their  final  opinion  qua  the  role  of 

petitioner  in  this  case  within  a  period  of  three  (03)  months,  failing  which, 

Director  General,  FIA  shall  initiate  inquiry  against  the  FIA  officials for  non- 

compliance  of  mandatory  provisions  of  law  regarding  submission  of  challan 

within  the  stipulated  time  period  and  render  explanation  in  writing  before this 

Court. 

(MOHSIN'  AKHTAR  Kj\ Y ANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in open  Court on 

c::?  ~  I ·  ~ln i  · 

Zdtid 

JUDGE 

