Form No: HCID /C-l?l

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE TSIATIABAD HIGH GOURT. TSLAMABAD
JUDIGIAL DEPARTMENT

I.C.A. No.86 of 201 I

Muhammad  Faraz
VERSUg
Mehfeez and others.

Date of Hearing:

23.t.20t2.

Petitioner by:

Mr. Sajjad  Haider  Mailk, Advocate

Respondent  by:

Mr. Tahir.Efzal Abbasi,  Advocate

TUHATTAD AZ,IU/ KHAI{ AFRlDl. J:- Muhammad  Faraz

son of Muhammad Naseem  R/o Dhoke Sanjalian, Post Office Bhara
Kahu  Tehsil and District Islamabad,  has preferred  the instant Intra
Court Appeal u/s 3 of Law Reforms  Ordinance, L972, seeking
annulment  of judgment and order passed by Hon'ble Single Judge-in-
Chamber, in W.P.No.370/201t  titled Mst. Mehfeez and others  VS

Muhammad Faraz.
2.  Brief and relevant facts for the disposal  of the instant Intra Court
Appeal are that Mst. Metrfeez D/o Muhammad  Azram  hereinafter
referred to as respondent  No.I filed W.P.No.370/2OLI  under Article
199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan,  1973,
hereinafter referred to as Constitution,  challenging therein order
dated  13.1.I I passed by learned Additional District  & Sessions  Judge,
Islamabad,  (respondent  No.3), who dismissed the petition  of
respondent  No.I for the custody of minors namely Waqas Ahmad,
Aleeza  Bibi and Awais  Atrmad  instituted under Section 49I Cr.P.C.
The said writ petition  was accepted  by the Hon'ble Single Judge of
this Court vide judgment  and order  dated  2L.4.11 and directed the
appellant to handover  the said minors  to respondent  No.I forthwith.
That the said judgment and order is contrary to the facts and law as
the respondent  No.t has left the minors in June,  2009 and that the

2

I.C.A. No.86  of 201I

appellant  was upbringing, educating and maintaining  them since
then. That a petition ils 7 of Guardian  & Wards Act, was pending  in
the Court of Guardian Judge Islamabad,  which has become
infnrctuous due to the afore-stated  judgment  and order. That due to
pendency  of the said petition  before the Guardian  Judge,  Hon'ble
Single  Judge-in-Chamber  was having no jurisdiction to entertain  the
writ. That the impugned judgment would adversely affect  the
education  of two minors who are admitted to school.  That the said
judgment and order is liable to be set-aside and writ petition would

merit dismissal.
3.  Learned counsel for the appellant  has argued that the
respondent No.l left the minors in the month  of June 2009, at her own
whereafter  they are brought up, educated and maintained by the
appellant.  That the proper fonrm for adjudication of the controversy
between the parents was a petition  under Guardian & Wards Act,
which is already in progress before the learned  Guardian Judge
Islamabad.  That the impugned  judgment and order passed  by the
Hon'ble  Single  Judge,  was contrary to the facts of the case and attitude
and conduct of respondent  No.l towards the minors. That the matter

should have been left for the decision of the Guardian  Judge, and that
the Hon'ble  Single Judge-in-Chamber  should have, at the most,
directed  expeditious  disposal of the petition pending in the Court of
learned Guardian  Judge, Islamabad.  That the impugned  judgment
and order would adversely  affect the person and career  of minors  as
they are getting  education  in schools. That neither the petition  u/s 49I
(1) Cr.P.C.  nor writ petition under Article I99 of the Constitution was
competent. Reliance  was placed on the case of Mst. Fouzia  Bibi
reported as PLJ 20I0 Cr.C.(Lahore) 396.
4.  On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent No.I
argued  that the impugned  judgment  and order of the Hon'ble Judge
of this Court,  is in consonance with the mandate  of law. That the
appellant had entered into second marriage  and as such the minor
children are left at the mercy of step-mother.  That the respondent
No.I being mother of minors was having  preferential right of
"Hizanat".  That the said judgment and order is not open to

3

LC.A. No.86 of 201I

interference in ICA. Reliance was placed on PLD 201I Lahore  423,

?OLI YLR 1021,  2010 YI,R 1629  and PLD 2010 Karachi I19.
5.  We have heard arguments  of the learned counsel for the parties
and penrsed the record  with their assistance.
6.  Undisputed facts of the case of the parties are that marriage of
the appellant and respondent  No.l was solemnized in the month  of
February , 2004, and out of their wedlock three minor children namely
Waqas Ahmad (son) aged about  6 years, Aleeza Bibi (daughter)  aged

about  4 years, Awais Ahmad (son) aged about  Z-Yz years, were born.
Ttre parties were not living and leading a  comfortable and
harmonious  life and, with the passage of time, started  developing
differences  with each other which ultimately  culminated  into hatred
and ended the matrimonial life by divorce  of respondent  No. l. The
appellant had thereafter, entered into a contract  of second marriage.
7.  Respondent  No.I, being real mother of minors, submitted
Habeas Corpus Petition u/s 49I Cr.P.C. for the recovery  of the said
minors before the Court of learned  Sessions  Judge, Islamabad,  which
was entrusted to and heard by learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Islamabad. Dismissal of the same vide judgment dated I3.I.II
constrained respondent  No.I to file the writ under Article 199 of the
Constitution,  which  was heard and accepted by the Hon'ble Single
Judge-in-Chamber  and directions were issued for handing over the
custody  of three minor children to the mother  forthwith.
8. 
"Hizanat" an origination and emanation  of "Hizan"  signifies and
denotes love, care and affection  direly  and constantly  needed to a
male child upto the age of seven  years  and a female  child till puberty.
Care,  love and affection  undoubtedly plays a vibrant  and vital role in
the making of nature  and character of a person and as such "Hizanat"
can be safely termed  as a tribute  and privilege of minor  assigned  and

vested in mother.
9.  Bond of "Hizan"  can neither be disrupted  nor interrupted by
divorce. The same may face discontinuity  either on remarriage of
mother  or overpassing  the prescribe  age i.e. seven years in case of
male and attainment of age of puberty in case of a female child or
when the welfare of minor i.e. the prime and paramount  goal and

object of well-being,  becomes  at stake.

4

I.C.A. No.86  of 201I

I0.  Undisputed  facts of the case of the parties  would  suggest that all
the ttree children are minors and borne out of the wedlock of the
appellant  and respondent  No.l. Respondent  No.l, real mother and
the minor children are vested  with the privilege of Hizanat  till the age
of puberty  in the case of female and seven years in the case of male

children.
11.  Section 49I(b) Cr.P.C.  authorizes a High Court, a Sessions
Judge  or an Additional  Sessions Judge to issue directions  of the nature
of Habeas  Corpus  that a person illegally or improperly  retained in
public  or private custody  be set at liberty. Appellant has retained  the

minors  contrary to the nrle of "Hizanat" and as such custody  of the
appellant  is an improper detention  of minors in private  custody  and

petition of respondent No.I under  Section 491 Cr.P.C. was competent

and entertainable.
L2. \Me, for the above reasons, were, not impressed  by the
arguments  of learned counsel  for the appellant  desirous of upsetting
the judgment of this Court dated 21.04.11 containing  directions  of

handing  over the minors children to the mother. Needless  to mention
that the learned Family Court, is invested with the jurisdiction  to
determine  and decide the entitlement of parties for the custody of
minors  on the tenet and rule of welfare of minor  and in case the
welfare  of minors is found in the person of petitioner, then rule of
"Hizanat" would certainly become fruitless  and useless and would

therefore loose significance.
13.  For the above  mentioned  reasons,  the ICA is found devoid of
merits, and is, therefore,  dismissed with no order as to costs.

(R

rHMf,D  KIrEN)
IUDGE

IUDGE

IDI)

Approved for reporting

*Qamar  Khan*

