ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.4563 of 2013 

Aamir Naseer 
VS
Mst.Sobia Bibi & others 

Petitioner by:  
Respondent No.1 by:Mirza Irfan Ghazanfar, Advocate. 

   Mr. Zamin Abbas Malik, Advocate. 

Date of Hearing:  

  12.11.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J:  Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  invoked  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court 

under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 

1973 with the following prayer:- 

“It  is,  therefore,  respectfully  prayed  that  the 
instant  writ  petition  may  kindly  be  accepted  and  the 
judgments  of 
learned  Appellate  Court  dated 
08.10.2013  as  well  as  learned  Trial  Court  dated 
02.05.2013  may  kindly  be  set  aside,  in  the  interest  of 
justice. 

Any  other  relief  which  this  Hon’ble  Court 
deems  fit  and  proper  may  also  be  awarded  to  the 
petitioner.” 

2. 

Briefly  stated,  facts  of  the  instant  petition  are  that  marriage 

between  petitioner  and  respondent  No.1  was  solemnized  on 

28.11.2010, at Islamabad according to Muslim Rites against a dower 

consideration  of  Rs.1000/-.  However,  in  Column  No.  17  of  the 

Nikkah  Nama,  a  special  condition  was  incorporated  that  in  case  of 

matrimonial dispute, Gold ornaments weighing three (03) Tolas and 

an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- in cash will be given to respondent No.1 

by the petitioner. Unfortunately, differences cropped up between the 

couple, owing to which the wife/ respondent No.1 filed two suits i.e. 

one for recovery of dowry articles and dower amount; and second for 

recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.20,000/-  per 

month,  gold  ornaments  weighing  03-tolas  and  Rs.1,00,000/-.  Both 

the suits were contested by the petitioner by filing written statement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                               
 
 
 
 
2 

“W.P No.4563 of 2013” 
(Aamir Naseer VS Mst. Sobia Bibi etc…) 

The learned Judge Family Court after recording evidence passed a 

consolidated  judgment  dated  02.05.2013  by  declaring  respondent 

No.1 to be entitled to the dowry articles, which could be collected in 

the presence of the Court Bailiff on her pointation from the house of 

the  petitioner.  She  was  also  held  entitled  for  the  recovery  of  dower 

amounting  to  Rs.1000/-.  According  to  column  No.17  of  Nikkah-

nama,  petitioner  was  ordered  to  pay  Rs.1,00,000/-  to  respondent 

No.1.  Suit  of  the  respondent  No.1  to  the  extent  of  her  monthly 

maintenance  allowance  and  three  tolas  gold  ornaments  was 

dismissed. 

3. 

Feeling  aggrieved,  both  the  parties  filed  appeals  before  the 

learned  District  Judge,  Islamabad-West,  which  were  marked  to 

learned  Additional  District  Judge-II, 

Islamabad.  The 

learned 

appellate  Court  vide  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree,  partly 

accepted  the appeal  filed by  respondent  No.1 and held her  entitled 

to  recover  amount  of  dower  Rs.1000/-,  3  tolas  of  gold  ornaments 

and  an  amount  of  Rs.1,00,000/-  in  accordance  with  column  No.  17 

of  „Nikahnama‟.    Her  remaining  claims  were  refused.  The  learned 

appellate  Court  also  remanded  the  case  qua  dowry  articles  to  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court  with  the  direction  to  record  evidence 

and  give  finding  on  issue  “As  to  what  specific  dowry  articles/items, 

the  respondent  No.1  is  entitled  to  recover  from  the  petitioner”.  The 

appeal filed by petitioner was dismissed, hence this petition.   

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  contended  that  the 

impugned  judgments  passed  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  as  well  as 

learned  appellate  Court  are  illegal  and  against  the  facts  and 

evidence,  therefore,  the  same  are  liable  to  be  set  aside;  that  the 

impugned  judgement  and  decree  dated  08.10.2013  of  learned 

appellate Court while not dismissing the suits of respondent No.1 are 

result of misreading and non-reading of evidence. Lastly, prayed for 

acceptance of the instant petition. 

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  No.1  has 

opposed  the  contentions  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

“W.P No.4563 of 2013” 
(Aamir Naseer VS Mst. Sobia Bibi etc…) 

petitioner with the contention that the petitioner failed to produce any 

evidence  during  the  trial  to  establish  that  he  had  already  paid 

everything to respondent No.1 and nothing was outstanding against 

him.  Except  his  bald  statement,  no  other  oral  or  documentary 

evidence was produced by the petitioner in support by of his stance; 

that  there  was  a  special  condition  incorporated  in  the  Nikah  Nama/ 

Ex.P.1 that in case  of “Ghair-abadi”/desertion, the husband will pay 

Rs.1,00,000/-  and  gold  ornaments  weighting  03  tolas;  that  the 

learned appellate Court has rightly appreciated the facts of the case 

and  the  passed  a  decree  in  favour  of  respondent  No.1,  which  is 

exactly in accordance with law and facts of the case. 

6. 

I  have  given  anxious  consideration 

to 

the 

respective 

arguments  advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  have 

perused the material available on record.  

7. 

From perusal of record the facts, which come to light are that 

the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.1  were  married  on  28.11.2010 

against  a  dower  consideration  of  Rs.1000  and  a  Nikkah  Nama 

Ex.P.1 was duly executed in this behalf. According to Colum No.17 

of the Nikah Nama a special condition was incorporated that in case 

of  “Ghair-abadi”,  the  husband  is  bound  to  pay  an  amount  of 

Rs.1,00,000/-  and  Gold  ornaments  weighing  03  Tolas  to  the  wife. 

Unfortunately,  differences  cropped  between  the  couple  owing  to 

which  respondent  No.1  deserted  the  house  of  the  petitioner  and 

opted to file suits for recovery of dower, dowry articles, maintenance 

as well as Rs.1,00,000/- and 3 tolas gold ornaments.  The said suits 

were contested by the petitioner/defendant with the plea that he had 

already  paid the  cash and  gold ornaments to respondent  No.1 and 

further that since she had herself deserted the house for petitioner, 

therefore,  she  was  not  entitled  to  any  maintenance.  With  regard  to 

the  dowry  articles,  it  was  claim  of  the  petitioner  that  no  dowry 

articles were given to her by her parents, therefore her claim in that 

behalf was not genuine.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

“W.P No.4563 of 2013” 
(Aamir Naseer VS Mst. Sobia Bibi etc…) 

8. 

A careful scrutiny of the record divulged that the claim  of the 

petitioner  that  he  has  already  paid  Rs.1,00,000/-  and  03  tolas  gold 

ornaments  to  respondent  No.1,  in  accordance  with  the  contents  of 

Column  No.17  of  the  Nikah  Nama  (Ex.P.1)  not  only  seems  to  be 

against  the  record  rather  ridiculous  one  because  it  was  special 

condition in the Nikah Nama (Ex.P.1) that in case of Ghair-abadi, the 

husband  will  be  bound  to  pay  the  aforesaid  amount  and  gold 

ornaments to the wife, which means that obligation to pay the same 

had to  start from  the  date of Ghair-abadi.  It is  not case of  either of 

the party that even earlier at any occasion, the respondent No.1 had 

left  the  house  of  the  petitioner  or  deserted  him  due  to  in-cordiality, 

therefore,  no  occasion  has  arisen  for  payment  of  the  same  to  the 

respondent  No.1.  Then  how  the  petitioner  can  claim  that  he  had 

already  paid  the  same  to  respondent  No.1  and  that  nothing  was 

outstanding  towards  him.    The  learned  lower  appellate  Court  has 

thus rightly  decreed  the suit  of  respondent No.1  to  this  extent.  The 

findings  of  the  learned  lower  appellate  Court,  in  this  behalf  are 

exactly  in  consonance  with  the  entry  in  Colum  No.17  of  the  Nikah 

Nama Ex.P.1 and the same do not call for any interference.  

9. 

So  far  as  the  claim  of  respondent  No.1  with  regard  to  dowry 

articles  is  concerned,  though  her  suit  was  decreed  by  the  learned 

trial  Court,  but  the  learned  appellate  Court  accepted  the  appeal  to 

that extent and remanded the matter to the learned Family Court to 

determine  as  to  what  extent  the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to  recover 

dowry articles. The said findings were never assailed by respondent 

No.1,  before  any  higher  forum,  hence  the  same  attained  finality. 

Even  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  failed  to  point  out  any  mis-

reading or non-reading in this behalf on the part of the learned lower 

appellate Court. 

10.  Similarly,  the  claim  of  respondent  No.1  qua  recovery  of 

maintenance  has  already  been  turned  down  by  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court  and  appeal  filed  against  the  same  also  failed,  hence 

the said chapter also stood closed, like past and closed transaction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

“W.P No.4563 of 2013” 
(Aamir Naseer VS Mst. Sobia Bibi etc…) 

11.  For the aforesaid reasons, the instant writ petition is devoid of 

any merits, hence the same is dismissed. 

(Ghulam Azam Qambrani) 

     Judge 

Announced in Open Court, on this 29th day of January, 2021. 

S.Akhtar 

       Judge 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
