ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P No.421-2021 

Mst. Rashida Aslam  
VS 
Additional District Judge, Islamabad (West) and others.   

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Abdul Hafeez Amjad, Advocate.  

Respondents by: 

Ms.  Saba  Batool  Mumtaz,  Advocate 
respondent No.3. 

for 

Date of Hearing: 

15.02.2023. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition,  the  petitioner  has  assailed  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 

15.07.2019, passed by learned Judge Family Court (West), Islamabad and 

judgment  and  decree  dated  09.11.2020,  passed  by  learned  Additional 

District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  both  the  Courts  below  have 

concurrently dismissed the claim of jewelry articles of the petitioner. 

2. 

Learned Counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner was 

married  to  respondent  No.3/Nawab  Akhtar  on  12.11.2011  at  District 

Kasur,  Punjab  and  thereafter  shifted  to  Islamabad.  He  further  contends 

that petitioner was given dowry articles amounting to Rs. 741,810/- as per 

list  Exh.P/4    including  the  gold  ornaments,  based  upon  some  of  the 

receipts Exh.P/4 to Exh.P/6, but the marriage was dissolved on the basis 

of  divorce  during  the  pendency  of  the  matter.  He  further  contends  that 

after  the  divorce,  she  has  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dowry  articles  on 

13.01.2018 and appended the list of dowry articles, whereas certain items 

have been handed over to the petitioner in bad condition, except the gold 

items, which have concurrently been denied by the Courts below, despite 

the fact that overwhelming evidence was available on record.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.421-2021 

Page | 2 

3. 

Conversely,  Learned  Counsel  for  the  respondent  No.3  contends 

that the judgments and decrees have factually been settled by the Courts 

below  and  this  Court  in  constitutional  petition  cannot  pass  a  contrary 

decision  against  the  factual  aspect.  He  further  contends  that  the  claim 

sought  by  the  petitioner  has  not  been  justified  in  any  manner,  therefore, 

instant writ petition may kindly be dismissed.  

4. 

5. 

Arguments heard and record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that petitioner filed a suit for recovery of 

dowry  articles  mentioned  in  the  list  Exh.P/4  whereby  all  the  items were 

decreed as per list, except gold ornaments from serial No. 90 to 93 of the 

list, which includes 03 tola gold set, 04 tola Bangles, gold chain and gold 

ring alongwith two topes and the claim of the petitioner has been denied 

in the written statement  by the respondent, who  acknowledges majority 

of  the  articles  in  the  written  statement,  which  were  handed  over  to  the 

petitioner and duly admitted before this Court. 

6. 

While considering the evidence of the petitioner, who appeared in 

her own support as PW-1 and was cross-examined at length, in which she 

admitted that:- 

She also acknowledges that:- 

7. 

However  petitioner  has  neither  mentioned  the  aspect  of  receiving 

back  the  gold  ornaments  in  her  plaint  nor  in  the  affidavit  of  evidence 

Exh.P1, which creates adverse affect against the claim of the petitioner by 

both the Courts below in their findings on issue No.1, which resulted into 

dismissal  of  suit  to  the  extent  of  gold  ornaments.  Similarly,  it  is  also 

reflected from the judgments of the Courts below that petitioner has been 

denied her right of the gold ornaments only on one count that she cannot 

 
 
W.P.No.421-2021 

Page | 3 

remember that what was the weight of gold set, which was given by her 

mother.  The  trial  Court  while  giving  the  findings  on  issue  No.1  has  also 

referred that "it does not appeal to prudent mind that the parents having limited 

source of income can give 7 tolas gold ornaments to their daughter besides giving 

her  dowry  articles  of  almost  valuing  Rs.400,000/-“.  Even  otherwise,  it  is 

common  practice  in  our  society  that  female  usually  keeps  the  gold 

ornaments with them.  

8. 

While  considering  the  above  findings,  it  appears  that  learned  trial 

Court  as  well  as  Appellate  Court  have  appreciated  the  testimony  of 

respondent No.3/DW-1, who, submitted his evidence Ex.D/1 in shape of 

affidavit  and  in  cross  examination,  respondent  No.3/Nawab  Akhtar 

acknowledges that:- 

9. 

While  considering  the  above  evidence,  the  concurrent  findings 

could not be interfered. The respondent side  has produced the receipt  of 

jewelry  in  shape  of  documentary  evidence,  whereas  the  evidence  of 

petitioner only contains some jewelry articles, which were already handed 

over to the petitioner and that aspect has concurrently been settled by the 

Courts  below,  therefore,  no  exception  could  be  taken  to  the  concurrent 

findings  in  constitutional  petition.  No  jurisdictional  defect  has  been 

pointed  out  by  the  petitioner,  rather  case  was  dismissed  by  the  Courts 

below on merits.   

 
 
 
W.P.No.421-2021 

Page | 4 

10. 

For  the  foregoing  reasons,  I  have  reached  to  the  conclusion  that 

plaintiff/petitioner 

is  not  entitled  for  any  gold  ornaments  from 

respondent No.3, hence instant writ petition is DISMISSED.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

        JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on  

RAMZAN 

        JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
