ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Writ  Petition  No.309/2017 
Pakistan  United  Christian  Movement  (PUCM)  & another 
VS
FOP through  Secretary,  Ministry  of Law  & Parliamentary  Affairs  & 6 others 

Petitioners  by: 

Mr. Muhammad  Majid  Bashir, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Barrister  Muhammad  Mumtaz  Ali, AAG. 
Muhammad  Akram,  Inspector,  ETO, Islamabad. 

Date  of Hearing: 

16.01.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  I:  Through 

the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

petitioners  seek  direction 

to  be  issued  to  respondent  authorities/ministries 

to 

impose  a  complete  ban  on  sale,  purchase  and  consumption  of  liquor  under  the 

name  of  religion  as  per  the  proposal  of  the  Islamic  Ideology  Council  and 

accordingly,  Article  37  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 

1973 may  be  amended. 

2. 

Brief facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ petition  are  that the  Islamic  Ideology 

Council 

in  Pakistan  has  banned 

the  consumption  of  alcohol/liquor  amongst 

Muslims,  whereas  Non-Muslims, 

including 

the  Christians,  and  foreigners  of  21 

years  of  age  or  above  are  being  issued  permits 

to  purchase/  consume  alcohol, 

while 

the  Pakistan  United  Christian  Movement 

(hereinafter  referred 

to  as 

"petitioner")  being  the  representative  of  the  Christian  community 

in  Pakistan 

highlighted 

that  consumption  of  alcohol  is  totally  prohibited 

in  all  the  religions 

practiced 

in  the  world, 

including  Christianity,  because  as  maintained  by  the 

Gospel  of  Luke  and  Mathews,  consumption  of  wine  is  considered  as  sinful,  but 

the  respondents 

authorities 

are  being  issuing  permits 

to  non-Muslims  with 

respect  to  purchase/  consumption  of wine.  Hence,  the  instant  writ petition. 

3. 

Learned 

counsel 

for  petitioners 

contended 

that 

increase 

use  of 

wine/liquor  in  Pakistan  is  a  clear  violation  of  moral  duties,  religious  principles 

and  constitutional 

laws;  that  since  Churches  all  over  the  world  and  biblical  texts 

W.P.  No.309/2017 

Page  I  2 

prohibit  the  consumption  of liquor  for  being  sinful, issuance  of its  permit  to 

sell/ purchase is illegal and  against the religious views of Christianity; that  the 

Islamic Ideology  Council had  already  proposed  a  ban  on  sale,  purchase  and 

consumption, but till date it has not been policed yet, therefore, the respondent 

authorities  may  be  directed  to  strictly  prohibit  the  sale,  purchase  and 

consumption  of  liquor  in  the  name  of Christians  and  other  Non-Muslims by 

imposing complete ban. 

4. 

Conversely, learned Additional Attorney General opposed the instant writ 

petition on the  ground  that  the same is competent and  not maintainable as the 

petitioners have wrongly invoked the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court; that the 

petitioners  have  distorted  the  facts  and  suppressed  the  material  facts  for 

malicious gain giving raise to disputed questions of facts and the same could not 

be resolved by  this Hon'ble  Court  under  Article 199 of the  Constitution of the 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973; that the permit with respect to sale, purchase 

and consumption of alcohol/liquor  is issued under Prohibition Order, 1979 after 

fulfillment of all  the  formalities required  under  the  law, therefore, the  instant 

writ petition has no force and the same may kindly be dismissed. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that the Pakistan United Christian Movement i.e. 

the  petitioner  has  raised  the  question  of  public  importance  and  prayed  for 

issuance of direction to prohibit the sale, purchase and consumption of liquor in 

the  name  of  Christians  and  other  Non-Muslim communities  mainly  on  the 

ground 

that 

the  use  of 

liquor 

is  strictly  prohibited 

in  Christians 

scriptures/ community. The relevant grounds raised by the petitioner in Para-3 of 

the instant writ petition are as under: 

"The  prohibitionist  position  has  experienced  a  general  reduction  of 
support  since  the  days  of prohibitionism  as  a  movement,  with  many  of 
its  advocates  becoming  abstentionists 
instead.  Groups  adopting 
prohibitionist  positions  include  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention  and 
Seventh-day  Adventists  The former  group  resolved  that  their  "churches 
be  urged  to give  their full  moral  support  to  the prohibition  cause,  and  to 

W.P.  No.309/2017 

Page  I  3 

gi.ve  a  more  liberal  financial  support  to  dry  organizations  which  stand 
for  the  united  action  of  our  people  against  the  liquor  traffic. "  Charles 
Spurgeon  said:  "I wish  the  man  who  made  the  law  to  open  them  had  to 
keep  all  the families  that  they  have  brought  to  ruin.  Beer  shops  are  the 
enemies  of  the  home;  therefore,  the  sooner  their  licenses  are  taken  away, 
the  better."  The  founder  of  the  Salvation  Army  William  Booth  was  a 
prohibitionist,  and  saw alcohol as evil  in  itself  and  not  safe for  anyone  to 
drink  in  moderation.  In  1990,  the  Salvation  Army  re-affirms:  "It  would 
be  inconsistent  for  any  Salvationist  to  drink  while  at  the  same  time 
seeking to help others  to gi.ve it up."  The Assembly  of God:  "a little alcohol 
is  too  much  since  drinking  in  moderation  provides  Satan  an  opening  to 
cruel  deception."  David  Wilkerson founder  of Teen  Challenge  said similar 
things.  Billy  Sunday:  "After  all  is  said  that  can  be  said  on  the  liquor 
traffic,  its  influence  is  degrading  on  the  individual,  the family,  politics 
and business and  upon everything  that you  touch in  this old world." 

Prohibitionists  such  as  Stephen  Reynolds  and  Jack  Van  Impe  hold  that 
the  Bible forbids  partaking  of alcohol  altogether,  with  some  arguing  that 
the  alleged  medicinal  use  of  wine  in  1  Timothy  5:23  is  a  reference  to 
unfermented  grape  juice.  They  argue  that  the  words  for  alcoholic 
beverages  in  the  Bible  can  also  refer  to  non-alcoholic  versions  such  as 
unfermented  grape juice,  and for  this  reason  the  context  must  determine 
which  meaning  is  required.  In  passages  where  the  beverages  are  viewed 
the  alcoholic 
negatively,  prohibitionists  understand 
drinks,  and  where  they  are  viewed  positively,  they  understand 
them  to 
mean  non-alcoholic  drinks.  Prohibitionists  also  accuse  most  Bible 
translators  of  exhibiting  a  bias  in  favor  of  alcohol  that  obscures  the 
meaning  of the origi.nal  texts. 

to  mean 

them 

The  Church  of Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  the  largest  body  of  the 
Latter  Day  Saint  movement,  also  teaches  that  "God  has  spoken  against 
the  use  of  alcohol.  They  base  this  teaching  on  the  Word  of  Wisdom,  a 
section  in  Doctrine  and  Covenants  which  is part  of the Mormon  Canon, 
that recommends  against  the ordinary  use of alcohol,  though  it  makes an 
exception  for  the  use  of  wine  in  the  sacrament,  a  similar  rite  to  the 
Eucharist.  However,  the  church  now  uses  water  instead  of  wine  in  the 
sacrament,  and  since  1851,  the  Word  of Wisdom's  advice for  wise living 
has been  considered  "a binding  commandment  on all  Church  members." 

The license issued  by  the  Government  of Pakistan  for  consumption  of liquor  is 

based  upon  the  religious  authority  as reflected from  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

Prohibition  (Enforcement  of Hadd)  Rules, 1981, wherein  Section 2( d) deals  with 

license, which is reproduced  as under: 

"(d)  "license"  includes  a  pass  or  permit  granted  under  these  rules  or 
the  Punjab  Excise  Act  (Act  I  of  1914)  or  under  any  rules, 
under 
notifications  or orders made  thereunder" 

W.P. No.309/2017 

Page  I  4 

Therefore, any  person  who  is  license holder  granted  under  the  said  Rules is 

authorized  to  use  and  consume  the  liquor,  however  in  order  to  understand 

liquor permits, the relevant provision referred in the said Rules is as under: 

12. 
The following  liquor permits  shall  be granted  in  the form  by  the authority 
and  to  the  persons  specified  below  and  shall  be  treated as  license  under  Article  17 
of  the  Order  of  the  purpose  specified  as  under  the  subject  to  the  conditions  as 
prescribed  by  the  Excise  Commissioner:-- 

Fann  of  Authority  competent  Renew 
permit 
PR.I 

to  Grant 
Prohibition  Officer 

Not 
renewable 

PR.II 

renewable 

Officer  Not 
Prohibition 
the 
that 
provided 
Inspector 
resident 
posted 
the 
to 
Institution  may  be 
treated  a  Prohibition 
Officer  for  the  grant 
of  such  permit 
in 
favour  of  foreigners 
and  tourists  staying 
in  that institution. 

To whom  Granted 

Purpose 

Non-muslim 
citizen  of Pakistan 
not  below  the  age 
of21  years. 

Non-muslim 
foreigner  holding 
a valid passport. 

the 

such 

For  purchase,  possession, 
transport  or  consumption 
of 
of 
quantity 
liquor  at  or 
intoxicating 
about 
ceremony 
prescribed  by  his  religion 
not exceeding at a  time  that 
specified  in  the permit. 
For  purchase,  possession, 
intoxicating 
transport  of 
liquor  not  exceeding  at  a 
time  that  specified  in  the 
for  his  personal 
permit 
his 
at 
consumption 
residence  or a hotel  room  in 
his occupation. 

7.  While considering  the  above  referred  Rules, this  Court  has  called  the 

report  from  the  Deputy  Commissioner,  Islamabad  and  Director  Excise and 

Taxation, JCT, who  have  provided  a complete list, which includes 4933 permit 

holders  and  majority of them  are  Christians by  faith, who  have  been  granted 

liquor permits. The list has been filed by the respondent authorities in Court and 

same is available on record. 

8. 

I  have  also called comments from the  Ministry of Religious Affairs and 

Inter-faith Harmony, Government of Pakistan, who avoided the interpretation of 

this aspect in  their  para-wise comments, whereas  Ministry of Law and  Justice 

agreed to process necessary legislation for amendment in the Constitution of the 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 regarding imposition of complete ban on the 

initiative  of  concerned  Ministry  subject  to  condition  that  if  all  religious 

W.P.  No.309/2017 

Page  I  5 

communities  unanimously  agree  for criminalization  of consumption  of alcoholic 

liquor. 

9. 

Besides the  above  referred  position,  the  learned  AAG in  attendance  has 

heavily  relied  upon  Article 37(h) of the  Constitution  of the  Islamic Republic  of 

Pakistan, 1973, which is referred  as under: 

Article  37: The State  snall--- 
(h) 
medicinal  and,  in  the case of non-Muslims,  religious  purpose;" 

Prevent  the  Consumption  of alcoholic  liquor  otherwise  than for 

10. 

The  learned  counsel  for  petitioner  when  confronted  with  the  position 

referred  in Article 37(h) of the  Constitution  of the  Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 

1973 has  drawn  attention  of this Court  towards  the  principles  of policy referred 

in Article 29 of the Constitution,  which refers as under: 

(1) 

The  Principles  set  out  in  this  Chapter  shall  be  known  as 
29. 
the  Principles  of  Policy,  and  it  is  the  responsibility  of each  organ  and 
authority  of the  State,  and of each  person  performing functions  on behalf 
of  an  organ  or  authority  of  the  State,  to  act  in  accordance  with  those 
Principles  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  functions  of  the  organ  or 
authority. 
(2) 

In  so  far  the  observance  of  any  particular  Principle  of 
Policy  may  be  dependent  upon  resources  being available for  the purpose, 
the  Principle  shall  be  regarded  as  being  subject  to  the  availability  of 
resources. 

11. 

The  learned  counsel  for  petitioner  has  further  relied  upon  PLD  1993 

Karahi  83  (Shahab Matloob  v.  Government  of Sindh),  wherein  it  has  been  held 

that: 

"Principles  of Policy ---Applicability  --- Mode of enforcement  ---  Extent 
---  Provision  of Art.37(c)  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  state  would 
make  technical  and professional  education  generally  available  and higher 
education  equally  accessible  to  all  on  basis  of  merit  ---  Validity  of  an 
action  or a  law  although  could  not  be  called  in  question,  on  the  ground 
that  same  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Principles  of  Policy,  and  no 
action  would file  against  the  State,  any  organ  or Authority  of  the  State 
or  any  person  on  such  ground,  yet  each  organ  and  Authority  of  the 
State,  and  each  person  performing  functions  on  behalf of  an  organ  or 
Authority  of  the  State  was  required  to  act  in  accordance  with  the 
"Principles  of Policy"  in  so far  as  they  related  to  the functions  of organ 
or  the  Authority  ---  Principles  of  Policy  enshrined  in  the  Constitution 
can always  1.,e  called in aid for  the purpose  of interpretation  of any  legal 

W.P.  No.309/2017 

Page  I  6 

provision  or instrument---  Any  interpretation  which  seeks  to  comply  or 
advance  Principles  of  Policy  should  always  be  adopted  as  against  an 
interpretation  which goes against such principles." 

Similarly, in another  reported  judgment  PLD 1990 Karahi  342  (Ms. Farhat  lalil 

VS Province o(Sindh),  it has been held that: 

law  in  accordance  with 

those  principles.  To  put 

"There  is  no  bar  to  the  superior  judiciary  in  the  'performance  of  its 
functions  and duties  and in exercise  of its jurisdiction  and powers  to act 
or  to  declare 
it 
differently,  the  judiciary  like  other  organs  and  authorities  is  immune 
from  attack  qua  its  actions  and  declaration  of  law  on  any  ground 
relatable  to principles  of policy.  If it  takes  any  action  or declares  any  law 
in  accordance  therewith,  there  is  nothing  in  this  Article  to  prevent  it 
from  doing so.  This  discussion  on  the bars  relating  to  the enforcement  of, 
or  actions  in  accordance  with, 
to  an 
irresistible  conclusion  that  qua  the  judiciary  (though  it  cannot  direct 
other  organs  of  the  state  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of 
policy)  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  itself from  acting  on  those  principles 
subject  of course  to  some  other  constitutional  limitations  and  important 
compulsions  qua the statute  law which  would  be spelt out  separately." 

the  principles  of  policy  leads 

12. 

Conversely,  the learned  AAG raised  serious  objection qua  maintainability 

of instant  writ  petition  on the  strength  of Article 30(2)  of the  Constitution  of the 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan,  1973, which refers as under: 

(2) 

30. 
The  validity  of an  action  or of a  law  shall  not  be  called  in 
question  on  the ground  that it is  not  in accordance  with  the Principles  of 
Policy,  and  no  action  shall  lie  against  the  State,  any  organ  or authority 
of the  State or any  person  on such ground." 

The  learned  AAG  further  contends  that  such  type  of  question  could  not  be 

settled in constitutional  jurisdiction  of this Court  and has relied upon  2015 SCMR 

1739 (Lahore Development  Authority  VS  Ms.  Imrana  Tiwana),  wherein  it  has 

been held that: 

"32. 
This  does  not,  however,  mean  that  the  Principles  of  Policy,  the 
Objectives  Resolution,  and Article  2A  either  on  their own  or when  read 
together  can  be  used  to  strike  down  laws.  All  that  it means  is  that  these 
Articles  can  be  used 
the  chapter  on 
in  its  proper  context.  This  may  facilitate  an 
Fundamental  Rights 
interpretation  of Fundamental  Rights  in harmony  with  and not  divorced 
from 
their  constitutional  setting.  The  object  of  this  approach  is  to 
harmoniously  construe  the  various  provisions  of  the  Constitution  in  a 
holistic  manner.  This  approach  does  not  deviate from  the  view  taken  by 

to  understand  and  interpret 

W.P. No.309/2017 

Page  I  7 

the  Court  that  the  Objectives  Resolution,  Article  2A  and  the  Principles 
of Policy cannot  provide  a  criterion  to  test  the  validity  of statutes  and  to 
strike  them  down." 

13. 

Besides the above referred position, the issue could  only be resolved by 

way of deliberation and recommendations of the relevant constitutional wisdom 

laid down in Article 228 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 

1973, whereby Islamic Ideology Council has been established with the powers to 

perform functions in terms of Article 230 of the Constitution, whereby they can 

make  recommendations  to  the  Parliament/Provincial  Assemblies  as  to  the 

measures for bringing the existing laws into conformity with injunctions of Islam 

and  the  stage  by  which  such  measures  are  to  be  brought  into  effect. Even 

otherwise, Article 25  of the Constitution laid down equal protection of law and 

considers all citizen equal before the law, such principle is equally applicable to 

non-Muslim citizens of Pakistan, who have also been given assurance in terms of 

Article 36 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, whereby 

the  State shall  safeguard  the  legitimate rights  and  interest  of minorities in  all 

respects.  Furthermore,  while  considering  the  mandate  of  Article  38  of  the 

Constitution,  it  is  the  duty  of  State  for  promotion  of  social  and  economic 

wellbeing of Pakistan  in  every respect. It  is the  State's  obligation to  settle the 

question of public  importance, especially when  the  petitioner  has  referred  the 

consumption  of  alcohol  as  totally  prohibited  in  all  religions  practiced  in  the 

world. 

14. 

In view of above background, the instant writ petition stands DISPOSED 

OF with  direction to the Federal Government to consider the recommendations 

of  Islamic  Ideology  Council,  whereby  complete  ban  was  suggested  on 

sale/ purchase  of  liquor  and  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Prohibition 

(Enforcement  of  Hadd)  Rules,  1981  requires  necessary  amendment  in  the 

schedule whereby liquor was permitted  on prescribed ceremony defined in any 

religion.  Such  phrase  is  against  the  dignity  of  the  Christian  community, 

W.P.  No.309/2017 

Page  I  8 

therefore, all the concerned ministries, including the Federal Government, shall 

come up  with  solution  by  inviting  all  the  stakeholders  on  the  parliamentary 

platform  for  the  amendment  of constitutional provision  and  other  laws,  if  so 

desired. However  it  is expected from the  Federal Government to  initiate such 

process before relevant authorities and forums at the earliest. 

(MOHSIN  AKHt AR KAY Alfi) 
JUDGE 

I 

Announced  in open Court on:  ()~  February, 2020. 

KhalidZ. 

JUDGE 

