ORDER SHEET
IN THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P No.  4678 of 2021 

Ruhi Farzana Shafi, etc 
VS
Komal Iqbal, etc 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge 
and that of parties or counsel 
where necessary.  

                           22.04.2024.  M/s.  Samina  Khan  and  Adnan 

Khan, Advocates for Petitioner. 
Mr.  Haroon  Rashid,  Advocate  for 
respondents.  

ARBAB  MUHAMMAD  TAHIR,  J:    Through  the 

listed petition in terms of Article 199 of the Constitution 

of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  petitioners   

(Ruhi  Farzana  and  Ahmed  Sewhani) 

impugned 

Judgments  and  decree  dated  08.11.2021  and 

24.06.2019 

(Impugned  Judgments)  passed  by 

learned  Additional  District  Judge-West,  Islamabad  and 

Senior  Civil  Judge/Judge  Family  court-West,  Islamabad  

whereby suit of respondent No. 1 for recovery of dower 

amount,  dowry  articles,  personal  belongings  and 

gold/diamond ornaments or  as an  alternate  remedy  its 

present  market  price/value  has  been  decreed  in  her 

favour  and  appeal  against  said  judgment  and  decree, 

filed by petitioners, has been dismissed.  

2. 

The fleetingly enumerated chronicles of the lis are 

that petitioner No. 2 and respondent No. 1 entered into 

wedlock  on  09.02.2015  and  after  consummation  of 

marriage,  the  couple  was  blessed  with  daughter  on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 2 

08.01.2016.  The  marriage  was  solemnized  against 

dower  of  Rs.  500,000/-  which  was  deferred.  However, 

due  to  some  domestic  disputes  the  respondent  No.1 

filed  her  suit  for  recovery  of  dower,  dowry  articles  and 

gold/diamond  ornaments  before  the  Family  Court, 

Islamabad, which was contested by petitioner No. 2 but 

partially  decreed  in  favour  of  respondent  No.  1. 

Thereafter  the  parties  challenged  the  judgment  and 

decree  of  the  learned  Family  Court  by  dint  of  appeal, 

but  the  same  were  dismissed  vide  judgment  dated 

08.11.2021. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that 

the  lower    Courts  have  not  appreciated  the  factual 

matrix  as  well  as  evidentiary  resume  of  the  case  and 

misinterpreted  the  facts  of  the  case;  that  giving  of 

dowry articles was acknowledged but its alternate value 

has not been properly determined by the Courts below; 

that the Courts below failed to  appreciate the fact that 

parties  are  permanent  resident  of  United  Kingdom  and 

purchase of dowry articles and its transportation to the 

petitioner’s  house  has  also  not  been  proved;  that  the 

judgment of the trial court is silent about the residence 

of respondents while it was the firm stand of petitioners 

that only marriage was solemnized in Pakistan. Learned 

Counsel placed reliance on case laws reported as 2019 

CLC  1008,    PLD  2019  SC  527,  2019  CLC  71,  2020 

YLR  282  and  unreported  Judgment  passed  in  CP 

No. S-466 of 2021.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 3 

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for the respondent No.1 

has  vehemently  opposed  this  petition  and  partially 

supported  the  impugned  judgments  and  decree;  that 

evidence  put  forward  by  the  respondent  are  clearly 

mentioned  and  petitioners  were  bound  to  give  the  same 

as  matter  of  right  but  learned  Family  Judge  partially 

decreed the suit of the respondent No. 1 without perusal 

of  record  and  evidence,  therefore  impugned  judgments 

are  result  of  misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence  of 

the parties; that lower courts failed to follow the law and 

dictums  laid  down  by  the  superior  courts  which  are 

binding therefore, instant petition is liable to be dismissed 

and  decree  is  liable  to  be  modified  in  favour  of 

respondent No. 1.  

5. 

Arguments  heard  and  file  perused  from  cover  to 

cover.   

6. 

The  nub  of  the  matter  is  the  contest  between  the 

parties  in  respect  of  the  dower  amount,  dowry  articles, 

gold  and  diamond  articles  given  by  petitioners  to 

respondent  No.  1  which  has  allegedly  been  stolen  by 

respondent No. 1. Petitioners called the police and lodged 

FIR No. 243/16 against the respondent under Section 392 

PPC with Police Station Margalla, Islamabad which matter 

is still pending before the Hon’ble Apex court.  

7. 

This  Court  is  of  the  opinion  that  right  of  a  wife  to 

receive  dower  from  her  husband  as  stipulated  in  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 4 

nikahnama  or  otherwise  agreed,  as  and  when  becomes 

due  under  the  law,  is  an  inherent  ingredient  of  the  very 

concept  of  the  marriage  in  Islam.  For  the  reason  that 

dower, in the context of Muslim marriage, is an obligation 

under the  Holy Quran and Sunnah. Burden to  prove  that 

said  obligation  has  been  discharged  by  the  husband  at 

the  time  of  marriage  or  during  the  existence  of  the 

marriage.    Said  burden  can  be  discharged  through  an 

overt act like execution of an affidavit having received the 

dower  or  producing  the  witness(es)  in  whose  presence 

said  obligation  was  discharged.  However,  petitioners 

failed  to  produce  any  kind  of  such  evidence  in  their 

favour.    Therefore,  in  such  eventualities,  the  Courts  are 

required to carefully examine the evidentiary resume of a 

case  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  a  groom/husband  has 

paid the dower at the time of nikah or on demand of the 

wife.  Having  held  so,  it  is  imperative  to  examine  the 

statement of the parties that persuaded the lower Courts 

in setting up the impugned findings.  

8. 

In  the  instant  case,  there  is  no  dispute  as  to  the 

amount  that  was  fixed  as  dower  in  terms  of  Columns 

No.13  of  the  nikahnama.  It  is  the  effect  of  how  Column 

No.  15  of  the  nikahnama  has  been  dealt  with  by  the 

parties  at  the  time  of  solemnization  of  their  nikah  and 

also  their  statements  during  the  cross  examination  that 

persuaded the Courts to set the findings. Admittedly, the 

term “Deferred” dower means ‘later on’ or ‘postponed’ as 

also  the  payment  ‘on  demand’  as  contemplated  in  para 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 5 

290 of the principles of “Muhammadan Law by D.F. Mulla 

that reads as under:  

“290  “Prompt”  and  “deferred” 
dower.-----(1)  The  amount  of  dower  is 
usually  split  into  two  parts,  one  called 
“prompt,” which is payable on demand, and 
the other called “deferred” which is payable 
on  dissolution  of  marriage  by  death  or 
divorce.” 

9. 

In  case  of  “Muhammad  Qayyum  Anjum  v. 

Additional  District  Judge,  Muzaffargarh  and  2  others” 

[2022  MLD  416  Lahore  (Multan  Bench)],  the  moot 

point as to how above referred Columns of the nikahnama 

deal  with  the  dower  and  its  kinds,  keeping  in  view  the 

scope  of  Section  10  of  the  Muslim  Family  Courts 

Ordinance,  1961,  came  under  discussion  and  the  Lahore 

High Court held as under:  

“8.  ….Here  it  is  relevant  for  the  present 
purposes to traverse through the wording of 
columns  No.  13  to  16  of  the  nikahnama.  In 
column  No.  13,  the  word  “Raqm  (مــقر  ( 
“(amount)  has  been  used;  column  No.14 
also  uses  the  word  “Raqm  (مــقر)”  (amount) 
whereas  columns  No.  15  and  16  use  the 
word  “Mahr”  (dower)  that  also  reveals  the 
intention  of  the  legislature  with  regard  to 
amount of dower, which can be incorporated 
and  settled  by  the  parties,  under  columns 
No.13  and  14  and  other  valuables  as  dower 
under  columns  No.  15  and  16.  Entries  in 
columns  No.13  to  16  together  become 
‘dower overall’. Thus, entry in column No. 13 
of the nikahnama is to contain the amount of 
dower,  entry  14  envisages  the  break-up  of 
such  amount  of  dower  spelled  out  by  the 
parties  by  virtue  of  entry  under  column  No. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 6 

13  into  prompt  and  deferred  whereas  entry 
in  column  No.  15  may  contain  anything 
given  or  paid  out  of  the  amount  envisaged 
under entry 13 or in addition thereto forming 
as  part  of  the  dower  overall…..entries  under 
columns  No.  13  to  16  of  the  nikahnama 
envisage  reflection  and  manifestation  of  the 
parties  as  to  amount/Raqm  (مــقر  (and  other 
articles and/or property given or to be given 
by  husband  to  wife  as  the  dower  overall. 
Therefore,  anything  other  than  an  amount, 
forming  part  of  dower  overall  and 
incorporated  under  columns  No.  15  and/or 
16 has also to contain the time and mode of 
payment and giving of the same by husband 
to  wife.  Failure  to  spell  out  the  mode  and 
time  of  dower  contained  in  entry  15  and/or 
16  would  entail 
the  attraction  and 
applicability of Section 10 of the Ordinance.”  

10. 

In  the  instant  case,  there  is  no  dispute  upon  the 

amount  of  dower.  As  per  column  No.  13,  the  amount  of 

dower  was  fixed  as  Rs.  500,000/-  and  nature  of  dower 

was described in column No. 14. Nikahnama is considered 

as  registered  document  in  light  of  Section  6  of  Muslim 

Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961,  therefore,  presumption  of 

correctness is attached to the entries therein. Very cogent 

evidence  was  required to  rebut the  entries of nikahnama 

and  the  stance  of  the  petitioners  that  respondent  has 

withdrawn  dower  amount  from  MCB  account  does  not 

prove payment of dower to  respondent No. 1  unless it is 

proved  through  independent  evidence  but  no  such 

evidence was placed on record by petitioners, Hence, this 

Court  is  of  the  view  that  claim  of  respondent  No.  1  has 

force and the lower Courts rightly relied on her statement 

while  deciding the payment of dower in her favour.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 7 

11. 

In writ jurisdiction, the High Court has to see as to 

whether  the  lower  Courts  have  committed  jurisdictional 

error,  uncondonable  in  nature  or  in  the  exercise  of 

jurisdiction  had  committed  patent  legal  error,  causing 

serious  miscarriage  of  justice  because  the  Hon’ble  Apex 

Court  has  consistently  held  that  the  High  Court  in  its 

constitutional  jurisdiction  is  not  supposed  to  decide  such 

matters,  as  a  Court  of  appeal  by  making  reappraisal  of 

the evidence and to form a different opinion from the one 

held by the Courts below, even if it is possible. 

12.  The learned Additional District Judge as well as the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court  have  attended  to  all  the 

material  aspects  of  the  case  and  have  considered  each 

and  every  important  piece  of  evidence  and  after  its 

proper  appraisal  recorded  concurrent  findings  on  each 

and  every  issue.  I  have  minutely  attended  to  both  the 

impugned  judgments  but  could  not  discover  any  gross 

misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence, 

causing 

miscarriage  of  justice  to  attract  the  extra  ordinary  writ 

jurisdiction of this Court. 

13.  The  Family  Court  is  a  Special  Tribunal,  constituted 

with  the  object  to  decide  domestic  disputes.  It  has  the 

benefit of reading the mind of the spouses during pre-trial 

and post-trial reconciliation, besides noting the demeanor 

of  the  witnesses  and  conduct  of  the  parties  during  the 

trial. Similarly, the Court of appeal is a Court of fact and 

law  both  and  when  both  such  Courts  decide  any  dispute 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W . P   N o .   4 6 7 8 / 2 0 2 1     | 8 

in  a  legal  manner  then,  the  High  Court  has  to  exercise 

maximum  restraints  in  interfering  with  findings  of  these 

Courts,  unless  and  until  it  is  shown  that  these  were  the 

result of misconstruction of duly executed documents and 

/  or  based  on  misreading  and  non-reading  of  material 

evidence  on  record,  resulting  into  miscarriage  of  justice, 

in  my  view,  the  case  in  hand  does  not  fall  within  that 

category. 

14. 

In view of the above discussion, this Court is of the 

opinion  that  instant  petition  has  no  merits  and  the 

findings  of  the  Appellate  Court  as  well  as  trial  Court 

merits  no  interference  by  this  Court,  therefore,  hereby 

upheld.  

15. 

Instant petition is dismissed accordingly.  

                           (ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR) 

JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on                 .2024. 

Sherazi 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
