ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Writ  Petition  No.1329/2019 
Muhammad  Mudassar 
VS
Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  & 3  others 

Petitioner  by: 

Ch. Yasir Azeem,  Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Ch.  Qaisar  Nazir  Sipra,  Advocate  for 
Respondents  No.2  to 4. 

Date  of Decision: 

30.01.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  J:  Through 

the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  called 

in  question 

judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court  (West),  Islamabad  dated  13.10.2018 as  well  as  the  judgment  of the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  dated  11.02.2019,  whereby 

Respondents  No.2  to  4  have  been  declared  entitled  for  recovery  of maintenance 

allowance  along  with  dower  in shape  of 7112  Tola  gold  ornaments. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred 

in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  the  Mst.  Sada£ 

Bibi/Respondent  No.2  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  and 

dower  against  the  petitioner  on  the  pleas  that the  petitioner  and respondent  No.2 

contracted  marriage  on  23.05.2010  against  dower  amount  of  71/2  Tola  gold 

ornaments,  which  was  not  paid  by  the  petitioner  at  the  time  of  Nikah.  The  said 

spouses  have  been  blessed  with  children 

i.e.  Respondents  No.3  &  4  but  the 

matrimonial  bond  became  tense  with  time,  re~~lting  into  ousting  of Respondents 

No.2  to  4 from  the  abode  of petitioner,  Consequently,  Respondent  No.2  filed  the 

suit  for  recovery  of  dower  and  maintenance  allowance,  which  was  contested  by 

petitioner  by  way  of  filing  written  statement  denying 

the  allegations 

leveled 

against  him  and  the  learned  trial  Court  pursuant  thereof  framed  six  (06) issues, 

to  which  both  the  parties  produced 

their  respective  evidence,  on  the  basis  of 

which  the  learned  Trial  Court  partially  decreed  the  suit  vide  impugned 

judgment 

W.P. No.1329/2019 

Page  I  2 

and  decree dated  13.10.2018 and  declared that  Respondent No.2 is entitled for 

recovery of dower  in shape of '71/2  Tola gold ornaments as well as declared the 

minors  i.e.  Respondents  No.3  &  4  each  to  receive maintenance  allowance @ 

Rs.5,000/- per  month  with  10%  annual  increase. Feeling aggrieved thereof, the 

petitioner as well as  Respondents No.2 to 4 preferred  their  respective appeals, 

whereby the learned first Appellate Court vide impugned judgment  and decree 

dated 11.02.2019 accepted the appeal of Respondents No.2 to 4 and declared that 

Respondent No.2 is entitled  to receive maintenance allowance @  Rs.4,000/- per 

month,  whereas  Respondent  No.3  &  4  were  declared  to  be  entitled  for  the 

maintenance allowance @  Rs.5,000/- per month  each with  10%  annual  increase 

till attaining their  age of majority and  marriage, respectively, from the  date  of 

filing of suit till the payment of prompt  dower, whereas the appeal filed by the 

petitioner was dismissed. Hence, the instant writ petition. 

3. 

Learned counsel for petitioner contends that the impugned judgment and 

decree to  the  extent  of grant  of prompt  dower  and  maintenance allowance to 

respondents has been passed in fanciful and  slipshod manner as Column No.14 

of  the  Nikahnama  reveals  that  dower  was  prompt  and  paid  at  the  time  of 

marriage; that the passing of impugned judgment and decree of both the Courts 

below is  the  result  of misreading  and  non-reading  of evidence; that  both  the 

Courts below have  not  properly  appreciated  the  evidence available on  record 

and  resorted  to  passing the  impugned judgment  and  decree, rather  the Courts 

below  have  relied  upon  oral  assertions  of  the  respondents,  therefore,  by 

accepting the  instant  writ  petition  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated 

13.10.2018 of the learned  trial Court and judgment  of the first Appellate Court 

dated 11.02.2019 may be set-aside. 

4. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

W.P. No.1329/2019 

Page I  3 

5. 

Perusal of record reveals that Mst. Sadaf Bibi/ respondent No.2 filed a suit 

for  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  and  dower  along  with  claim  of 

maintenance of minors  i.e. Respondents No.3 and  4  against the  petitioner. The 

suit was contested by the petitioner by way of filing written  statement denying 

the stance of plaintiff/respondent  No.2 with the plea that Respondent No.2 being 

a  disobedient and  arrogant  wife herself left the  house  along with  minors and 

refused  to  join  the  petitioner  for  performance of matrimonial  obligation. The 

petitioner has  also taken  the  stance that  he  has  paid  the  dower  at  the  time of 

Nikah in shape of 71/2  Tola gold ornaments and respondent  No.2 is not entitled 

for dower as claimed by her in her plaint. 

6. 

The  diverse  pleadings  of  the  parties  led  to  framing  of  six  (06)  issues, 

relating to which evidence of the parties was recorded and pursuant  thereof the 

learned  trial Court  vide  impugned  judgment  and  decree dated  13.10.2018 has 

partially  decreed  the  suit  in  favour  of  Respondents  No.2  to  4  directing  the 

petitioner to pay the dower in shape of gold ornaments or its equivalent amount 

along with  maintenance allowance @  Rs.5,000/- per month  to each minor with 

10%  annual increase, whereas the claim of respondent No.2 (plaintiff wife) to the 

extent of her maintenance was turned down. 

7. 

Both the  parties  feeling aggrieved thereof preferred  their  cross appeals, 

whereby appeal of respondent  No.2 was allowed and maintenance of Rs.4,000/  

per  month  was  granted  in  her  favour, while the  appeal  filed by  the petitioner 

was dismissed vide impugned judgment dated 11.02.2019. 

8. 

In order to resolve the controversy, I  have gone through  the testimony of 

respondent No.2, who has taken the categorical stance that her Haq Mahar  fixed 

in the  Nikahnama  (Exh.P4) in  Column No.13 was  of 71/2  Tola gold  ornaments, 

which  was  not  paid,  although  she  acknowledged  the  terms  referred  in  the 

Nikahnama  in  her  testimony.  Respondent  No.2  also  produced  Nikah-Khawan 

W.P.  No.1329/2019 

Page  I  4 

namely  Nasir  Farooq, who  reiterated  the  stance of  respondent  No.2 through 

Exh.P2 by stating before the Court that Haq Mahar was fixed as 71/2 Tola gold with 

further acknowledgment that: 

"-LL4:--J.:.::.AJf.JL,;1(J  fI.)  J .» J?.r'i..f...::.J,Lt,JJt;" 

The  said  Nikah-Khawan  despite  being  cross  examined  at  length  remained 

consistent  in  his  testimony,  who  is  also  an  independent  witness  and 

acknowledged that  he  has referred word  "J:i.yi"  in relevant column of Exh.P4, 

but he explains that gold jewelry was not paid, therefore, the contrary evidence 

brought on record by the petitioner by way of his witness namely DW-2 Naeem 

has no  significance and  both  the  Courts below have righty  adjudicated  upon 

the matter  and  awarded  the  dower  of 71/2  Tola of gold  ornaments  to  plaintiff 

wife. 

9. 

The second objection raised by the petitioner is regarding the maintenance 

allowance of  Respondent  No.2  as  he  contended  that  respondent  No.2  is  a 

disobedient wife and not willing to resume the matrimonial bond. However, this 

factor has  properly  been appreciated  by both  the  Courts below, in which the 

conduct  of  petitioner  is  not  above  board,  who  is  not  willing  to  settle  the 

matrimonial  relationship  with  his  wife  as  he  is  neither  providing  the 

maintenance  allowance  nor  he  is  paying  the  dower,  therefore, he  could  not 

rectify this position and  could not prove the stance of disobedient wife in any 

manner. 

10. 

It  is  settled  law  that  dower  was  obligatory  on  husband,  which  is 

entitlement of wife as consideration of marriage and once it has been proved on 

record that the same was not paid, the wife can refuse to live in the matrimonial 

bond, whereas the burden  of proof lies upon the husband to prove that he had 

paid  full dower  and  nothing  is due  against him. Reliance is placed upon  2014 

W.P.  No.1329/2019 

Page  I  5 

CLC 15 (Abdul Sattar VS Mst.  Shagu,fta Bano). As such, the petitioner has failed 

to prove that he has paid the dower in shape of gold ornaments as agreed by him 

at the time of Nikah. 

11. 

Furthermore,  the  concept  of  dower  in  favour  of  wife  is  based  on  the 

Quranic injunction referred in Verse:24 of Surah An-Nisa  in the following manner: 

"And  those of whom  ye seek content  (by marrying  them),  give unto 
them  their portion as a duty." 

12.  As  such,  the  Quranic  injunction  referred  above  does  not  permit  the 

withholding  of payment  of dower  till dissolution of marriage. Even otherwise, 

there is no concept of defer or prompt  dower in the Quranic injunction referred 

in  Surah  An-Nisa,  rather  it  is  the  obligation of  a  husband  to  pay  the  same. 

Reliance is placed upon PLD 1998 Lahore 52 (Dr. Anees Ahmad VS Uzma). 

13. 

In  the  above  referred  position,  when  the  husband  is  neither  paying 

maintenance allowance  to  wife, nor  providing  due  protection  and  security in 

shape of separate residence facility, he could not claim that wife is disobedient, 

rather he is not performing his obligation. The stance taken by petitioner in his 

pleadings as well as in his evidence is not justified despite the fact that burden to 

proof the payment of dower is on husband. 

14. 

This Court has put a serious effort for reconciliation of the parties on five 

different dates  of hearing as the marriage between the parties is  still intact and 

respondent  No.2 is taking care of the minors on her  own without  any  support 

from the petitioner in shape of maintenance allowance, however, reconciliation 

could not be effected. Moreover, the petitioner despite making promise has failed 

to  arrange  separate  kitchen  and  washroom  in  the  house  for  his  wife  i.e. 

respondent  No.2, therefore, at  this stage, the petitioner has failed to  prove any 

illegality in the findings of the Courts below and as such, the concurrent findings 

W.P.  No.1329/2019 

Page  I  6 

could not  be  interfered with  in  the  constitutional jurisdiction, even otherwise, 

the  evidence has  properly  been appreciated by both  the  Courts below, hence, 

the 

instant  constitutional  petition 

is  misconceived  and 

the  same 

is 

hereby DISMISSED. 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR KA T;\NI) 

JUDGE 

KhalidZ. 

1 

