JUDGMENT SHEET. 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

R.S.A No.07/2016. 

      Naseem Ahmed Khan, etc.  

VS             Syed Fahad Ali, etc.  

        Appellants by: 

Syed Asad Ali Saeed, Advocate. 

 Respondents No.1 & 2 by: 

Mr. Tariq Ameen, Advocate. 

 Respondent No.3 by: 

Mr. Tariq Masud, Advocate. 

 Date of Hearing 

                 25.10.2016. 

JUDGMENT. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  the  instant  appeal,  the  appellants 

have  assailed  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  25.01.2016,  passed  by  learned 

Additional District Judge (West) Islamabad, whereby suit titled Syed Fahad Ali, 

etc VS Mst. Jamshed Jahan and others was decreed in appeal. 

2. 

Brief facts leading to the filing of instant appeal are that Sarfraz ul Hassan 

Syed/respondent No.2 filed a suit in capacity of next friend/Guardian at Litum on 

behalf of respondent No.1(minor) titled as Syed Fahad Ali and another  VS Mst. 

Jamshed  Jehan,  etc,  whereby  respondent  No.1  sought  declaration  against  the 

respondents and claimed that he is lawful owner in possession of suit properties 

mentioned  in  the  body  of  plaint  on  the  basis  of  oral  gift  deed  made  by  Mst. 

Musarat  Sultana    on  12.10.2006  in  the  presence  of  witnesses.  The  suit  was 

contested  by  the  respondents.  Learned  Trial  Court  framed  the  issues  and  after 

recording  of  evidence  of  the  parties,  the  suit  filed  by  respondent  No.1  was 

dismissed  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  08.12.2015.  The  said  judgment  and 

decree  was  assailed  through  R.F.A  by  Syed  Fahad  Ali/respondent  No.1  before 

learned Additional District Judge (West) Islamabad, who accepted the appeal, set 

aside  judgment  and  decree  of  Trial  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

25.01.2016. 

3. 

As  per  contents  of  the  plaint,  respondent  No.1  Syed  Fahad  Ali  claimed 

that his mother Mst. Musarat Sultana died on 28.05.2008, whereas he was adopted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
       
       
 
      
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

2 

by Mst. Musarat Sultana and Sarfraz ul Hassan soon after his birth as both were 

issueless.  

4. 

Mst. Musarat Sultana was only daughter of her parents and her late father 

Muhammad Sultan was owner of the suit properties bearing House No.125, Street 

No.16,  Sector  G-10/I,  Islamabad,  land  measuring  80  Kanals  situated  in  Mouza 

Kharianwala, District Sheikhupura. Late Muhammad Sultan was also share holder 

in the properties of his late sister Mst.Murtazai Begum in capacity of real brother 

as  Mst.  Murtazai  Begum  was  issueless  and  her  husband  had  already  been  died. 

Mst.  Murtazai  Begum  was  owner  of  House  No.1477,  Street  No.22,  Mohallah 

Haripura,  District  Rawalpindi  and  the  said  land  was  inherited  by  Mst.  Musarat 

Sultana. Mst. Musarat Sultana was also owner of land measuring 1 Kanal situated 

in Jhangi Syedan, Islamabad vide registered sale deed No.406, dated 02.02.1994. 

Respondent No.1 claimed that he is in possession of suit properties referred above 

and respondent No.3 Mst. Jamshed Jehan mother of Mst. Musarat Sultana being 

in  capacity  of  share  holder  in  the  properties  has  already  submitted  his  written 

statement in the suit conceding the stance of respondent No.1.   Respondent No.1 

in order to prove his case produced Sarfraz ul Hassan as P.W.1, Sabiha Begum as 

P.W.2 and Mst. Aziza Masroor as P.W.3 in order to prove oral gift declaration of 

Mst.  Musarat  Sultana  in  favour  of  respondent  No.1.  Respondent  No.1  also 

produced  documentary  evidence,  copy  of  allotment  letter  of  House  No.125, 

Sector G-10/1, Islamabad as Exh.P.1, copies of record of rights as Exh.P.2, copy 

of  sale  deed  as  Exh.P.3,  certified  copy  of  order  dated  11.01.2005  of  suit  titled 

Mst.  Mustafai  Begum  VS  Mst. Jamshed  Jahan,  etc  as  Exh.P.4,  certified  copy  of 

suit  titled  Syed  Fahad  Ali  VS  Mst.  Jamshed  Jahan,  etc  Exh.P.5,  copy  of  death 

certificate  of  Musarat  Sultana  as  Mark-A  and  copy  of  transfer  order  dated 

21.03.1974  as  Mark-B.  The  defendants  produced  their  evidence  through  Mobin 

Ahmed Khan as D.W.1 and submitted documentary evidence Exh.D.1 to Exh.D.5 

comprising of certified copies of judicial record of different cases.  

5. 

Learned counsel for appellants contended that first appellate Court has set 

aside the judgment and decree of Trial Court contrary to the law and facts of the 

case; that learned first appellate Court has not discussed all issues of the suit nor 

 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

3 

even given issue wise findings, which is contrary to law; that first appellate Court 

has  completely  ignored  the  documentary  evidence  produced  by  the  present 

appellant,  even  issue  No.2  with  regard  to  jurisdiction  of  Court  has  not  been 

discussed;  that  respondent  No.1  while  submitting  his  plaint  contended  that  oral 

gift deed was pronounced in the presence of witnesses Syed Wajid Ali, Mansoor 

Ahmed  and  Sartaj  Ali,  whereby  physical  possession  was  also  handed  over  to 

respondent No.1/plaintiff but during the course of evidence no such fact has ever 

been  brought  on  record  rather  contrary  evidence  has  been  produced,  therefore, 

when the appellate Court has not considered this fact of departure from pleadings 

and passed the judgment and decree in favour of respondent No.1, the same is to 

be considered in violation of statutory provisions of law, whereas it is mandatory 

upon  the  plaintiff  to  prove  his  case  through  cogent  evidence  on  the  basis  of 

pleadings, whereas first appellate Court while accepting the evidence beyond the 

pleadings has committed serious error in law, which is core question before this 

Court in second appeal. 

6. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondents No.1 & 2 contended that first 

Appellate  Court  has  rightly  passed  the  judgment  and  decree,  whereby  suit  of 

respondent No.1 was decreed as there is no rival contest of the suit; that only legal 

heirs available on record is respondent No.2  as well as Mst. Jamshed Jehan, who 

have  conceded  in  favour  of  Syed  Fahad  Ali  and  acknowledged  the  oral  gift  on 

record, therefore, there is no further evidence required to prove case.  

7. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused.  

From the perusal of record, it has been observed that respondent No.1 filed 

suit for declaration regarding oral gift declaration dated 12.10.2006 in presence of 

witnesses pronounced by Mst. Sultana Musarat late in  favour of respondent No.1, 

whereby  respondent  No.1  claimed  that  he  is  owner  in  possession  of  the  suit 

properties  mentioned  in  the  body  of  the  plaint.  The  suit  was  filed  against  the 

defendants Mst. Jamshed Jehan mother of late Mst. Musarat Sultana.  Defendant 

Mst.  Jamshed  Jehan  appeared  before  the  Trial  Court  and  got  recorded  her 

statement  on  24.02.2012,  whereby  she  conceded  the  prayer  of  respondent  No.1 

and stated that she has no objection if the suit of respondent  No.1 is  decreed as 

 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

4 

she wants to transfer the house in the name of her grandson/respondent No.1. The 

statement  was  recorded  by  learned  Civil  Judge  and  Mst. Jamshed  Jehan  put  her 

thumb impression and signature on the margin of order sheet.  The suit was filed 

by  respondent  No.1  through  his  next  friend  respondent  No.2,  the  adopted  father 

and  husband  of  Mst.  Musarat  Sultana,  who  has  no  adverse  interest  to  that  of 

minor. Subsequently the suit was amended  on two different occasions and other 

legal heirs have been impleaded as defendant in the suit, in the instant are appeal 

appellants No.1 to 8, whereas respondent No.4 Mst. Mustafai Begum, Phuphi of 

late Mst. Musarat Sultana, who was living in India and appointed Syed Sartaj Ali 

has general attorney but later on both the parties are not aware of the whereabouts 

of the respondent and with consent of both the parties her name was deleted from 

array of the defendants vide order dated 22.04.2016, even the said Mst. Mustafai 

Begum was proceeded against ex-parte.  

9. 

Mst. Musarat Sultana was married to respondent No.2 Sarfraz ul Hassan, 

who were issueless, therefore, they adopted Syed Fahad Ali as their son, however, 

Mst.  Musarat  Sultana  died  on  28.05.2008,  whereby  she  was  owner  and  having 

share in different properties listed below:- 

(i)       House No.125, Street No.16, Sector G-10/I, Islamabad. 

(ii)     Land measuring 80 Kanals situated in Mouza Kharianwala, 

District    Sheikhupura. 

(iii)  House  No.1477,  Street  No.22,  Mohallah  Haripura,  District 

Rawalpindi. 

(iv) Land measuring 1 Kanal situated in Jhangi Syedan, Islamabad. 

10. 

Respondent No.1 has filed a suit for declaration to the effect that late Mst. 

Musarat Sultan on 12.10.2006 on eleventh birth day of respondent No.1 gifted of 

properties  to  respondent  No.1  minor  through  oral  gift  deed  in  the  presence  of 

witnesses Mansoor Ahmed, Syed Wajid Ali and Sartaj Ali and also handed over 

physical  possession  to  the  extent  of  her  share  to  the  minor,  however,  same  was 

acknowledged by respondent No.2 father of minor. The other living legal heir of 

Mst.  Musarat  Sultana  is  mother  Mst.  Jamshed  Jehan,  who  appeared  before  the 

Court and  got  recorded  her statement vide order dated 24.02.2012, whereby  she 

has no objection on the decree prayed for and she has acknowledged the rights of 

 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

5 

respondent  No.1  to  the  extent  of  house  referred  in  the  body  of  the  plaint.  The 

other  legal  heir  is  Sarfrazul  Hassan  Syed/respondent  No.2,  who  is  representing 

respondent  No.1  in  capacity  of  next  friend  and  acknowledged  the  claim  of 

respondent  No.1 during  entire proceedings.  The  present  appellants  contested the 

said suit by filing their written statement on record in capacity of defendants No.3 

to 10 mainly on the ground that oral gift has been pronounced in October, 2006 

but late Muhammad Sultan never transferred the property in favour of respondent 

No.1 in her life time till the death i.e. 28.05.2010, hence, they claimed that entire 

story of oral gift is after thought. The present appellants have denied the oral gift 

story  at  the  very  inception  of  the  proceedings  rather  contested  the  matter 

vigorously.  From  the  perusal  of  record,  it  has  been  observed  that  learned  Trial 

Court after hearing learned counsel for the parties framed following issues:- 

ISSUES. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Whether  the  plaintiffs  are  entitled  to  the  decree  for 
declaration and permanent injunction as prayed for?OPP 

Whether  this  court  has  territorial  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate 
upon the suit in hand?OPD-3 to 10 

Whether the plaintiffs have come to  the  court with sullied 
hands?OP-3 to 10 

Whether suit of the plaintiffs is not maintainable under the 
law?OPD-3 to 10 

Whether  the  plaintiffs  are  stopped  by  their  words  and 
conduct to file the instant suit?OPD-3 to 10 

Whether  the  suit  is  false,  frivolous  and  vexatious,  hence, 
answering  defendants  are  entitled  to  special  costs  U/S  35-
A, CPC?OPD-3 to 10. 

7. 

Relief.  

11. 

From the above mentioned issues, it reveals that main issue is issue No.1, 

on  which  both  the  parties  lead  their  evidence.  Respondent  No.1  has  been 

represented  through  Sarfraz  ul  Hassan  as  P.W.1,  who  stated  that  at  the  time  of 

filing  of  the  suit  respondent  No.1  Fahad  Ali  was  minor,  whereas  Mst.  Musarat 

Sultana died on 28.05.2008. Respondent No.2 in capacity of P.W.1 further stated 

in  his  evidence  that  House  No.125,  Street  No.126,  Sector  G-10/1,  Islamabad 

belongs  to  my  late  wife,  whereas  he  also  claimed  that  he  is  share  holder  in  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

6 

said  property  and  house  in  question  was  initially  owned  by  his  father  in  law 

Muhammad Sultan. He further stated that agricultural land measuring 80 Kanals 

situated in Sheikhupura and 1 Kanal land situated in Mouza Tornol as well as a 

plot situated in Rawalpindi were also owned by Mst. Musarat Sultana and on the 

11th  birth  day  event  of  respondent  No.1  on  12.10.2006,  when  entire  family 

relatives  were  present  in  the  function,  mother  in  law  (defendant),  his  brother 

Sartaj Ali, his other family members and his sister and cousin Wajid Ali with his 

family were present and in their presence late Mst. Musarat Sultana stated that she 

has gifted her entire property to her son Fahad Ali, however, respondent No.1 was 

minor, therefore, the said gift deed has been acknowledged by P.W.1 in capacity 

of father. The entire possession of the property has also been received by P.W.1, 

hence, suit be decreed in favour of respondent No.1.  

12. 

Respondents  No.1  &2  have  also  produced  Sabiha  Begum  and  Aziza 

Begum  as  P.W.2  &  P.W.3,  sisters  of  respondent  No.2  and  aunts  (Phuphi)  of  

respondent  No.1, who have  got  recorded their statements  and acknowledged the 

entire transaction of oral gift deed on the 11th birth day event of respondent No.1. 

During  the course of cross-examination by present  appellants,  P.W.1/respondent 

No.2  has  acknowledged  that  he  has  not  referred  the  share  belonging  to  Mst. 

Musarat  Sultana  in  the  house  situated  in  Sector  G-10/1,  Islamabad,  land  in 

Sheikhupura, share in house situated at Haripura, Rawalpindi as to what is share 

of Mst. Musarat  Sultana in  these properties. He  further  admitted that he  has not 

endorsed  the  gift  transaction  in  the  revenue  record  of  Sheikhupura  nor  he  ever 

entered  the  possession  of  land  situated  in  Sheikhupura.  He  further  admitted  that 

Mst.  Musarat  Sultana  has  never  put  any  transfer  of  her  property  in  the  name  of 

respondent  No.1  and  he  further  admitted  that  properties  situated  in  Rawalpindi 

and Sheikhupura are out of the jurisdiction of this Court. He further admitted that 

no written document has been executed for the purpose of oral gift deed. 

13. 

From the perusal  of record, it is  evident that  respondents  No.1 & 2 have 

submitted  the  allotment  letter  dated  24.05.1992/Exh.P.1,  wherein  house  No.125, 

Sector  G-10/1,  Islamabad  was  transferred  in  the  name  of  Mst.  Jamshed  Jehan, 

Mst.  Musarat  Sultana  and  Mst.  Khatoon  Begum.  Respondents  No.1  &  2  also 

 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

7 

produced copy of record of rights of land measuring 80 Kanals situated in revenue 

estate  Kharianwala  District  Sheikhupura  as  Exh.P.2  and  registered  sale  deed 

No.406, dated 02.02.1994 registered before Sub-Registrar Islamabad measuring 4 

Kanals situated in Mouza Jhangi Syedan in favour of Sarfrazul Hassan Syed and 

Mst. Musarat Sultana, whereby Mst. Musarat Sultana owned 1 Kanal land in the 

said registered sale deed. 

14. 

Beside  the  above  referred  documents,  respondents  No.1  &  2  submitted 

certified  copy  of  civil  suit  titled  as  Mustafai  Begum  VS  Syed  Fahad  Ali, 

etc/Exh.P.5,  death  certificate  issued  by  Union  Administrator  Union  Council 

No.34 of Rawalpindi in the name of Mst. Musarat Sultana/Mark-A, transfer letter 

issued by government of Punjab of Houser No.P1477 as Mark-B.  

15. 

The  present  appellants  only  produced  D.W.1,  whereby  Mobin  Ahmed 

Khan appellant No.2 appeared as D.W.1 on behalf of other appellants, contested 

the  suit  vigorously  and  stated  that  Mst.  Musarat  Sultana  d/o  Sultan  Ahmed  was 

my close relative and he is (Yak Jadi) related to late Mst. Musarat Sultana through 

his  predecessor.  Further  stated  that  the  land  situated  in  Mouza  Kharianwala 

District Sheikhupura has been transferred in his name through mutation No.6667 

and at the time of funeral of Mst. Musarat Sultana no one ever declared that she 

had transferred her suit properties on 12.10.2006 and the said  claim  is  false and 

frivolous. Further stated that Mst. Musarat Sultana was issueless and she has share 

in  other  properties  as  Murtazai  Begum  is  her  Phuphi.  Further  stated  that 

respondent No.2 has filed a criminal complaint U/s 22-A, Cr.P.C against mutation 

No.667,  which  has  been  dismissed  by  the  Court.  Further  stated  that  a  civil  suit 

filed by Sartaj Ali, real father of Fahad Ali was dismissed and similarly another 

civil suit filed Murtazi Begum in Sheikhupura was also dismissed by Civil Court. 

Even the said suit was contested by Sartaj Ali, who was real father of respondent 

No.1.  

16. 

From  the  perusal  of  entire  evidence,  there  are  two  main  legal  points 

involved  in  the  entire  matter  as  to  onus  to  prove  the  oral  gift  deed  is  upon  the 

respondents  No.1  &  2/plaintiffs,  who  are  otherwise  beneficiary  of  the  entire 

 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

8 

transaction.  Respondents  No.1  &  2  are  bound  to  prove  their  case  independently 

without weaknesses of the present appellants/defendants.  

16. 

Respondents  No.1  &  2  have  categorically  referred  in  para  No.7  of  the 

plaint, which is as follow:- 

“That on 12-10-2006 on the eleventh birthday of the plaintiff No.1 
Mst. Mussrat Sultana gifted her all properties to the minor/plaintiff 
No.1 due to love and affection through oral gift in the presence of 
witnesses namely Syed Wajid Ali, Masroor Ahmed and Sirtaj Ali 
and the physical possession of the said properties was handed over 
to the plaintiff to the extent of her share and the same was accepted 
by the plaintiff No.1 through his father i.e. plaintiff No.2.” 

17. 

The above referred para of the plaint discloses names of the witnesses i.e 

Syed Wajid  Ali,  Masroor Ahmed and Sirtaj  Ali,  whereas respondents  No.1 &  2 

during  the  course  of  evidence  have  not  produced  these  witnesses,  which  were 

disclosed in the plaint at the time of filing of instant suit, hence, the principle on 

the  said  proposition  has  been  referred  in  Order  VI  Rule  2,  CPC,  whereby  it  is 

obligatory  upon  the  parties  to  plead  all  material  facts,  on  which  the  party 

pleadings relies for his claim or defence as the case may be. Hence, the specific 

stance  taken  by  respondents  No.1  &  2/plaintiffs  in  their  plaint  is  the  factum  of 

oral gift declaration made on 12.10.2006 by Mst. Musarat Sultana in presence of 

witnesses regarding the properties on the eleventh birthday of respondent No.1.  

18. 

From  the  perusal  and  comparison  of  plaintiffs  evidence,  it  has  been 

observed  that  the  plea  raised  by  plaintiffs/respondent  No.1  &  2  in  their  plaint 

especially in Para No.7 of the plaint has not been proved in evidence rather not a 

single word has been uttered by P.W.1 in his examination in chief, hence, it can 

safely  be  assumed  that  the  plaintiffs  have  failed  to  produce  their  affirmative 

evidence, which is basic requirement to prove the ingredients as referred by Apex 

Court in the judgments on the subject. It is settled law that he who alleges fact has 

to discharge onus and the plea not taken in the pleadings, party cannot be allowed 

to lead evidence about the plea and the said principle has also been applied Vice 

Versa  if  the  plea  taken  in  the  pleadings  is  not  proved,  the  entire  case  has  been 

defeated. Reliance is placed upon 2006 CLC 546 Lahore(Ghulam Nabi through 

L. Rs. and others VS Tahir Abbas and others), wherein it was held that:- 

 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

9 

“It is settled law, that no one should be allowed to plead the case 
beyond  the  scope  of  his  pleadings.  And  even  if  any  evidence  has 
been led, which is outside the purview of the pleadings of a party 
should  be  ignored  by  the  Court.  The  written  statement  of  the 
appellants  has  been  perused,  but  the  plea  now  raised  is 
conspicuously  missing  therein.  It  is  for  this  reason,  that  no  issue 
had been framed by the trial Court in this behalf.” 

In  2007  CLC  462  (Trading  Corporation  of  Pakistan  (Pvt.)  Limited  VS 

Messrs  Nidera  Handelscompagnie  B.  B.  Meent  94,  P.  O.  Box  676,  3000  AR 

Rotterdam The Netherlands and another), it was held that:- 

“No party can be taken by surprise. The questions asked from the 
witness  were  without  support  of  pleadings  and  cannot  be 
considered.  A  party  cannot  lead  evidence  which  is  not  supported 
by pleadings. In this respect, In the case of Binyameen and others 
v. Chaudhry Hakim and another 1996 SCMR 336 the Honourable 
Supreme Court has held as under:-- 

“…It is a well settled principle of law that a party can prove 
a  case  which  has  been  pleaded  by  it.  In  support  of  his 
contention,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  referred 
to Government of Pakistan (now Punjab) through Collector, 
Bahawalpur  v.  Haji  Muhammad  PLD  1976  SC  469.  It  is 
also a well-settled principle that no evidence can be led or 
looked into in support of a plea which has not been taken in 
the  pleadings.  A  party  is  required  to  plead  facts  necessary 
to seek relief claimed and he would be entitled to produce 
evidence  to  prove  those  pleas.  Variation  in  pleading  and 
proof is not permissible in law.” 

 In  2009  CLC  1070  (Rafiq  Dawood  and  4  others  VS  Messrs  Haji  Suleman 

Gowa Wala & Sons Ltd. through Director and others), it was held that:- 

“After  the  disclosure  of  the  respective  positions  of  the  parties  in 
their pleadings, no evidence which deviates from or is contrary to 
the  pleadings  is  to  be  looked  into.  Rights  and  obligations  of  the 
respective  parties  are  always  to  be  determined  keeping  in  view 
only  such  pleas  that  have  been  taken  by  them  in  their  respective 
pleadings. The evidence that is adduced by the parties is also to be 
looked into only to the extent it supports or opposes the pleas that 
have  been  taken  by  the  parties  in  their  pleadings.  Any  piece  of 
evidence  which  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  pleadings  cannot  be 
considered while deciding a controversy. This is a well-established 
legal  principle.  A  division  bench  of  this  Court  in  the  case  of 
Ehteshamuddin  Qureshi  v.  Pakistan  Steel  Mills  reported  in  2004 
MLD  36  held  that  a  party  cannot  be  allowed  to  lead  evidence 
contrary to its pleadings, nor could a party be permitted to take a 
plea different than the plea which it has taken in its pleadings and 
any part of the evidence which is beyond the pleadings is ought to 
be  overlooked  as  improvement  of  the  nature  being  afterthought 
and impermissible in law.” 

19. 

The  above  referred  judgments  clearly  demonstrate  that  principle  of 

departure  is  applicable  in  the  instant  matter  in  terms  of  Order  VI  Rule  2,  CPC, 

whereby the parties could not be allowed to depart from their pleadings as at the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

10 

stage  of  evidence  they  can  only  be  departed  by  way  of  amendment  in  terms  of 

Order  VI  Rule  2,  CPC.  Hence,  when  the  plaintiffs/respondents  No.1  &  2  have 

specifically mentioned their witnesses in Para No.7 of the plaint, they are bound 

to produce these witnesses or at least summon them through Court or place some 

evidence on record as to why they have not been produced, in such circumstances, 

it  can  be  assumed  if  these  witnesses  have  been  produced  in  evidence,  might  go 

against  the  plaintiff’s  claim  and  in  consequence  of  such  future  act  of  these 

witnesses, respondents No.1 & 2 withheld evidence in violation of Article 129 (g) 

of  Qanoon-e-Shahadat,  1984,  hence,  the  presumption  can  be  taken  against 

respondents No.1 & 2.  

20. 

In Islamic law any person of sound mind may dispose of his property by 

way of gift and writing is not essential to the validity of the gift. The ingredients 

of gift U/S 149 of Mohammadan Law are as follow:- 

(i) Declaration of the gift by the doner 

(ii) Acceptance of the gift expressed or implied by or on behalf of 

done. 

(iii) Delivery of possession of the gift by the doner.  

21. 

Beside the above referred ingredients, every transaction has to be proved 

through  two  witnesses  in  terms  of  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  therefore, 

person claiming title on the basis of such oral gift would have to prove the same 

by cogent and solid evidence, the person, who claims to be a witness of the said 

transaction have to explain the time, date or place of gift, even the circumstances 

as  to  why  the  gift  was  not  reduced  into  writing,  failing  which  the  transaction 

cannot  be  proved.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2004  CLC  33(Ghulam  Zainib  and 

another VS Said Rasool and & others), wherein it was held that:- 

“Ss.  122  &  123---Registration  Act  (XVI  of  1908),  Ss.  17  &  49---
Islamic  Law---Oral  gift  or  through  registered  deed---Proof---
Beneficiary  of  gift 
to  prove, 
independent of such deed, transaction of gift as a fact---Persons in 
whose  favour  there  was  no  document  of  any  kind  to  support  gift, 
would  stand  on  a  much  weaker  wicket  as  compared  to  those 
getting title out of registered gift.”  

through  registered  deed  has 

22. 

In  view  of  above  referred  reasons,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  onus  to 

prove the transaction is upon respondent No.1/plaintiff, who is under obligation to 

 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

11 

discharge onus, which has not been discharged in accordance with law. Similarly, 

the  plea  referred  in  Para  No.7  of  the  plaint  taken  in  terms  of  Order  VI  Rule  2, 

CPC has also not been adhered to rather the evidence has been withheld in terms 

of Article 129(g) of Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, even otherwise section 123 

of  Transfer  of  Property  Act,  1882  expressly  provides  that  for  the  purpose  of 

making gift of immovable property, the transfer must be effected by a registered 

instrument  singed  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  doner  and  attested  by  at  least  two 

witnesses,  whereas  the  witnesses  referred  in  the  plaint  have  not  been  placed  on 

record. Hence, the first question has been answered in negative.  

23.  

The  second  important  question  is  as  to  whether  the  instant  appeal 

disclosed  a  question  of  law  from  the  entire  pleadings  and  evidence,  in  order  to 

understand the term question of law referred in section 100, CPC. It is necessary 

to demonstrate on record that the impugned decision is being contrary to law and 

the  said  decision  having  failed  to  determine  some  material  issue  of  law  or 

substantial error or defect in the procedure has not been removed or answered and 

the entire decision effect merits of the case.  

24. 

From  the  perusal  of  judgment  of  first  Appellate  Court,  it  has  been 

observed  that  first  Appellate  Court  conceded  to  this  fact  that  Sartaj  and  Waleed 

Ali have been referred as witnesses of the gift but they have not been produced by 

respondents  No.1  &  2  rather  Sabiha  Begum  and  Aziza  Sarwar  have  been 

produced  as  P.W.2  &  P.W.3,  who  are  sisters  of  respondent  No.2  Sarfarazul 

Hassan, in  view of the said  observation the first Appellate Court has considered 

that  the  requirement  of  the  witnesses  have  been  fulfilled,  whereas  the  departure 

from the pleadings in terms of Order VI Rule 2, CPC, 1908 imposes procedural 

restriction upon the plaintiff or the defendant as the case may be to refer material 

facts  in  their  pleadings  and  subsequent  to  pleadings,  the  evidence  can  only  be 

lead, which has been referred in the pleadings and anything beyond the pleadings 

amounts  to  departure,  which  is  not  permissible  under  the  law,  hence,  the  said 

important  aspect  of the case has wrongly been considered in  violation of settled 

principle,  the  said  question  is  a  material  question  of  law  to  be  answered  in  the 

instant  appeal.  In  order    to  understand  question  of  law  reliance  is  placed  upon 

 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

12 

1965  SC  690  (Haji  Abdullah  Khan  and  others  VS  Nisar  Muhammad  Khan 

and others), wherein it was held that:- 

“(d)  Question  of  law__Meaning__Such  question  can  be  raised  at 
any stage. 

A  pure  question  of  law  means  a  question  which  not  only 
does not  require any investigation into facts, but which could  not 
have been  met  by a plea of  fact if raised at  the  proper stage and 
ordinarily  it  will  be  a  good  argument  as  against  a  plea  being  a 
plea of law that it could have been met by an allegation of fact. 

The  proposition  is  not  open  to  contest  that  pure questions 

of law can be raised at any stage. 

Where in a case, on appeal, the High Court observed that 
to allow the question of law or of fact to be raised in appeal for the 
first  time  would  clearly  prejudice  the  other  party  and  thus  defeat 
the ends of justice: 

Held, that it is the duty of the Court itself to apply the law. 
A party is not bound to engage a counsel. Whatever law becomes 
applicable  on  the  admitted  or  proved  facts,  law  has  to  be  given 
effect to whether or not it has been relied upon by a party” 

In  PLD  1966  SC  612  (Malik  Muhammad  Hayat  Khan  VS  Subedar  Yar 

Muhammad Khan), it was held that:- 

fact, 

“(b) Civil Procedure Code (V of 1908), S. 100__Queestion of law 
of 
or 
document__Surrounding 
of 
government Lands (Punjab) Act (V of 1912). 

circumstances__Colonisation 

construction 

is_Inference 

what 

from 

The question of the proper legal effect of a document or of 
a proved fact is always a question of law but when an inference is 
to be drawn as to a question of fact then whether the inference is 
drawn  from  oral  evidence  or  from  documents  it  is  always  a 
question of fact.  

The  proper  legal  effect  of  a  proved  fact  is  essentially  a 
question  of  law,  but  the  question  whether  a  fact  has  been  proved 
when  evidence  for  and  against  has  been  properly  admitted  is 
necessarily a pure question of fact. 

Where the question to be decided is one of fact, it does not 
involve an issue of law merely because documents which were not 
instruments  of  title  or  otherwise  the  direct  foundations  of  rights, 
but  were  really  historical  materials,  have  to  be  construed  for  the 
purposes of deciding the question.” 

In  2000  SCMR  1871  (Messrs  Irum  Ghee  Mills  Limited  VS  Income  Tax 

Appellate Tribunal and others), it was held that:- 

“It has been held by the Court that when a finding of fact is based 
partly  on  evidence  and  partly  on  conjectures  the  question  of  law 
does arise. In support of this proposition, reliance has been placed 
on  Oriental  Investment  Co.  Ltd.  v.  Commissioner  of  Income-tax. 
Bombay  (PLD  1958  Supreme  Court  (Ind.)  151),  wherein  the 
following  test  was  provided  to  determine  whether  the  question  is 
one of fact or law: 

(1) When the point for the determination is a pure question of 
law  such  as  construction  of  a  statue  or  document  of  title, 
the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  is  open  to  reference  to  the 
Court under section 66(1). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

13 

(2) When the point for determination is a mixed question of law 
and  fact,  while  the  finding  of  the  Tribunal  on  the  facts 
found  is  final,  its  decision  as  to  the  legal  effect  of  those 
findings is a question of law which can be reviewed by the 
Court. 

(3) A  finding  on  a  question  of  fact  is  open  to  attack  under 
section 66(1) as erroneous in law if there is no evidence to 
support it or if it is perverse.  

(4) When the finding  is  one  of  fact, the fact that it is  itself an 
inference from other basic facts will not alter its character 
as one of fact. 

What  are  the  characteristics  of  the  business  of  dealing  in 
shares of that of an investor is a mixed question of fact and 
law.  What  is  the  legal  effect  of  the  facts  found  by  the 
Tribunal  and  whether  as  a  result  the  assessee  can  be 
termed a dealer or an investor is itself a question of law.” 

 In PLD 1960 Dacca 52 (Rangalal Sutradhar and others VS Satish Chandra 

Poddar), it was held that:- 

“(a) Civil Procedure Code (V of 1908), SS. 100 & 103__Failure of 
lower  Courts  to  investigate  and  come  to  a  finding  on  vital  basic 
question  of  fact__Constitutes  an  error  in  law__Second    Apeal 
competent. 

There  is  no  difference  in  principle  between  a  failure  to 
appreciate and determine the real question of fact to be tried, and 
failure to appreciate and determine a question of fact which vitally 
affects the issue. The failure of the Courts below to investigate and 
come to a finding on the vital basic question of fact constitute an 
error  in  law  against  which,  by  virtue  of  section  100  of  the  Civil 
Procedure Code, 1908, a second appeal will lie.” 

25. 

From the above referred precedents of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as 

High Courts, following legal principles emerge that second appeal shall lie:- 

(i)  When the decision impugned is contrary to law. 

(ii) 

Failure to determine some material issues of law. 

(iii)  Decision based upon undisputed facts, which has not been 
appreciated by the Courts below on the wrong principle of 
law. 

(iv) 

(v) 

Interpretation  and  legal  effect  of  any  document  is  also  a 
question  of  law,  which  has  not  been  appreciated  by  the 
Courts below. 

Failure  to  appreciate  and  determine  a  question  of  fact, 
which materially effects the principle issue of the case and 
as a result of said basic question of fact constitutes an error 
in law. 

(vi)  Decision  based  on  erroneous  reasoning  and  incorrect 

exposition of law. 

(vii)  Decision based upon evidence, which has not been pleaded 
by the parties in their pleadings and the Courts below have 
not  given  any reason for change of plea  and evidence  and 
wrongly appreciated the law. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

14 

(viii)  Courts  below  have  committed  error  or  defect  in  the 
procedure, which is of substantial nature and the decision is based 
upon such defect. 

(ix)  Question of admissibility of evidence. 

26. 

The  above  referred  principles  clearly  define  as  to  maintainability  of 

Second  Appeal  whereas  in  present  case  the  appellants  have  raised  substantial 

question of law, which has not been appreciated by first Appellate Court, even the 

findings  given  by  the  first  Appellate  Court  are  contrary  to  the  settled  procedure 

and  in  violation  of  principles  of  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  order,  1984.  Learned  first 

Appellate Court has based its findings on  assumption, whereby those  facts  have 

been  appreciated,  which  were  not  placed  by  respondents  No.1  &2/plaintiffs  in 

their pleadings rather they have changed their basic witnesses and such departure 

has not been discussed nor even appreciated in the impugned judgment, hence the 

same has been considered substantial question of law, therefore, the instant appeal 

has rightly been filed.  

27. 

After  the  issue  of  maintainability  of  instant  appeal,  it  has  been  observed 

from the record that respondents No.1 & 2/plaintiffs are under obligation to prove 

the oral declaration of gift as question of fact independently in terms of Qanoon-

e-Shahadat Order, 1984, whereby it is necessary to produce two witnesses of the 

transaction,  who  have  to  express  every  fact  in  evidence  in  which  one  party 

signifies  his  willingness  to  do  certain  act  of  declaration  of  gift  alongwith  its 

details of the property, time, name of the witnesses, place of the declaration and 

terms  of  the  declaration  of  gift  including  the  details  of  possession  and 

demarcation  of  the  property  in  clear  terms  and  the  other  party  has  to  accept  the 

offer in clear words, which is necessary requirement for the oral declaration of the 

gift whereas no such requirement has been proved. Reliance is placed upon 2010 

SCMR  342  (Muhammad  Ejaz  and  2  others  VS  Mst.Khalida  Awan  and 

another), wherein it was held that:- 

“It  is  not  the  respondent’s  case  that  the  gift  of  the  suit 
property was made orally. The witnesses produced by her namely, 
Muhammad  Tufail  P.W.1(scribe)  and  the  two  marginal  witnesses 
to the gift deed namely, Muhammad Zaman P.W.3 and Muhammad 
Nawaz P.W.4 also deposed in relation to the gift-deed. Moreover, 
they do not profess to be witnesses to any oral gift. Their testimony 
is  also  to  the  effect  that  the  respondent/plaintiff  was  not  present 

 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

15 

when the alleged gift-deed was reduced into writing by the scribe.  
In  these  circumstances,  neither  an  oral  gift  nor  a  valid  gift  deed 
has been proved on record.  

It has been observed by the High Court that under Muslim 
Law a gift may be made by a Muslim donor through a declaration 
to  this effect,  followed by acceptance by the done and delivery of 
possession.  These  are  the  requisite  elements  of  a  valid  oral  gift 
under  Muslim  Law  and  there  can  be  no  cavil  with  the  general 
proposition stated by the High Court. In the present case, however, 
as noted above, there were no witnesses of the acceptance of the 
gift  or  delivery  of  possession.  The  scribe  Tufail  (P.W.2)  in  clear 
terms, deposed that the respondent/plaintiff was not present at the 
time  of  the  alleged  gift.  Statements  to  the  same  effect  have  been 
made by Muhammad Zaman P.W.3 and Muhammad Nawaz P.W.4, 
Zaman  expressly  deposed  that  only  three  persons  namely  Ahmad 
Bakhsh,  Muhammad  Nawaz  P.W.4  and  Zaman  himself  were 
present  at  the  time  when  the  gift-deed  was  made.  Muhammad 
Nawaz  P.W.4  testified  that  the  respondent/plaintiff  Mst.Khalida 
Awan  was  not  present  at  the  time.  From  the  testimony  of  these 
witnesses, the only conclusion which can be drawn is that there is 
no evidence of acceptance of the gift  by the plaintiff even if the 
gift deed Exh.P/1 was treated as a declaration of gift.  

to 

the  disputed  property  was  not  delivered 

Coming next to the question of delivery of possession, the 
evidence once again does not support the respondent/plaintiff. She 
has  acknowledged  in  her  own  statement  that  her  brother, 
Muhammad  Ejaz  (petitioner  No.1)  has  one  room  in  the  disputed 
house which is  under his  lock and key and he resided in  the said 
room when he visits Shorkot Muhammad Zaman P.W.3 has made a 
similar  statement  while  Muhammad  Nawaz  P.W.4  has  stated  that 
Muhammad Ejaz has retained two rooms in the disputed property. 
From  these  statements  and  in  the  absence  of  any  explanation  for 
this  material  circumstance,  it  is  abundantly  clear  that  possession 
of 
the 
respondent/plaintiff  by  her  father.  On  the  contrary,  the  most 
logical inference to be drawn from this circumstance was that the 
portion  of  the  disputed  property  (be  it  two  rooms  or  one)  was  in 
the  use  and  occupation  of  Ejaz  Even  during  his  father’s  lifetime 
and possession was never handed over to the respondent/plaintiff. 
Had it been otherwise, the plaintiff and her witnesses would have 
explained  in  their  testimony,  the  events  whereby  Ejaz  came  into 
possession of such portion of the property after it had been gifted.  
As  this  point,  I  would  like  to  advert  to  another  important 
aspect  of  the  case.  The  respondent/plaintiff  has  testified  that  her 
father  Ahmad  Bakhsh  was  an  affluent  and  rich  person  having 
retired  from  the  Police  service  as  S.H.O.  It,  therefore,  does  not 
stand  to  reason  that  he  would  not  have  obtained  registration  of 
the  gift  deed,  had  he  wished  to  convey  the  suit  property  to  the 
plaintiff.  Interestingly,  the  scribe  Muhammad  Tufail  (P.W.2)  has 
stated in his testimony that the Sub-Registrar’s office was only 25 
yards from his place of work. This fact has also been noted by the 
learned  appellate  Court  and  the  logical  inference  from  the  same 
has been drawn.  

(Emphasizing and underlining is mine) 

28. 

Learned first Appellate Court while passing impugned judgment & decree 

has also relied upon the conceding statement of the mother (Jamshed Jahan) of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

16 

deceased, who got recorded her statement vide order dated 24.02.2012 before the 

Trial Court in following words:- 

۔ںہو ہتیچا ا

نکر ما

ن کے سےانو پنےا

کو نمکا 

کے بیٹی پنیا میں ۔ہے نہ ضاعترا

 پر نےجا کیے یگرڈ عیمد بحق یعود کہ کیا نبیا

The said statement has been given due weightage although the statement has not 

been  cross-examined  by  the  appellants,  even  Mst.  Jamshed  Jahan  was  not 

identified nor even the said conceding statement qualifies the quality of evidence, 

through  which  one  can  prove  oral  gift  declaration,  even  the  said  lady  has  not 

confirmed the oral declaration of gift made by late Mst. Musarat Sultana , hence 

the  same  in  toto  is  inadmissible  having  no  legal  effect  in  favour  of  respondents 

No.1 & 2.  Reliance is placed upon PLD 2016 Lahore 587 (Sardara and Allah 

Ditta through Legal Heirs and others VS Mst. Bashir Begum and another), 

wherein it was held that:- 

“Nothing  was  on  record  as  to  when,  where  and  before  whom 
declaration of gift was made by the donor which was accepted by 
the donee and possession was delivered in lieu thereof---Oral gift 
was permissible but same was required to be proved by production 
of persuasive and trustworthy evidence---Trial Court proceeded to 
decree the suit merely on the basis of conceding written statement 
taking 
as  well  as  conceding  statement  of  donor  without 
precautionary measures whether all such proceedings were being 
conducted  without  any  coercion  or  misrepresentation  on  the  part 
of  donor-lady---Consent  decree  being  an  agreement  between  the 
parties to the lis when brought under challenge was required to be 
proved  by  beneficiary  through  production  of  convincing  and 
cogent evidence.” 

29. 

In view of above referred judgments of the Apex Court as well of learned 

High Courts, I am of the considered view that the plea of oral gift has been raised 

by respondents No.1 &2/plaintiffs and the same has not been proved, although the 

onus  and  obligation  to  prove  the  said  facts  is  the  responsibility  of  a  person,  he 

who alleges the said facts. It has been proved from record that respondents No.1 

&2/plaintiffs after the departure from the pleadings have gone beyond their plea, 

therefore, as a result of said departure civil suit fails whereas the Appellate Court 

has  refused  to  acknowledged  the  said  departure  rather  failed  to  appreciate  the 

most  important  and  crucial  plea  referred  in  Para  No.7  of  the  plaint  while 

considering  the  oral  gift  declaration  as  respondents  No.1  &2/plaintiffs  have 

changed the witnesses at their own. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A No.07/2016. 

17 

30. 

Respondents  No.1  &  2  have  not  proved  the  material  facts,  which  were 

pleaded in their plaint rather substituted their testimony through other witnesses. 

Such substitution and departure is substantial question of law, which can be taken 

up  at  the  level  of  second  appeal,  hence,  this  Court  is  of  the  view  that  first 

Appellate  Court  has  wrongly  considered  the  factum  of  oral  declaration  of  gift 

without  considering  the  pleadings  of  the  plaintiffs,  hence,  committed  material 

error  on  factual  side,  which  resulted  in  wrong  application  of  law,  therefore,  this 

appeal  is  allowed  and  the  judgment  &  decree  dated  25.01.2016  passed  by 

Additional District Judge (West) Islamabad while giving findings on issue No.1 is 

set aside and the judgment and decree dated 08.12.2015 passed by learned Trial 

Court is upheld.  

                            (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

           JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 14.11.2016. 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 

R.Anjam 

JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
