ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.3144/2020 

Mst. Yasmin Akhter & 02 others. 
VS 
Learned Additional District & Sessions Judge (East), Islamabad & 

another. 

PETITIONERS BY:      

Ch. Mohammad Aslam, Advocate. 

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Proceeded against ex-parte  

DATE OF DECISION: 

13.12.2021. 

======================================== 

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  The  petitioners  have  impugned 

judgment  dated  09.09.2020,  pursuant  to  which  the  appeal  filed 

by  respondent  No.2  against  orders  of  the  learned  executing 

Court  dated  13.02.2020  and  08.08.2020,  pursuant  to  which 

property  of  respondent  No.2  had  been  attached  in  execution 

proceedings, was accepted.  

2. 

This  Court  had  issued  notice,  but  nobody  appeared  on 

behalf  of  respondent  No.2.  Consequently  after  issuance  of 

proclamation,  respondent  No.2  will  be  proceeded  against  

ex-parte. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted  that 

pursuant 

to  orders  dated  13.02.2020  and  08.08.2020, 

respectively, the property of respondent No.2 was attached and 

ordered  to  be  auctioned  in  order  to  execute  the  decree  against 

the  son  of  respondent  No.2  i.e.  Muhammad  Riaz  dated 

29.09.2014.  He  submitted  that  the  auction  was  suspended 

pursuant  to  order  dated  22.08.2020  on  the  date  on  which  the 

auction  had  been  conducted  and  subsequently  the  impugned 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                                          -2-            Writ Petition No.3144 of 2020 

judgment  was  passed.  He  submitted  that  pursuant  to  law  laid 

down  by  the  learned  High  Court  in  Sultan  Ahmad  VS  Judge 

Family  Court  and  05  others  (PLD  2012  Lahore  148)  and 

Mst.  Haleema  Bibi  and  04  others  VS  Additional  District 

Judge,  Layyah  and  02  others  (2018  CLC  Note  12),  in  the 

event that a decree for maintenance for up keep of minors could 

not be executed against the father, such minors could not be left 

merciless  and  the  decree  could  be  executed  against  paternal 

grandfather  of  the  minors.  He  contended  that  it  was  in  reliance 

of these judgments that the learned execution Court had ordered 

the attachment and auction of property belonging to respondent 

No.2,  which  order  has  been  set-aside  through  the  impugned 

judgment. 

4. 

The  learned  Additional  District  Judge  in  the  impugned 

judgment  relied  on  a  judgment  rendered  by  the  learned  Lahore 

High  Court  Muhammad  Ramzan  VS  Ali  Hamza  and  others 

(PLD 2016 Lahore 622), wherein it was held that liability could 

be affixed against a grandfather only in the event that the father 

was  poor  and  infirm,  and  the  mother  was  also  unable  to 

maintain  her  children  and  further  that  the  grandfather  was  a 

person  of  means  and  could  maintain  the  grandchildren.  In  the 

impugned  judgment  it  has  also  been  noted  that  the  learned 

execution  Court  failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  an 

application  for  attachment  of  the  property  of  the  father  had 

already been filed and dismissed by the learned executing Court 

by  order  dated  05.11.2019,  which  was  upheld  in  appeal  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Court  and  that  the  learned  executing 

Court  had  erred  while  passing  orders  dated  13.02.2020  and 

 
 
 
 
  
                                          -3-            Writ Petition No.3144 of 2020 

08.08.2020  by  not  taking  into  account  the  dismissal  of  the 

appeal  of  the  petitioners  with  regard  to  attachment  of  the 

property  of  respondent  No.2.  The  learned  Additional  District 

Court also distinguished the law laid down by the learned Lahore 

High Court in Mst. Haleema Bibi and 04 others. 

5. 

The facts of the case are that the judgment and decree 

dated 29.09.2014 was passed against Muhammad Riaz in suit for 

recovery  of  maintenance,  delivery  expenses  and  dower  filed  by 

petitioner  No.1.  Respondent  No.2,  who 

is  the  father  of 

Muhammad Riaz, was not a party in the suit, there was no claim 

made  by  petitioner  No.1  against  respondent  No.2,  and  no 

judgment  or  decree  were  rendered  against  respondent  No.2.  It 

was only after the judgment and decree against Muhammad Riaz 

could  not  be  executed,  despite  Muhammad  Riaz  having  been 

arrested  under  the  order  of  the  learned  executing  Court,  that 

petitioner  No.1  filed  an  application  seeking  the  attachment  of 

property  of  respondent  No.2  to  seek  the  execution  of  decree 

dated 29.09.2014. 

6. 

A  perusal  of  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure, 

1908 (“CPC”) including, inter alia, Sections relating to execution 

of the decrees as well as Order XXI of CPC, reflect that there is 

no  provision  within  the  CPC  that  permits  decree  holder  to  seek 

execution  of  a  decree  except  against  the  person  against  whom 

such decree has been passed. The only exception to this scheme 

is  the  case  where  execution  is  being  sought  against  the  legal 

representatives  of  a  person  against  whom  a  decree  has  been 

passed.  Such  decree  can  then  be  executed  to  the  extent  of  the 

 
 
 
 
  
                                          -4-            Writ Petition No.3144 of 2020 

property  of  the  judgment  debtor  that  makes  its  way  to  his/her 

legal  representatives.  It  is  also  settled  law  that  the  executing 

Court is vested with no authority to go beyond  the scope of the 

judgment  and  decree  that  is  being  executed  by  it.  Reliance  is 

placed  on  Ch.  Ahmed  Nawaz  VS  Province  of  Punjab 

through  Land  Acquisition  Collector,  Jhelum  and  others 

(2015 SCMR 823), Irshad Masih and others VS Emmanuel 

Masih  and  others  (2014  SCMR  1481)  and  Mst.  Naseem 

Akhtar  and  04  others  VS  Shalimar  General  Insurance, 

Company Limited and 02 others (1994 SCMR 22). 

7. 

With  all  due  respect  to  the  view  expressed  by  the 

learned  Lahore  High  Court  in  Sultan  Ahmad,  this  Court  is  not 

inclined  to  follow  such  dicta.  The  jurisprudence  on  the  question 

of  maintenance  makes  room  for  obliging  the  grandfather  of 

minors  to  support  such  minors  in  certain  limited  circumstances. 

But a pre-condition to the creation of such obligation, inter alia, 

is that it stands determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction 

that  the  father  of  the  minors  is  either  not  alive  or  is  otherwise 

infirm and incapable of maintaining the children. Merely because 

a  decree  for  maintenance  has  not  been  executed  against  the 

father, 

the  grandfather  cannot  be  burdened  with 

the 

responsibility  of  discharging  his  son’s  obligations  just  because 

the decree holder finds it more convenient to seek the execution 

of  the  decree  against  the  grandfather.  Suggestion  to  the 

contrary is not only against the jurisprudence on the question of 

maintenance, where, in a suit for maintenance, before creating a 

financial  obligation  against  the  person  who  is  not  the  father  of 

the  minors,  a  Court  has  to  satisfy  itself  that  the  person  being 

 
 
 
 
  
                                          -5-            Writ Petition No.3144 of 2020 

asked  to  maintain  the  minors  is  obliged  under  law  to  discharge 

such  obligation.  But  such  suggestion  is  also  contrary  to  the 

fundamental  principle  of  individual  responsibility  under  the 

Constitution. 

8. 

 Article  5  of  the  Constitution  creates  an  obligation  for 

every citizen to be obedient to the Constitution and the law. And 

Article  4  creates  a  reciprocal  obligation  for  the  State  to  treat 

every  citizen  in  accordance  with  the  law.  In  the  event  that  a 

citizen is burdened with the liability to discharge the obligation of 

another  citizen  as  affixed  by  a  Court  of  competent  jurisdiction, 

such  transfer  of  liability  without  due  process  of  law  would  be  in 

breach  of  article  10A  as  well  as  articles  9  and  23  of  the 

Constitution.  The  Constitutional  framework  is  rooted  in  the 

notion  of  individual  responsibility  as  opposed  to  collective 

responsibility  and  under  the  concept  of  rule  of  law  one  adult 

citizen cannot be randomly held liable for the responsibilities and 

obligations of another adult citizen without due process or a fair 

trial,  even  when  the  two  citizens  are  related  by  blood.  Any  rule 

to  the  contrary  would  fall  foul  of  the  principle  of  individual 

responsibility under the Constitution. 

9. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioners has failed to point out any  infirmity in the impugned 

judgment  dated  09.09.2020.  The  petition 

is 

therefore 

dismissed.  

A. Rahman Abbasi.  

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
