Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
JUDGMENT SHEET. 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 

Abid Hussain. 

VS 

The State. 

Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 

Zahid Hussain. 

VS 

Abid Hussain and another. 

Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

Zahid Hussain. 

VS 

Nazabat Hussain and another. 

Appellant by         :  Mr.  Naseer  Anjum  Awan,  Advocate 

(in Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016). 

Mian  Asad  Hayat  Awan,  Advocate 
for  the  Appellant/Petitioner  (in 
Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 and 
Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016).  

Respondent by     :  Mian  Asad  Hayat  Awan,  Advocate 

(in Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016).  

Mr.  Naseer  Anjum  Awan,  Advocate 
(in Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
and  Criminal  Appeal  No.63  of 
2016). 

Mr.  Muhammad  Atif  Khokhar, 
learned State Counsel 

Date of hearing     : 

   27.04.2020    

********** 

AAMER FAROOQ, J. - This judgment shall decide the instant 

appeal  as  well  as  Criminal  Revision  No.27  of  2016  and  Criminal  Appeal 

No.63 of 2016 as common questions of law and facts are involved. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

2. 

Abid Hussain (the appellant in Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016) and 

Nazabat Hussain were tried in case F.I.R. No.84, dated 07.08.2012 under 

Sections  324/34  P.P.C.  (subsequently  Section  302  P.P.C.  was  added  as 

the  injured  Altaf  Hussain  succumbed  to  the  injuries)  registered  with 

Police  Station  Nilore,  Islamabad;  Abid  Hussain  was  convicted  of  the 

offences by the learned Trial Court, vide judgment dated 09.03.2016 and 

was awarded life imprisonment, however, Nazabat Hussain was acquitted 

of  the  charges.  Abid  Hussain  has  filed  a  Jail  Appeal  against  his 

conviction, which is the subject matter of Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016; the 

complainant  Zahid  Hussain  filed  Criminal  Revision  for  enhancement  of 

the sentence awarded to Abid Hussain (Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016) 

and  Zahid  Hussain  also  filed  an  appeal  against  acquittal  of  Nazabat 

Hussain, which is the subject matter of Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  in  Jail  Appeal  No.56  of 

2016,  inter-alia,  contended  that  the  prosecution  suppressed  material 

facts especially  the  fact  that  Nazabat  Hussain also  received  injuries  and 

was  treated  for  the  same  at  PIMS  Hospital,  Islamabad;  he  contended 

that Ex-PN and the Injury Sheet Ex-PO substantiate the said fact. It was 

also  submitted  that  the  above  fact  is  also  supported  in  the  evidence  of 

Ehsan-ul-Haq,  ASI  (PW-8),  who  was  the  first  Investigating  Officer. 

Learned counsel contended that the suppression of fact of injury inflicted 

on  Nazabat  Hussain  shows  that  in  fact  the  complainant  and  his  family 

were the aggressors and injuries were inflicted on the accused; he placed 

reliance  on  the  judgment  reported  as  “Amir Zaman VS Mehboob and 

others”  (1985 SCMR 685).  It  was  also  pointed  out  that  there  is 

 
 
 
 
-3-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

contradiction  between  ocular  account  and  medical  evidence;  that  F.I.R. 

(Ex-PA/1),  provides  that  Nazabat  Hussain  gave  a  Churri  blow  to  Altaf 

Hussain the deceased and then Abid Hussain hit him with hatchet on the 

forehead  above  the  left  eye.  It  was  submitted  that  in  the  cross-

examination,  the  Investigating  Officer  (PW-12)  categorically  stated  that 

the cause of death of Altaf Hussain is injury caused due to a blunt object 

and that he can distinguish between a blunt and a sharp edged weapon. 

The witness also stated that in the Inquest Report, he has stated that the 

injury has been caused due to a blunt weapon (Ex-PB); that Dr. Farrukh 

Kamal, PW-6 negated the ocular account as he stated categorically that 

the  cause  of  death  is  injury  on  the  left  front  side  of  the  head,  which 

fractured  the  skull  and  exposed  the  brain;  the  witness  also  stated  that 

the  injury  was  caused  by  a  blunt  object.  Learned  counsel  further 

contended that no blood stain was found on the Churri recovered by the 

police and even the Forensic Report confirms that it cannot be said that 

the blood stain on the Axe is of human origin. It was also submitted that 

the referred facts show that the Axe/Kulhari was not used either from the 

sharp edge side or the blunt side and the assumption/supposition by the 

learned Trial Court is an error. Learned counsel placed reliance on cases 

reported as “Hallu and Ors. VS State of Madhya Pradesh” (AIR 1974 SC 

1936) as well as “M. Hassan VS Ghulam Rasool” (2009 P Cr. L J 940). 

Learned  counsel  further  contended  that  the  prosecution  failed  to  prove 

the motive. In this behalf, it was contended that though it was alleged in 

the  F.I.R.  that  the  motive  for  the  murder  is  the  matrimonial  dispute 

between the daughter of the complainant and her mother-in-law, who is 

the  sister  of  the  accused  but  the  same  was  not  duly  proved.  It  was 

 
 
-4-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

contended  that  Tanzeela  Bibi,  PW-7,  who  entered  the  witness  box 

supported  the  motive  but  with  malafide  and  dishonestly  improved  her 

statement,  which  could  not  have  been  done.  Reliance  was  placed  on 

“Khalid Javed and another VS The State”  (2003 SCMR 1419)  and 

“Abdul Khaliq VS The State”  (1996 SCMR 1553).  It  was  further 

submitted  that  the  recovery  was  not  in  accordance  with  law  and  is  in 

violation  of  Article  40  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  Reliance  was 

placed on “Sardar Bibi and another VS Munir Ahmed and others” (2017 

SCMR 344);  that  no  statement  of  the  recovery  witness  of  hatchet/Axe 

was  taken  down,  which  has  been  duly  admitted  by  the  Investigating 

Officer  in  the  cross-examination.  It  was  contended  that  even  otherwise 

the recovery of weapon is of no use inasmuch as it does not confirm that 

the weapon of offence was used to murder the deceased. Reliance was 

placed on “Mst. Shazia Parveen VS The State” (2014 SCMR 1197). 

4. 

Learned counsel contended that Nazabat Hussain recorded his 

first version immediately, which though was reduced in the Police Diary, 

but was never investigated by the police. It was submitted that it is the 

obligation  of  the  police  under  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898  to 

investigate  the  matter  and  take  into  account  entire  inculpatory  and 

exculpatory  evidence.  Learned  counsel  contended  that  Nazabat  Hussain 

specifically  stated  that  there  were  people  standing  on  the  roof  of  the 

shop  of  the  complainant,  which  included  Adnan,  the  nephew  of  the 

complainant and wife of the complainant, who threw stones and bricks, 

which hit the deceased Altaf Hussain. Reliance was placed on “Liaqat Ali 

and another VS The State” (1998 P Cr. L J 216)  and “Mst. Mumtaz 

 
 
 
-5-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

Begum VS Ghulam Farid and another”  (2003 SCMR 647).  It  was 

submitted  that  it  is  trite  law  that  the  interested  witnesses  in  the  case 

required  corroboration  and  in  the  instant  case,  the  complainant  and 

other  eye  witness  i.e.  Umair  Ali,  both  are  interested  and  required 

independent  corroboration.  It  was  also  submitted  that  under  the  facts 

and  circumstances,  the  benefit  of  doubt  was  to  be  granted  to  the 

appellant  namely  Abid  Hussain,  which  was  not  done  and  he  ought  to 

have been acquitted. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  complainant,  inter-alia,  contended 

that the case in hand is one of awarding death sentence to the convicted 

accused  namely  Abid  Hussain.  It  was  submitted  that  the  prosecution 

proved the case beyond reasonable doubt; that the deceased was put to 

death by Abid Hussain as he hit him with Axe. It was further submitted 

that  the  eye  witnesses  namely  Zahid  Hussain  and  Umair  Ali  (PW-1  and 

PW-2)  categorically  stated  about  the  facts  of  the  case  and  their 

testimonies  remain  untarnished  in  the  cross-examination.  It  was  further 

submitted  that  the  weapon  of  offence  (the  Axe)  was    got  recovered  by 

Abid  Hussain  from  his  house  and  the  blood  stains  have  been  confirmed 

on the same by the Forensic Report Ex-DB(2). 

6. 

While arguing appeal against acquittal learned counsel for the 

complainant contended that Nazabat Hussain has wrongly been acquitted 

of the charges in as much as the ocular account regarding the incident is 

categorical  that  it  was  Nazabat  Hussain  and  Abid  Hussain,  who  inflicted 

injuries on Altaf Hussain because of which he died. It was also contended 

 
 
 
 
-6-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

that motive has also been duly proved against both the accused as they 

are brothers of the mother-in-law of Zahid Hussain’s daughter. 

7. 

Mr.  Naseer  Anjum  Awan,  Advocate  while  responding  to  the 

arguments  addressed  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  in 

criminal revision submitted that no case for enhancement of the sentence 

is made out rather the instant case is one for acquittal. It was submitted 

that even the learned Trial Court has mentioned that the motive alleged 

has  not  been  duly  proved  and  the  ocular  account  is  also  not  above  the 

board.  

8. 

Learned State Counsel supported the arguments addressed by 

learned counsel for the complainant. 

9. 

Arguments  advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  have 

been heard and the record of the case was duly examined with their able 

assistance. 

10.   

The  case    of  the  prosecution  against  Abid  Hussain  and 

Nazabat  Hussain  as  stated  in  the  complaint,  which  culminated  in  F.I.R. 

No.84,  dated  07.08.2012  (Ex-PA/1),  is  that  on  07.08.2012,  at  about 

03:00  P.M.,  Abid  Hussain and  Nazabat  Hussain,  armed  with  kulhari  and 

churri respectively, came to the shop of complainant Zahid Hussain and 

verbally abused him; upon this Altaf Hussain came out of his shop which 

is situated by close by and tried to stop the accused upon which Nazabat 

Hussain inflicted a blow with Churri, with which he was armed, near the 

lower  part  of  left  eye.  Abid  Hussain  inflicted  a  blow  with  Axe/Kulhari, 

which hit Altaf Hussain on the front left side of the scalp. It is stated in 

 
 
 
 
 
-7-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

the  F.I.R.  that  on  the  hue  and  cry  of  the  complainant  and  other  eye 

witnesses  namely  Umair  Ali  and  Muhammad  Ismail  and  others,  the 

accused  fled;  the  injured  Altaf  Hussain  was  taken  to  the  hospital  by 

Ismail  and  the  complainant,  where  he  succumbed  to  the  injures.  It  has 

been  alleged  in  the  complaint  and  in  the  F.I.R.  that  the  motive  for 

murder  was  a  family  feud  due  to  acrimonious  relations  between  the 

daughter  of  the  complainant  and  her  mother-in-law,  who  is  sister  of 

accused persons. In order to prove its case, the prosecution led thirteen 

(13)  witnesses.  In  this  behalf,  the  eye  witnesses,  Zahid  Hussain  and 

Umair  Ali  appeared  as  PW-1  and  PW-2,  Zabih  Ullah  Abbasi,  the  initial 

Investigating Officer appeared as PW-13 and Muhammad Annar, S.I, the 

Investigating Officer of the case appeared as PW-12. Dr. Farrukh Kamal, 

appeared  as  PW-6  and  PW-11.  The  Forensic  Report  was  tendered  in 

evidence as Ex-DB, whereas the F.I.R. was exhibited as Ex-PA/1, Inquest 

Report  as  Ex-PB,  Memo  of  possession  of  parcel  regarding  blood  stain 

clothes  as  Ex-PF,  Memo  of  possession  of  parcel  regarding  weapon  of 

offence  (hatchet)  as  Ex-PJ,  Memo  of  possession  of  parcel  regarding 

Churri    as  Ex-PK;  Injuries  Map  as  Ex-PL,  Postmortem  Report  as  Ex-PH 

and the Site Plan as Ex-PG. Both the eye witnesses namely Zahid Hussain 

and Umair Ali categorically stated that Nazabat Hussain and Abid Hussain 

came to shop of Zahid Hussain armed with Churri and Axe respectively. 

It was also stated that due to the fight, the victim received initial injury 

with Churri  below  left  eye.  It  is  pertinent  to  observe  that  in  the  F.I.R. 

(Ex-PA/1)  and  in  the  testimonies  of  PW-1  and  PW-2,  it  is  only  one 

infliction  of  blow  with  Churri  by  Nazabat  Hussain,  whereas  in  the 

Postmortem Report (Ex-PH) three injuries have been indicated and in this 

 
 
-8-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

behalf, Injuries No.2 and 3 have been classified as incised wounds below 

left  eye.  Dr.  Farrukh  Kamal,  who  conducted  the  postmortem,  has 

affirmed the position while appearing as witness by stating that Injuries 

No.2  and  3  on  the  pictorial  diagram  (Ex-PH)  are  incised  wounds  one 

below  left  eyelid  and  the  other  below  left  eye  lateral  to  Injury  No.2. 

There  is  no  mentioning  of  infliction  of  two  blows  of  Churri  by  Nazabat 

Hussain in the statements of Zahid Hussain and Umair Ali, the third eye 

witness  Ismail  was  never  produced  by  the  prosecution.  Moreover,  both 

the eye witnesses have stated that Abid Hussain struck a blow with the 

Axe/Kulhari, which hit him on the front left side of the scalp and exposed 

the  brain  (Injury  No.1  on  the  pictorial  diagram,  EX-PH).  Dr.  Farrukh 

Kamal  in  his  cross-examination  has  opined  that  the  cause  of  death  is 

Injury  No.1,  which  most  probably  has  been  caused  by  a  blunt  object. 

Similar statement was made by the Investigating Officer (PW-12) in the 

cross-examination,  when  he  stated  that  he  can  distinguish  between  the 

injury caused by a sharp edged weapon  and the one by  a blunt object. 

He  also  stated  that  he  has  mentioned  in  Column  No.12  of  the  Inquest 

Report that the injury caused to the deceased is one of blunt object (Ex-

PB). Learned Trial Court while deciding the matter has assumed that the 

back  end  of  the  Axe  has  been  used,  however,  there  is  nothing  to  the 

effect  on  record.  Generally,  when  it  is  deposed  by  someone  that  an 

attack was made through Axe/hatchet, it is assumed that the sharp end 

side  is  used;  despite  the  Postmortem  Report  and  the  Inquest  Report 

indicating  that  the  fatal  injury  was  caused  by  a  blunt  object  the 

prosecution  made  no  attempt  to  clarify  the  matter  that  the  Injury  No.1 

was  inflicted  through  a  blunt  object.  The  prosecution made  no  effort  to 

 
 
-9-  

                           Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

clarify the contradiction or rather specify that back end/blunt side of the 

axe/hatchet  has  been  use,  which  they  ought  to  have  in  light  of  the 

decisions  reported  as “M. Hassan VSGhulam Rasool” (2009 P. Cr. 

LJ 940)  and  “Hallu and others VSState”  (AIR 1974 Supreme 

Court 1938).  The  said  anamoly  about  the  use  of  the  Axe/hatchet  and 

the  fatal  injury  being  caused  by  a  blunt  object  creates  contradiction 

between the ocular account and the medical evidence. 

11.   

The above factor when taken into consideration alongwith the 

first  version  of  the  accused  cast  doubt  on  the  story  of  the  prosecution. 

Nazabat  Hussain,  who  was  injured  was  taken  to  PIMS  Hospital  on  the 

same  date  Ex-PN  and  Ex-PO;  he  stated  categorically  that  wife  of  the 

complainant and his nephew namely Adnan upon hearing the scuffle and 

exchange  of  verbal  abuse  came  to  the  rooftop  of  the  shop  of  the 

complainant and threw stones and bricks one of which hit the deceased. 

It  is  relevant  to  state  that  Dr.  Farrukh  Kamal  appearing  as  PW-6 

categorically  stated  that  in  his  opinion  the  injuries  inflicted  on  Nazabat 

Hussain were not self-inflicted. Moreover, the Investigating Officer (PW-

12)  admitted  in  cross-examination  that  Nazabat  Hussain  recorded  first 

version regarding people being present at the rooftop, however, did not 

further probe the matter by interrogating wife of the complainant and his 

nephew  namely  Adnan.  He  also  conceded  that  no  effort  was  made  to 

examine the site of occurrence to see whether any blood stained stones 

or  bricks  were  present.  It  is  relevant  to  observe  that  the  Investigating 

Officer  (PW-12)  was  bound  to  investigate  the  matter  in  totality.  When 

the  first  version  came  to  his  knowledge  through  statement  of  Nazabat 

 
 
-10-                              Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

Hussain,  he  was  supposed  to  include  in  the  investigation  the  people 

mentioned in order to discern the true state of affairs. It is the obligation 

of  the  Investigating  Officer  not  only  to  take  into  account  inculpatory 

evidence  but  also  exculpatory  evidence.  Any  piece  of  evidence  which 

benefits  the  accused,  if  is  not  probed  or  withheld  violates  the 

fundamental right of any person of fair trial as enshrined in Article 10-A 

of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan; reliance is placed on 

case  reported  as  “Liaquat Ali VSThe State” (1998 PCr. LJ 216). 

The  alleged  weapon  of  offences  i.e.  Axe  and Churri  were  recovered  by 

the  police,  no  blood  stain  was  found  on Churri  as  per  Forensic  Report, 

Ex-DB. However, the Axe according to the prosecution was got recovered 

by  Abid  Hussain  from  his  house.  It  is  relevant  to  mention  that  the 

Investigating  Officer  PW-12  in  cross-examination  admitted  that  in  the 

house of Abid Hussain, his family was also residing and when he entered 

the  house  for  recovery,  it  was  open  and  the  Axe  was  lying  in  corner  of 

one room. The referred fact makes the recovery doubtful and ineffective 

inasmuch as  the alleged offence was committed on 07.08.2012 and the 

arrest was made on 10.08.2012. Appellant had ample time to dispose of 

the weapon of offence or wash of the blood. Moreover, in a house, which 

is easily accessible, recovery of weapon from an open place is regarded 

as  ineffective.  Reliance  is  placed  on “Sardar Bibi and another VS Munir 

Ahmed and others” (2017 SCMR 344)  and “Noor Shah Gul VS Asim 

Ullah and another”  (PLD 2015 Peshawar 01).  The  Forensic  Report 

from Punjab Forensic Science Agency states that though Axe was blood 

stained  but  it  cannot  be  confirmed  that  the  same  was  of  human origin, 

whereas Churri  did  not  have  any  blood  stain.  If  it  cannot  be  confirmed 

 
 
-11-                              Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

that the blood stains were of human origin and matched with one of the 

deceased, the weapon of offence otherwise is of no avail to support the 

case of the prosecution. 

12.   

As  noted  above,  it  was  the  obligation  of  the  Investigating 

Officer to further investigate the first version given by Nazabat Hussain, 

which he acknowledges that was duly recorded in cross-examination. The 

said  act  of  the  Investigating  Officer  is  in  violation  of  law  in  light  of  the 

judgments  reported  as “Liaqat Ali and another VS The State” (1998 P 

Cr. L J 216)  and “Mst. Mumtaz Begum VS Ghulam Farid and another” 

(2003 SCMR 647).  The  above  facts  and  circumstances  give  rise  to 

doubt  in  the  case  of  the  prosecution.  In  this  behalf,  the  following 

circumstances cast shadow on the case of the prosecution:- 

a) 

The first version of the accused wherein he stated that wife of 

the complainant and his nephew hurled stones and bricks from 

the  rooftop  from  the  shop  of  the  complainant  was  not 

investigated  at  all  by  the  Investigating  Officer,  which  he  duly 

admitted in his cross-examination. 

b) 

The ocular and medical account evidence contradict each other 

inasmuch as both the eye witnesses have stated that one blow 

with  the  Churri  was  made,  whereas  in  the  postmortem  there 

are  two  incised  wounds;  moreover,  Abid  Hussain  has  been 

attributed  to  have  inflicted  a  blow  with  Axe  on  the  victim, 

whereas the Inquest Report as well as the Postmortem Report 

and  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Farrukh  Kamal  indicate  that  the  fatal 

 
 
-12-                              Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

injury  was  caused  by  a  blunt  object.  In  this  behalf,  the 

prosecution failed to establish that the injury was inflicted with 

a blunt side of the Axe as none of the eye witness clarified the 

position despite the  Inquest Report as well as the Postmortem 

Report, which they were required to do so. 

c) 

The  Forensic  Report  is  negative  inasmuch  as  it  states  that  the 

blood on the axe is of human origin cannot be confirmed.  

13.   

In  view  of  the  above  facts  and  circumstances,  the  learned 

Trial Court rightly concluded that the case against the Nazabat Hussain is 

not  made  out,  hence  he  is  to  be  acquitted.  Due  to  the  above  reasons, 

even case against Abid Hussain is also not made out. More so as in light 

of  the  judgment  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  “Notice to 

Police Constble Khizar Hayat Son of Hadait Ullah on account of his false 

statement” (PLD 2019 SC 527) and “Sardar Bi Bi VSMunir Ahmed” 

(2017 SCMR 344), where testimony of one witness is disbelieved, it is 

to be disbelieved in totality, hence when the version of the eye witnesses 

is  disbelieved  to  the  extent  of  Nazabat  Hussain,  it  is  also  disbelieved  to 

the  extent  of  Abid  Hussain.  Moreover,  no  case  for  enhancement  of  the 

sentence is made out as the prosecution’s case is not beyond reasonable 

doubt and has shortcomings.  

14.   

For what has been stated above, Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 is 

allowed and the conviction of Abid Hussain is set-aside; consequently, 

his  is  acquitted  of  the  charges  leveled  against  him  in  the  above 

mentioned case, hence he is to be released from the jail forthwith, if not 

 
 
 
-13-                              Jail Appeal No.56 of 2016 
      Criminal Revision No.27 of 2016 
        Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016 

required in any other case. Criminal Appeal No.63 of 2016  and Criminal 

Revision No.27 of 2016 are accordingly dismissed.  

               (CHIEF JUSTICE)                                         JUDGE 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 

Announced in Open Court this             day of June, 2020. 

                 CHIEF JUSTICE 

           JUDGE  

*M. Zaheer Janjua* 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
      
             
   
 
 
 
                       
                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
