JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition No. 3947/2018. 

Muhammad Zaryab Ali 

VS

Ministry of Religious Affairs, through its Secretary, Islamabad, etc.  

Petitioner by: 

Ms. Zaib-un-Nisa, Advocate.  

Respondents by:  Barrister Mumtaz Ali, AAG. 

Ms. Rakhshanda Younas, Advocate. 
Inam-ul-Haq, Director, R&R, M/o Religious 
Affairs, Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

28.03.2019. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner has prayed for the following reliefs:- 

i. 

To direct the respondent No.1 to bring entire record alongwith the 

application  forms,  and  all  other  related  documents  of  candidates 

(Respondents  No.2  to  18)  who  have  been  appointed  illegally  in 

violation of merit of post of Naib Qasids. 

ii. 

iii. 

To  re-scrutinize/fresh  the  eligibility  of  recommended  candidates, 

through honest and independent inquiry committee on merits. 

That  the  appointments  of  those  candidates  (Respondents  No.2  to 

18)  be  declared  null  and  void  who  did  not  meet  the  criteria  and 

merit. 

iv. 

That the respondent No.1 be directed to consider the petitioner for 

the  post  of  Naib  Qasid  who  meet  the  criteria  and  cleared  the  test 

and interview holding domicile of Islamabad. 

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that respondents No.2 to 18 

have  been  selected  against  the  post  of  Naib  Qasid  in  violation  of  the  terms 

referred in the advertisement and their  selection is in violation of law which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 2 

give  rise  to  a  situation  that  their  appointment  be  recalled;  that  majority  of 

appointees  are  not  resident  of  District  Islamabad  and  even  they  do  not  have 

any  valid  domicile  in  their  favour  to  justify  that  they  are  residents  of 

Islamabad. 

3. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  as  well  as  AAG  in 

attendance  under  the  instruction  of  Ministry  of  Religious  and  Interfaith 

Harmony,  Islamabad  contend  that  advertisement  got  published  by  the 

respondent  department  only  refers  that  preference  will  be  given  to  the  local 

candidates  but  it  does  not  mean  that  any  candidate  from  other  districts  will 

not be appointed; that post advertised by the department is of federal nature 

and  as  such  the  candidates  of  other  region  could  not  be  deprived  of  their 

valuable rights in terms of constitutional guarantees. 

4. 

5. 

Arguments heard, record perused.  

From  the  perusal  of  record,  it  reveals  that  petitioner  has  called  in 

question the appointment of respondents No.2 to 18 appointed as Naib Qasid 

in  Ministry  of  Religious  and  Interfaith  Harmony,  Islamabad  on  the  basis  of 

advertisement  dated  30.04.2017.  The  main  objection  of  the  petitioner  is 

regarding the eligibility criteria in which one of the pre-condition for the post 

of Naib Qasid BPS-1 is  local basis. In order to reach  at  the just  conclusion, I 

have  gone  through  the  relevant  advertisement  in  which  following  condition 

has been given:- 

ىبتسکبپ تهوکح
دبثٓا ملاسا ،یگٌہٓا نہ تہارولا يیث و زوهُا یجہره تزاشو
ںیہ یلاخ ںایماسا
 ازوپ سپ طئاسش ےئلیک یزسقت سپ ںویهبسا لیذ جزد ںیه دبثٓا ملاسا ،یگٌہٓا نہ تہارولا يیث و زوهُا یجہره تزاشو
 ںیتساوخزد ےس ںوزاودیها ےلاو ےًستا
 لیسیس
سجوً
4 

ہثسجت و تیلثبق یویلعت

 دادعت
یهبسا
11 

سیا یث(دصبق تئبً

:ںیہ ةولطه

دح یک سوع

سبپ یسوئاسپ

یهبسا مبً

 یئبثوص

11  بت52

لبس 

-1) 

/

یئبقلاع
وکہٹ
 ںوزاودیها  یهبقه
وک
 ید  حیجست 
۔یگ ےئبج

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 3 

6. 

Respondents  No.2  to  18  have  been  selected  after  due  process  by  the 

competent authority and as per final list, only two candidates having domicile 

of Islamabad were selected, whereas, rest of the candidates are from different 

parts of Pakistan, therefore, it is necessary to go through the relevant law as to 

whether it is pre-condition that all aspirant candidates for the posts of BPS-01 

have  to  be  appointed  on  local  basis  and  as  such  terms  “local”  means  the 

person  who  are  based  in  Islamabad  with  domicile,  issued  from  ICT 

Magistrate. The other meaning of word “local” are restricted, limited confined 

narrow,  home  neighboring  community  district,  regional  area,  native 

indigenous resident, inhabitant, etc., whereas the term “domicile” referred in 

Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 read with Rules of 1952 has been explained as 

under:- 

17.  Certificate  of  domicile.---The  Federal  Government  may  upon  an 

application  being  made  to  it  in  the  prescribed  manner  containing  the 

prescribed  particulars  grant  a  certificate  of  domicile  to  any  person  in 

respect of whom it is satisfied that he has ordinarily resided in Pakistan for 

a  period  of  not  less  than  one  year  immediately  before  the  making  of  the 

application, and has acquired a domicile therein. 

The term domicile is  widely  used in different contexts and conveys different 

meanings.  Domicile  is  a  person’s  permanent  place  of  dwelling.  It  is  a  legal 

relationship  between  the  person  and  locality.  It  may  or  may  not  be  of  same 

meaning  as  term  “residence”.  For  the  purpose  of  jurisdiction,  “domicile” 

means  a  legal  residence  which  is  the  place  where  the  person  has  fixed 

dwelling with intention to making it his/her permanent home.  

7. 

Domicile is a combination of two factors namely residence and intent to 

remain. As the term domicile includes residence, the scope and significance of 

the term domicile is  larger than the term residence.  An individual  may have 

several  residences,  whereas  he/she  will  have  only  one  domicile.  Domicile  is 

used  as  reference  to  personal  rights,  duties and  obligations.  The  individual’s 

 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 4 

present  physical  location  of  stay  is  known  as  residence  and  it  may  be  one 

amongst  several  places  where  a  person  may  be  present  and  there  is  no 

restriction that a person may have his/her residence in one place and his/her 

domicile in another. The term residence used in the statute will be construed 

as having the meaning of domicile or vice versa depends upon the purpose of 

statute. It also depends upon the nature of matter as well as context in which 

the term is used will be taken into consideration. Similarly, residence is a more 

flexible  concept  than  domicile  and  permanency  is  not  a  requirement  for 

residency as even a temporary and transient place of dwelling can qualify as 

residence. However, while considering the provisions of the Citizenship Act, I 

have  also  gone  through  the  concept  of  domicile  certificate,  which  is  an 

essential document through which a person is declared to be an inhabitant or 

permanent  resident  of  that  city  as  such  certificate  is  primarily  used  for  the 

purpose of job and admission in University or educational institutions. 

8. 

In  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  following  documents  have  been 

enlisted as requirement for the purpose of domicile.  

“For the applicants who attained the age of 21 years (major) 

  Copy of CNIC of Applicant  
  Copy of CNIC of Father/Husband 
  Copy  of  Proof  of  Residence  in  Islamabad  (Allotment 

letter or Lease Agreement) 

  One original utility bill (Electricity, Gas or Telephone) 

of the residence  

  NOC from the Department (For Government Servants) 
  Copy of SSC/Matric Certificate.  
  Copy of  Marriage Registration  Certificate (for  married 

persons) 

  Copy of Form-B (if you have children) 
  Proof of trade or occupation.  
  Two Passport size photographs  

For the applicants who are under the age of 21 years (Minor) 

  Copy of Form-B or CNIC of Applicant. 
  Copy of CNIC of Father/Mother 
  Copy  of  Domicile  Certificate  of  parent(s)  in  which  the 

name of applicant is mentioned 
  Copy of SSC/Matric Certificate  

 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 5 

  Proof of trade or occupation  
  Two passport size photographs 

The  above  referred requirements  for  domicile  in  Islamabad  Capital  Territory 

give rise to an impression that such documents can only be issued to a person 

who  holds  a  proof  of  residence  in  Islamabad  and  his  secondary  school 

education was completed in Islamabad Capital Territory or he is doing a job of 

any  Government  department  or  a  private  business  in  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory.  In  order  to  reach  out  the  answer  of  said  queries,  the  ICT 

administration is relying upon utilities bills of residence, NOC of Government 

department,  Form-B,  and  for  any  applicant  who  is  less  than  21  years  of  age, 

his parents domicile plays a key role. The question originates as to why such 

requirement  have  been  imposed  by  the  district  administration  for  obtaining 

domicile certificate, the answer is simple, after obtaining the said certificate of 

domicile, a person is eligible for consideration of any job or admission in any 

educational  institution  as  of  right  being  a  resident  of  the  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory as any seat reserved for the residents of Islamabad Capital Territory 

will only be considered against those applications of different individuals who 

are permanent residents of Islamabad.  

9. 

The  above  referred  provision  clearly  spells  out  the  concept  of 

permanent residence certificate, which could only be granted upon findings of 

fact that as to whether the person is actually/physically resided in a particular 

area  or  otherwise.  The  said  provision  also  qualifies  the  term  “ordinarily 

resided” and as such, certificate requires an inquiry on the administrative side 

by  the  District  Magistrate,  who  after  receiving  certain  documents  referred 

above  and  by  recording  of  statement,  satisfies  himself  that  the  applicant  is  a 

resident  of  that  district,  where-after,  said  certificate  could  be  issued.  The 

minimum requirement is one year as determining factor for any applicant who 

is residing within particular territory can apply for the issuance of domicile and 

 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 6 

as such only one domicile can be issued at  one time, while a  person holding 

two domiciles at the same time would be guilty of misconduct and liable for 

prosecution.  

10. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  constitutional  provision  of  Article  27  of 

the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  which  governs  the 

concept of adequate representation in the services of Pakistan, therefore, same 

is reproduced hereunder for ready reference:- 

Art.  27:  No  citizen  otherwise  qualified  for  appointment  in  the  service  of 

Pakistan  shall  be  discriminated  against 

in  respect  of  any  such 

appointment on the ground of race, religion, caste, sex, residence or place 

of birth: 

Provided  that,  for  a  period  not  exceeding  [forty]  years  from  the 

commencing day, posts may be reserved for persons belonging to any class 

or area to secure their adequate representation in the service of Pakistan. 

Provided  further  that,  in  the  interest  of  the  said  service,  specified 

posts or services may be reserved for members of either sex if such posts or 

services  entail  the  performance  of  duties  and  functions  which  cannot  be 

adequately performed by members of the other sex [:] 

[Provided also that under-representation of any class or area in the 

service of Pakistan may be redressed in such manner as may be determined 

by an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).] 

(2)    Nothing  in  clause(1)  shall  prevent  any  Provincial  Government,  or 

any local or other authority in a Province, from prescribing, in relation to 

any  post  or  class  of  service  under  that  Government  or  authority, 

conditions as to residence in the Province, for a period not exceeding three 

years, prior to appointment under that Government or authority. 

11.  While taking into consideration the above Article, the time of forty (40) 

years has already been expired in the year 2013. In my humble understanding, 

the  time  limit  envisaged  in  the  said  Article  is  only  meant  to  equalize  the 

underprivileged  areas  of  Pakistan  with  the  privileged  ones  in  order  to 

eliminate 

the  gap,  harmonize,  rationalize  and  equalize 

the  human 

development gap. The other purpose of the abovementioned time limit of 40 

 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 7 

years further gives an uplift to the regions having less exposure or they have 

not  been  developed  due  to  their  socio-economic  and  political  reasons, 

therefore,  the  citizens  of  those  areas  could  be  given  an  opportunity  equal  to 

those citizens who are living in developed areas of Pakistan. 

10. 

The  period  of  40  years  has  already  been  expired  in  year  2013, 

whereafter the time limit was neither extended nor the parliament passed any 

other specific legislation to address such issue, therefore,  this Court is bound 

by the mandate prescribed by the constitutional wisdom. In this sense, Article 

27(2) plays a key role while dealing with positions notified for local authority, 

whereas  the  local  authority  or  the  Provincial  Government  is  empowered  to 

prescribe  any  condition  as  to  residence  in  relation  to  any  post  or  class  of 

service  under  that  Government  or  authority.  The  said  Article  of  the 

Constitution also empowers the local administration of the Islamabad Capital 

Territory  to  prescribe  any  condition  to  a  service  with  reference  to  the 

residence, therefore, in my humble estimation, the departments established in 

the Islamabad Capital Territory, called as “local departments”  within limited 

jurisdiction  to  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  for  the  purposes  of  dealing  with 

different issues of governance, can only hire candidates, who are residents of 

Islamabad  and  having  domicile  issued  by  the  district  administration  of 

Islamabad.   

12. 

In  Islamabad  District,  the  offices  like  ICT  Administration,  ICT  Police, 

CDA, District Courts, High Court and similar type of offices, which are only 

confined to the ICT for the purpose of their working and jurisdiction, can only 

hire  candidates  having  domicile  of  ICT,  unless  any  particular  post  has  been 

declared as federal post or their rules prescribe quota of other region. Rule 16 

of Civil Servants (APT) Rules, 1973 put emphasis that vacant posts of BPS-1 & 

BPS-2  shall  ordinarily  be  filled  on  local  basis,  which  means  that  person 

 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 8 

ordinarily  residing  in  Islamabad  on  permanent  basis  alongwith  domicile  of 

district Islamabad. 

13. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  Esta  Code,  Chapter-II,  which  deals  with 

recruitment,  appointment, seniority and promotion, whereby at Serial No.14, 

following O.M. has been referred: 

“Sl. No.14 
Quota  for  Posts  in  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Administration 
and Autonomous/Semi Autonomous Bodies 

Rules-15  and  16  of  the  Civil  Servants  (Appointment, 

Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, provides as under:  

Rule-15. 

Rule-16. 

Vacancies  in  posts  in  BPS  3  to  15 
and equivalent in offices which serve 
only  a  particular  province  or  region 
shall  be  filled  by  appointment  of 
persons domiciled in the province for 
region concerned.  
Vacancies  in  posts  in  BPS  1  and  2 
and  equivalent  shall  ordinarily  be 
filled on local basis.” 

Recruitment  to  posts  upto  BPS  15  in  all  the  offices  of  the 
2. 
I.C.T.**  administration  and  other  Federal  Government  offices 
whose functional jurisdiction is restricted to the Islamabad Capital 
Territory,  is  required  to  be  made  on  regional/local  basis  in 
accordance with the above quoted rules.  
3. 
Attention  is  also  invited  to  the  Estt.  Division’s  O.M. 
No.8/9/82-TRV/R2, dated 29.09.1973 (Sl No.45) under which the 
provincial/regional  quotas  have  been  made  applicable 
to 
appointments  in  or  equivalent  to  BPS  17  and  above  in  all 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous  Bodies  under  the  administrative 
control  of  the  Federal  Government***.  As  such,  recruitment  to 
posts upto BPS 16 in autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies located 
in Islamabad is outside the provincial/regional quotas.  
4. 
All  Ministries/Divisions  and  Heads  of  Departments  are 
requested that the above rules/instructions may please be observed 
strictly  while  making  recruitment  to  the  posts  upto  BPS  15  in 
offices/organizations under their control.” 

The above referred O.M. clearly spells out the mandate of Article 27(2) of the 

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  

14.  While considering the entire background and advertisement as well as 

law  on  the  subject,  the  advertisement  published  by  the  respondent 

department  has  put  emphasis  )۔یگ  ےئبج  ید  حیجست  وک  داسفا  یهبقه(,  which  means 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 9 

preference will be given to ICT based candidates, whereas two out of eighteen 

candidates  were  appointed  from  ICT  while  the  remaining  candidates  have 

been appointed from rest of  the Pakistan, as such the minimum requirement 

has not been fulfilled. The departments are under obligation to apply the law 

in  its  true  perspective,  especially  with  reference  to  the  local  residents  of 

Islamabad (ICT) who are not being considered for any post in other provinces 

as no quota is fixed for them on reciprocal basis.  

15. 

Keeping  in  view  the  situation  discussed  above  as  the  advertisement 

specifically  carries  condition  that  “یگ  ےئبج  ید  حیجست  وک  داسفا  یهبقه”,  hence, 

respondent  Ministry  was  under  obligation  to  appoint  local  inhabitants  of 

Islamabad  being  domicile  of  Islamabad  and  in  case  of  any  local  resident  of 

Islamabad was not appointed,  the department  was bound to write down the 

reason for not appointing a candidate of Islamabad domicile while he was to 

be given preference vide advertisement and such preference could not be put 

aside without solid reasoning which otherwise amounts to depriving a person 

being domicile of Islamabad being local resident (داسفا یهبقه). As such depriving 

a  local  resident  of  Islamabad  from  appointment  amounts  to  depriving  him 

from his legitimate right of appointment.    

16.  Moreover,  in  my  humble  view,  posts  from  BPS-01  to  BPS-15  are  to  be 

considered for the purpose of appointment in terms of Rules 15 and 16 of the 

Civil  Servants  (Appointment,  Promotion  and  Transfer)  Rules,  1973  as 

employees  in  such  cadres  play  key  role  in  the  working  of  any  government 

department. Local candidates have been given preference only with intention 

to save  time as such employees  can easily deal with their  service  and family 

matters  for  being  in  same  vicinity.  The  other  important  reason  for  hiring  of 

local person for the post of BPS-1 and BPS-2 is the economic factor as due to 

lower slabs, such candidate would effortlessly afford to live in such particular 

district  or  area  for  being  already  settled.  In  case,  the  candidate  belongs  to 

 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 10 

far-flung areas of Pakistan, he would not be able to perform his duties while 

dealing  with  his  domestic  affairs  in  performance  of  his  official  duties  due  to 

his lower salary slab. 

17. 

It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  all  the  local  based  departments  in 

ICT  have  to  apply  strict  adherence  to  the  principle  of  “local  basis”  and 

“domicile” of ICT for appointment in BPS-1 to BPS-15 and should not hire any 

person who is neither a permanent resident of ICT nor holder of ICT domicile 

as such kind of practice will prejudice the rights of the local residents of ICT. 

After 18th amendment in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 

1973,  majority  of  the  departments  have  been  vested  to  provinces  and  at  this 

stage,  local  posts  could  only  be  given  to  local  residents  of  ICT  and  not  to 

candidates belonged to other provinces. 

18.  At last, I am of the view that respondents have not considered the ratio 

and  wisdom  of  the  term  “local  basis”  explained  in  Rule  16  of  the  Civil 

Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 as well as in the 

advertisement. Even otherwise, they hired only 02 candidates from Islamabad 

against total 18 vacant posts, which clearly expresses the incorrect approach of 

the  respondent  department,  who  had  to  give  preference  to  the  candidates, 

who  belonged  to  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  by  virtue  of  their  permanent 

residences  as  well  as  domiciles,  as  the  word    ""یگ  یئبج  ید  حیجست  وک  داسفا  یهبقه”, 

means preference should be given to those, who are resident of Islamabad by 

virtue of their address in addition to their domiciles, therefore, the instant writ 

petition is hereby DISPOSED OF with direction to the respondent department 

to  reconsider  the  entire  hiring  process  in  light  of  observations  made 

hereinabove  by  this  Court  and  appoint  candidates  having  domicile  of 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  who  have  their  permanent  addresses  of 

Islamabad  as  at  this  stage  this  Court  restrains  itself  from  setting  aside  the 

appointments  while  in  process  of  judicial  review  due  to  the  reason  that  it  is 

 
W.P. No.3947/2018 

Page 11 

the  role  and  duty  of  the  Government  of  Pakistan  and  the  concerned 

respondents,  who  are  sitting  at  the  helm  of  affairs  to  apply  the  law  in  its 

correct  approach.  The  respondent  department  is  under  obligation  to  resettle 

the appointments while considering the law within the period  of  03 months, 

under intimation to this Court.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on:                 April, 2019. 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting 

Khalid Z. 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
