ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  
Sajjad & another  
VS 
Muhammad Younas Khilji & others  

Date of Hearing:             19.04.2016 
Petitioners by: 

           Mr. Muhammad Illyas Sheikh,  
           Advocate 

Respondent No.1 by:   Abdul Shakoor Peracha, Advocate 
_______________________________________________________ 

 MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-Through  the 

instant  Writ  Petition,  the  petitioners,  Sajjad  Khan  and  his 

brother  Mumtaz  Khan, 

impugn  the  Judgment  dated 

25.03.2016,  passed  by  the  Court  of  learned  Additional 

District  Judge (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  the  petitioners' 

appeal against the  Order dated 02.01.2016, passed by the 

Court  of 

learned  Rent  Controller, 

Islamabad,  was 

dismissed.  Vide  the  said  Order  dated  02.01.2016,  the 

learned Rent Controller allowed respondent No.1's eviction 

petition under Section 17 of the Islamabad Rent Restriction 

Ordinance,  2001  ("IRRO")  and  directed  the  petitioners  to 

vacate House No.61, Street No.33, Sector G-9/1, Islamabad 

("the rented premises"). 

2. 

This  case  seems  to  have  a  long  chequered  history. 

Respondent  No.1  is  the  brother-in-law  (behnoi)  of  the 

petitioners.  On  07.01.2011,  respondent  No.1  filed  an 

eviction petition under Section 17 of the IRRO seeking the 

eviction of the petitioners from the rented premises. In the 

said  eviction  petition,  the  position  taken  by  respondent 

No.1 was that the rented premises  had been rented out to 

the  petitioners  in  the  year  1992  on  the  basis  of  an  oral 

agreement; 

that  up 

to  30.06.2010,  a  monthly  rent 

Rs.35,000/-  was  paid  by 

the  petitioners,  but  since 

01.07.2010, the petitioners had not paid any rent;  and that 

under  the  provisions  of  the  IRRO,  the  petitioners  were 

liable to pay rent at a 25% increased rate of Rs.43,750/- per 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

month.  The  grounds  taken  by  respondent  No.1  in  the 

eviction  petition  were,  (i)  that  the  rent  premises  are 

required by respondent  No.1 to  accommodate his married 

son,  and  (ii)  that  the  petitioners  had  defaulted  in  the 

payment of rent since 01.07.2010. 

3. 

The  petitioners  contested  the  said  eviction  petition 

by  filing  their  reply  in  which  the  petitioners  denied  the 

relationship of landlord and tenant. The petitioners pleaded 

that in the year 1999, the rented premises had been orally 

gifted 

to  petitioner  No.2 

(Mumtaz  Khan),  and 

that 

possession  of  the  rented  premises  was  also  delivered  to 

him.  From  the  divergent  pleadings  of  the  contesting 

parties,  the  learned  Rent  Controller  framed  the  following 

issues:- 

"1.  Whether the respondents are willful defaulter and 

liable to be ejected as prayed? OPA 

2.  Whether the suit premises is required by the 

petitioner for his personal bonafide use? OPA 

3.  Whether the petitioner has not come to the court  

with clean hands ?OPR 

4.  Whether the suit house has been gifted to    

respondent No.2 by the petitioner? OPR 

5.  Whether the petitioner has concealed the material 

facts from the court ? OPR 

6.  Whether the petition in hand is false, frivolous, 
baseless and vexatious, hence, the same is liable 
to be dismissed ?OPR 

7.  Whether there is no relationship of landlord and 

tenant exist between the parties ? OPR.  

8.  Relief."  

4. 

On 10.02.2014, after the evidence was recorded and 

arguments  were  addressed  on  the  eviction  petition,  the 

petitioners  filed  an  application  for  re-framing/reverting 

issue No.7 so as to place the onus  of  proof  on  respondent 

No.1.  Respondent  No.1  opposed  this  application.  The 

learned  Rent  Controller,  vide  order  dated  16.06.2014 

modified  issue  No.7  and  placed  the  onus  of  proof  on  both 

the  parties.  Thereafter, 

respondent  No.1 

filed  an 

application for additional evidence, which was allowed.  

5. 

The 

learned  Rent  Controller,  vide  order  dated 

18.11.2014,  dismissed  respondent  No.1's  eviction  petition 

by  holding  that  no  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant 

 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
3 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

existed  between  the  parties.  The  rent  deposited  in  the 

Court by the petitioners in compliance with a tentative rent 

order passed by the learned Rent Controller under Section 

17(8)  of  the  IRRO,  was  directed  to  be  reimbursed  to  the 

petitioners. Respondent No.1, in appeal before the Court of 

Additional District Judge, Islamabad, impugned this order. 

Vide  order  dated  07.03.2015,  the  learned  Appellate  Court 

dismissed  the  said  appeal.  Respondent  No.1  challenged 

the 

said 

appellate 

order  dated 

07.03.2015 

in 

W.P.No.763/2015,  before  the  Hon'ble  Islamabad  High 

Court.  Vide  Order  dated  16.04.2015,  the  Hon'ble  High 

Court  allowed  the  said  writ  petition,  and  the  concurrent 

orders  passed  by  the  courts  below  were  set  aside.  The 

matter  was  remanded  to  the  Court  of 

learned  Rent 

Controller with the direction to decide the matter afresh in 

the  light  of  the  observations  made  by  the  Hon'ble  High 

Court. The said order dated 16.04.2015 was challenged by 

the  petitioners  before  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan in Civil Petition No.1468/2015. On 18.09.2015, the 

petitioners withdrew the said petition.  

6. 

After  the  case  was  remanded,  the  learned  Rent 

Controller,  vide  judgment  dated  02.01.2016,  allowed  the 

eviction  petition  and  directed  the  petitioners  to  handover 

vacant  possession  of  the  rented  premises  to  respondent 

No.1  within  a  period  of  fifteen  days.  This  judgment  was 

challenged in an appeal by the petitioners before the Court 

of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad.  Vide 

judgment  dated  25.03.2016,  the  said  appeal  was  also 

dismissed. The petitioners, through the instant writ petition 

have  challenged 

the  concurrent 

judgments  dated 

02.01.2016  and  25.03.2016,  passed  by  the  learned  Rent 

Controller  and  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge, Islamabad, respectively.   

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted  that 

the  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  does  not  exist 

between  respondent  No.1  and  the  petitioners;  that  in  the 

 
4 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

year  1999,  the  rented  property  was  gifted  by  respondent 

No.1  to  petitioner  No.2;  that  the  petitioners'  entry  into  the 

rented premises was not in the capacity of tenants, but  as 

owners;  that  while  making  an  oral  gift,  respondent  No.1 

had  also  given  possession  of  the  rented  premises  to  the 

petitioners; that the rent receipts submitted by respondent 

No.1  were  forgeries;  that  the  payment  of  rent  during  the 

pendency  of  the  eviction  petition  was  made  by  the 

petitioners  in  order  to  avoid  the  penal  consequences 

envisaged  under Section 17(9) of the IRRO;  that petitioner 

No.2  had  instituted  a  suit  for  declaration  and  permanent 

injunction 

in  the  court  of  the 

learned  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad, against respondent No.1 praying for inter-alia a 

declaration to the effect that petitioner No.2 is the owner in 

possession  of  the  rented  premises  on  the  basis  of  an  oral 

gift made in the year 1999 by respondent No.1 in favour of 

petitioner  No.2;  that  the  petitioners  had  filed  a  petition 

before  the  Hon'ble  Islamabad  High  Court  praying  for  the 

transfer  of  the  appeal  from  the  Court  of  Ms.  Zeba 

Chaudhry,  learned  Additional District  Judge,  Islamabad  to 

another  Court;  that  the  learned  appellate  court  instead  of 

waiting    for  a  decision  on  the  said  petition,  decided  the 

appeal in the absence of the petitioners and their counsel; 

that  instead  of  deciding  the  appeal  on  merits,  the  learned 

appellate  court should  have dismissed  the appeal  for non-

prosecution.  Learned  counsel  prayed  for  the  judgment  of 

the  learned  appellate  court  to  be  set  aside  and  matter 

remanded  for  arguments.  In  making  these  submission, 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  placed  reliance  on 

cases  of  Mazhar  Saeed  and  another  VS  A.D.J.  and  eleven 

others  (2011  YLR  3089),  Akhtar  Hussain  VS  Allah  Ditta 

(2011  MLD  1834),  Mst.  Wakeelan  Begum  VS  Additional 

District Judge, Gujranwala and two others (2006 CLC 1886) 

and  Allies  Book  Corporation  through  L.Rs  VS  Sultan 

Ahmad and others (2006 SCMR 152). 

 
5 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

8. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent 

No.1 submitted that no gift, oral or written, was ever made 

by  respondent  No.1  in  favour  of  the  petitioners;  that  the 

petitioners  were  respondent  No.1's  wife's  real  brothers; 

that  respondent  No.1  continued  to  remain  owner  of  the 

rented premises in the C.D.A. records; that the petitioners 

used to pay rent to respondent No.1, but stopped doing so 

since 01.07.2010; that the rented premises are required by 

respondent No.1 for his bonafide use and to accommodate 

his  married  son;  that  the  learned  appellate  court  decided 

the  appeal 

in  the  petitioners’  absence  because  the 

petitioners  were  trying  to  linger  on  the  matter  by  not 

appearing before the appellate court. The learned counsel 

for  respondent  No.1  prayed  for  the  dismissal  of  the  writ 

petition. In making these submissions, learned counsel for 

respondent No.1 placed reliance on the case Shajjar Islam 

VS Muhammad Siddique (PLD 2007 SC 45). 

9. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel 

for  the  contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record 

with their able assistance. 

10.  Now the entire edifice of the petitioners' case stands 

on  their  claim  that  the  rented  premises  were  gifted  by 

respondent  No.1  to  petitioner  No.2  in  the  year  1999. 

Respondent No.1  denies  this,  and  wants  the  petitioners  to 

be  evicted  from  the  rented  premises.  He  wants  these 

premises  for  his  own  use  and  the  use  of  his  family.  He 

asserts  the  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between 

himself and the petitioners.  

11.  On  account  of  respondent  No.1's  denial  as  to  the 

alleged oral gift, petitioner No.2, on 18.05.2011 instituted a 

suit  for  declaration  and  permanent  injunction  before  the 

court of learned Civil Judge, Islamabad. In this civil suit, it 

is  pleaded  that  petitioner  No.2  is  the  owner  of  the  rented 

premises  on  the  basis  of  an  oral  gift  made  by  respondent 

No.1  in  his  favour  on  25.05.1999.  In  this  suit,  petitioner 

No.2 inter-alia  prays  for  a declaration to  the  effect  that  he 

 
 
6 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

is  lawful  owner  in  possession  of  the  rented  premises. 

According  to  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  this 

suit is still pending adjudication. Copies of the pleadings in 

the  said  suit  have  been  placed  on  record.  In  this  suit, 

petitioner  No.2  is  yet  to  establish  and  prove  the factum  of 

the  oral  gift  of  the  rented  premises  in  his  favour.  Until  a 

declaration  as  to  the  ownership  of  the  rented  premises  in 

favour of  petitioner No.2 is made by the learned civil court, 

he  cannot,  in  my  view,  resist  his  eviction  from  the  rented 

premises.  

12. 

The  mere  fact  that  the  petitioners  assert  that  the 

rented  premises  were  orally  gifted  by  respondent  No.1  to 

petitioner No.2, they impliedly admit and acknowledge that 

prior  to  the  said  alleged  gift,  respondent  No.1  was  the 

owner  of  the  rented  premises.  Unless  and  until,  it  is 

established  through  a  declaratory  decree  in  favour  of 

petitioner  No.2  that the rented  property  was  indeed  gifted 

to him by respondent No.1, the petitioners cannot continue 

to  remain  in  occupation  of  the  rented  premises.  He  must 

first vacate the rented premises and re-gain possession of 

the same, in  the event,  he is successful in establishing his 

title to the same through a declaration to this effect from a 

court of competent jurisdiction. As Section 2(g) of the IRRO 

defines  ‘landlord’  as  the  owner  of  the  premises,  and  as 

petitioner  No.2  is  yet  to  have  himself  adjudged  as  the 

owner of the rented premises, the petitioners have no legal 

basis  for  denying  respondent  No.1's  title  to  the  rented 

premises.  Reference  to  case  law,  at  this  stage  would  be 

apposite:- 

(i)  

In the case of Iqbal VS Rabia Bibi, reported as 

PLD 1991 SC 242, it has been held at page 245 of the 

report as follows:- 

“Be that as it may, in some recent judgments 
this court has taken the view that in cases like the 
present one, where the sale agreement or any 
other  transaction  relied  upon  by  a  tenant  is 
seriously and bona ride disputed by the landlord, 
the appellant/tenant cannot be allowed to retain 
the  possession  during  the  litigation  where  he 

 
 
 
7 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

continues to deny the ownership of the landlord 
who had inducted him as a tenant, without any 
condition and/or reservation. It has been ruled that 
in such cases although the tenant has a right to 
adduce evidence and take a short time for that 
purpose to remain in occupation despite having 
set  up  a,  hostile  title  which  is  denied  by  the 
landlord, but on the well-known bar of estoppel in 
this behalf, he (the tenant) cannot be permitted to 
remain in occupation and right the litigation for 
long time--even for decades. In this case it is more 
than a decade that the appellants have been able 
to  keep  the  possession  on  a  claim  which  the 
landlord asserts is false. Accordingly, as held in 
those cases in fairness to both sides, while the 
tenant is  at  liberty to prosecute the  litigation, 
wherein he should try to establish his claim but it 
should not be at the cost of' landlord/owner. It 
should be at the cost of himself and he must 
vacate--though of course he would be entitled to 
an easy and. free entry as soon as he finally 
succeeds in establishing his title against his own 
landlord. See Makhan Bano V, Haji Abdul Ghani 
(PLD  1984  Supreme  Court  17),  Allah  Yar  and 
others  v.  Additional  District  Judge  and  others 
(1984 SCMR v. Mufti Abdul Ghani (PLD 1985 SC 
1).” 

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Jumma  Khan  VS  Zarin  Khan, 

reported  as  PLD  1999  SC  1101,  the  relationship  of 

landlord and tenant was denied by the tenant on the 

ground that the landlord had executed an agreement 

to  sell  the  rented  premises  to  the  tenant,  and  that  a 

substantial  amount  had  been  paid  to  the  landlord, 

and  that  a  civil  suit  for  specific  performance  was 

pending  adjudication  against  the 

landlord.  The 

landlord  had  unequivocally  refuted  the  execution  of 

any agreement for  sale. The Hon'ble Supreme Court 

of  Pakistan  dismissed  the  tenant’s  petition  in  the 

following terms:- 

“7.   On the basis of dictum laid in aforequoted 
reports  we  unhesitatingly  hold  that  petitioner 
cannot  legitimately  resist  maintainability  of 
ejectment proceedings pending against him on the 
ground of sale-agreement. Suffice it to observe 
that genuineness or otherwise of such agreement 
and its consequential effort will be independently 
determined by the Civil Court. However, in the 
instant case we are satisfied that issue regarding 
relationship of tenancy and personal bona fide 
requirement  of  respondent-landlord  has  been 

 
 
8 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

correctly decided by the Courts below. There does 
not appear any material defect or legal infirmity 
with regard to conclusions drawn in the impugned 
judgments.  Accordingly  the  petition  having  no 
merit is dismissed and leave to appeal is refused.” 

(iii)  In  case  of  Barkat  Masih  VS  Manzoor  Ahmad, 

reported  as  2006  SCMR  1068,  it  was  held  that  if  a 

tenant  denies  the  relationship  of  the  landlord  and 

tenant  he  should  first  vacate  the  premises  in  his 

possession and then contest his proprietary rights. 

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Abdul  Rasheed  VS  Maqbool 

Ahmed, 

reported  as  2011  SCMR  320, 

the 

petitioner/tenant  had  denied  the  relationship  of 

landlord  and  tenant  between  parties.  The  petitioner 

had  claimed 

that  he  had  purchased  demised 

premises  subsequently  through  a  sale  agreement. 

The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  dismissed 

the petition by holding as follows:- 

“5. … It is settled law that where in a case filed for 
eviction of the tenant by the landlord, the former 
takes up a position that he has purchased the 
property and hence is no more a tenant then he 
has to vacate the property and file a suit for 
specific  performance  of  the  sale  agreement 
whereafter he would be given easy access to the 
premises  in  case  he  prevails.  In  this  regard 
reference can be made to Shameem Akhtar v. 
Muhammad  Rashid  (PLD  1989  SC  575),  Mst. 
Azeemun Nisar Begum v. Mst. Rabia Bibi (PLD 
1991 SC 242), Muhammad Rafique v. Messrs Habib 
Bank Ltd. (1994 SCMR 1012) and Mst. Bor Bibi v. 
Abdul  Qadir  (1996  SCMR  877).  In  so  far  as 
determination of the relationship of landlord and 
tenant is concerned, such enquiry by the Rent 
Controller is of a summary nature. Undoubtedly 
the premises were taken by the petitioner on rent 
from the respondent and according to the former 
he later on purchased the same which was denied 
by the latter. Consequently, the relationship in so 
far as the jurisdiction of the Rent Controller is 
concerned stood established because per settled 
law the question of title to the property could never 
be decided by the Rent Controller.” 

(v) 

In  the  case  of  Gohar  Ali  Shah  VS  Shahzada 

Alam,  reported  as  2000  MLD  82,  the  appellant  was 

seeking  to  avoid  eviction  from  the  rented  premises 

by  claiming  that  he  had  purchased  the  rented 

 
 
 
9 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

premises. The Hon'ble High Court of Sindh struck off 

the  tenant’s  defence  and  directed  him  to  vacate  the 

premises  subject  to  refund  by  the  landlord  of  the 

amount  of  consideration  paid  towards  the  price  of 

the  premises 

in  question 

to 

the 

tenant  after 

adjustment  of  rent  till  the  delivery  of  possession. 

Furthermore, it was held as follows:- 

"Mere agreement to sale would not 
absolve the appellant to pay rent only because he 
was proposed purchaser of the premises when 
there has been no term that appellant would not 
pay rent on this executing such agreement of sale 
when such agreement of sale would not create any 
right title or interest in or over the property in 
favour of appellant the proposed purchaser until 
and unless the said relationship of landlord or 
tenant is determined by an agreement."  

(vi) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Akmal  VS  Faisal 

Saeed  Mirza,  reported  as  2004  CLC  862,  the  tenant 

had  denied  the  existence  of  relationship  of  landlord 

and 

tenant  between 

the  parties  alleging 

that 

predecessor-in-interest  of  the  landlord  had  entered 

into  agreement  to  sell  the  premises  in  question  in 

favour of the tenant. The tenant had also stated that 

he  had  filed  a  suit  for  specific  performance  of  the 

agreement  to  sell.  The  said  assertions  of  the  tenant 

did  not  find  favour  with  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High 

Court,  and  in  paragraph  8  of  the  said  report,  it  was 

held as follows:-  

“8. … It may be pointed out here that learned Rent 
Controller has not to decide the fact of sale and 
purchase allegedly made between the appellant 
and predecessor-in-interest of the respondents. 
The Civil Court, seized of the matter, is competent 
to  decide  such  dispute  and  if  appellant  turns 
successful in that suit he would have the chance 
for the recovery of possession, in case of his 
ejectment.  Till  the  decision  of  the  civil  suit 
proceedings  of  this  case  (ejectment  petition) 
cannot be stayed or stalled as held in Iqbal and 6 
others v. Mst. Rabia Bibi and another PLD 1991 SC 
242. The intention of suit for specific performance 
of  contract  cannot  furnish  a  ground  to  the 
appellant to get the proceedings before the Rent 
Controller stayed as held in Muhammad Amjad v. 
Mst. Rehana Kausar 2001 YLR 939.” 

 
 
 
 
10 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

(vii)  In the case of Muhammad Parvez VS Additional 

Rent Controller, Lahore, reported as 2013 YLR 1881, 

an  applicant,  claiming  to  be  the  purchaser  of  the 

rented  premises,  had  filed  an  application  under 

Order  I,  Rule  10  C.P.C.  for  impleadment  in  the 

eviction  petition  before  the  Rent  Controller.    The 

landlord’s writ petition against the order of the Rent 

Controller  allowing  the  application  for  impleadment 

was  allowed  by  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court, 

holding as follows:- 

“6. …By applying above said principles in the 
instant case the inescapable conclusion is that a 
tenant remains a tenant, he cannot prolong his 
occupation  by  exercising  his  right  of  being 
subsequent purchaser unless so held by the court 
of competent jurisdiction. The reasons behind is 
that he has no status to justify his possession and if 
he denies the relationship of landlord and tenant 
he will be known to be an illegal occupant. The rent 
proceedings  are  between  the  land  owner  and 
tenant and entry or interference by the third party 
is to be jealously guarded. In this view of the 
matter, the impugned order is set aside and the 
writ petition is  allowed. Resultantly application 
under Order 1 Rule 10, C.P.C. filed by respondents 
Nos.2 and 3 is dismissed.” 

(viii)  In  the  case  of  Refhat  Hamidee  VS  Abdul  Aziz, 

reported  as  2013  YLR  1898,  it  has  been  held  by  the 

Hon'ble  High  Court  of  Sindh  that  unless  and  until  a 

registered sale deed existed between the parties, the 

relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  existed  between 

the  parties,  the  tenant  could  not  get  the  benefit  of  a 

‘sale  agreement’  to  avoid  payment  of  rent.  The 

eviction  of  the  tenant  from  the  rented  premises  was 

held to be justified. 

(ix) 

In  the  judgment  dated  24.03.2016,  passed  in 

Writ  Petition  No.1050/2016, 

titled  “Muhammad 

Rafique  VS Farida  Khan and  others”,  I have had the 

occasion to hold as follows:- 

“It  has  become  commonplace  for 
unscrupulous  tenants/litigants  to  avoid  eviction 
proceedings  by  contending  that  the  rented 

 
 
 
 
11 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

premises had been sold to them. Unless and until 
the petitioner was able to establish his claim for 
specific performance on the basis of the alleged 
sale agreement through a judgment (not an interim 
order)  in  his  favour  passed  by  a  Court  of 
competent  jurisdiction,  respondent  No.1  would 
continue to enjoy the status of being the owner and 
landlord of the rented premises. Pendency of a 
civil suit does not give a license to the tenant to 
remain  in  occupation  of  the  rented  premises. 
There is a catena of case law in support of the 
proposition that ejectment proceedings could not 
be stayed or stalled on the plea that tenants in 
possession were holding an agreement to sell. 
Mere pendency of a suit for declaration or specific 
performance of an agreement is no ground to 
avoid  eviction  of  tenants,  who  claim  to  have 
purchased the rented premises.” 

13. 

It  is  trite 

law  that  a  person  cannot  remain  in 

occupation  of  rented  premises  simply  because  he  asserts 

to be the owner of the rented premises and has instituted a 

suit  for  declaration  in  this  regard.  The  above  mentioned 

case  law  pertains  to  a person  who claims  to  be the owner 

of  the  rented  premises  on  the  basis  of  an  alleged 

agreement  to  sell.  It  is  my  view  that  the  case  of  such  a 

person  is  on  an  equal  footing  with  a  person  who  alleges 

that  the  rented  premises  had  gifted,  whether  orally  or  in 

writing.  

14.  As  regards  the  case  law  relied  upon  by  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioners,  in  the  case  of  Mst.  Wakeelan 

Begum  VS  Additional  District  Judge,  Gujranwala  and  two 

others  (2006  CLC  1886),  it  has  been  held  that  the  initial 

burden  would  lie  on  the  eviction  petitioner  to  prove  by 

production of documentary or sufficient oral evidence that 

the  respondent  was  a  tenant.  In  the  case  of  Suleman 

Mashkoor VS Abdul Ghafoor (2002 CLC 143), after making 

reference  to  Section  2  (c)  of  the  Urban  Rent  Restriction 

Ordinance,  1959,  it  has  been  held  by  the  Hon'ble  Lahore 

High  Court  that,  in  view  of  the  definition  of  the  term 

‘landlord’  in  the  said  Ordinance  it  is  not  necessary  that  in 

order  to  fall  within  the  definition  of  landlord,  the  person 

must be the owner of the rented land or building. Under the 

 
 
12 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

provisions  of  the  said  Ordinance,  it  was  possible  that  a 

person may not be the owner of the building but still be the 

landlord.  Additionally,  it  has  been  held  that  a  person  may 

be  the  owner  of  the  property,  but  does  not  fall  within  the 

definition  of  a  landlord,  as  given  in  the  said  Ordinance.  In 

the  case  of  Mazhar  Saeed  and  another  VS  A.D.J.  and 

eleven  others  (2011  YLR  3089)  it  has  been  held  that  a 

person  in  occupation  of  an  immovable  property  would  be 

bound to establish his capacity in which he was occupying 

the same. It was also held that the initial burden was on the 

landlord  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  relationship  of 

landlord  and  tenant  through  convincing  and  cogent 

evidence.  In  the  case  of  Akhtar  Hussain  VS  Allah  Ditta 

(2011  MLD  1834),  it  was  held  that  the  onus  of  proving  the 

existence of the relationship of landlord and tenant was on 

the  eviction  petitioner. 

In  the  case  of  Allies  Book 

Corporation  VS  Sultan  Ahmad  (2006  SCMR  152),  it  has 

been held that where the concurrent findings of the forums 

below  suffered  from  illegality,  infirmity,  misreading  and 

non-reading  of  evidence  on  record,  misconstruing  the 

evidence  or  based  on  extraneous  material,  then  the  High 

Court  would  be 

justified 

in  setting  aside  concurrent 

findings. 

15. 

The case  law  relied upon by the learned counsel for 

the petitioners  are  with  regard  to the  meaning  of  the term 

‘landlord’ under the West Pakistan  Urban Rent Restriction 

Ordinance,  1959.  Section  2  (c)  of  the  said  Ordinance 

defines ‘landlord’ as follows:- 

"landlord" means any person for the time being 
entitled to receive rent in respect of any building or 
rented land whether on his own account or on behalf or 
for the benefit of any other person, or as a trustee, 
guardian, receiver, executor or administrator for any 
other person, and includes a tenant who sublets any 
building  or  rented  land  in  the  manner  hereinafter 
authorized and every person from time to time deriving 
title under a landlord;"  

16. 

The  definition  of  ‘landlord'  under  the  IRRO 

is 

different from the one under the West Pakistan Urban Rent 

 
  
 
13 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

Restriction  Ordinance,  1959.  Section  2(g)  of  the  IRRO 

defines the term 'landlord'  as follows:- 

"landlord" means the owner of the premises and 
includes any person for the time being authorized or 
entitled to receive rent in respect of any building  or 
rented land, whether on his own account or on behalf, or 
for the benefit, of any other person, or as a trustee, 
guardian  or  receiver,  and  or  a  tenant  who,  being 
authorized under the terms of his lease so to do, sublets 
the building and every other person for the time being 
deriving title from the landlord." (emphasis added).  

 17.  Now  Section  2(g)  of  the  IRRO  ‘landlord’  inter-alia 

means  ‘the  owner  of  the  premises’.  This  phrase 

is 

conspicuously  absent  from  the  definition  of  ‘landlord’ 

under  West  Pakistan  Urban  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance, 

1959. In the case  of Shajar Islam  VS Muhammad Siddique 

(PLD 2007 SC 45), it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  that  where  the  title  of  the  eviction 

petitioner  is  not  disputed  and  in  the  absence  of  any 

evidence in rebuttal, there would be a strong presumption 

of existence of tenancy between the parties. Furthermore, 

at page 47 of the report, it is held as follows:  

"This is settled proposition of law that a landlord 
may not be essentially an owner of the property and 
ownership may not always be a determining factor to 
establish the relationship of landlord and tenant between 
the parties. However, in the normal circumstances in 
absence of any evidence to the contrary, the owner of the 
property by virtue of his title is presumed to be the 
landlord and the person in possession of the premises is 
considered as tenant under the law or the tenancy may 
not be necessarily created by a written instrument in 
express terms rather may also be oral and implied."  

18.  During  the  trial,  respondent  No.1  was  subjected  to 

rigorous  cross-examination.  In  response  to  a  suggestion 

put  by  the petitioners,  respondent  No.1  denied  the factum 

of an oral gift in favour of petitioner No.2. The learned Rent 

Controller  has  correctly  held  that  such  a  suggestion  is  an 

implied  admission  on  the  part  of  the  petitioners  that 

respondent  No.1  was  an  absolute  owner  of  the  rented 

premises  and  had  the  power  to  gift  the  same  to  someone 

else.  In  view  of  the  denial  of  the  factum  of  the  oral  gift  by 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
14 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

respondent  No.1,  the  onus  to  prove  the  gift  shifted  on  to 

the  petitioners.  As  mentioned  above,  Section  2(g)  of  the 

IRRO defines 'landlord' to mean the owner of the premises. 

The denial of the relationship of landlord and tenant placed 

a  heavy  burden  on  the  petitioners  to  establish  that  they 

were  not  tenants  in  the  rented  premises.  This  onus  the 

petitioners were not able to discharge. The petitioners also 

failed  to  produce  any  title  document  in  their  favour. 

Nevertheless, petitioner No.2 is yet to prove his ownership 

of  the  rented  premises  on  the  basis  of  the  oral  gift  in  the 

civil  suit  instituted  by  him  against  respondent  No.1.  In  the 

developed sectors of Islamabad, a transfer/allotment letter 

issued  by  the  Capital  Development  Authority  is  like  a  title 

document.  Such  a  title  document  has  not  been  issued  at 

any  material stage  in  favour of petitioner No.2.  It  does  not 

appeal  to  reason  as  to  why  for  a  period  over  a  decade, 

petitioner No.2 remained silent and did not have the rented 

premises  transferred  in  his  name  on  the  basis  of  the 

alleged  oral  gift.  The  four  witnesses  produced  by  the 

petitioners  before  the  Court  of  learned  Rent  Controller 

were  not  able  to  establish  the  absence  of  the  relationship 

of landlord and tenant. Therefore, the learned lower courts 

have  correctly  held  that  the  petitioners  have  failed  to 

discharge the onus placed on them to establish ownership 

of the rented property. 

19.  Section  25(3)  of  the 

IRRO  requires  the  Rent 

Controller  to  finally  dispose  of  an  application  under  the 

IRRO  as  expeditiously  as  possible  but  not  later  than  four 

months  of  the  date  of  the  first  hearing  after  the  service  of 

summons  on  a  respondent.  As  mentioned  above,  the 

eviction  petition  was  instituted  on  07.01.2011.  It  had  been 

five long years when the matter was in the appellate court. 

Perusal  of  the  appellate 

judgment  dated  25.03.2016 

reveals  that  no  one  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  petitioners. 

The  petitioners'  absence  from  the  Appellate  Court  on  a 

date  fixed  for  arguments  is  not  understandable.  The  mere 

 
15 

W.P.No.1215 of 2016  

fact  that  the  petitioners  had  filed  a  civil  revision  petition 

before  the  Hon'ble  High  Court    for  the  transfer  of  the 

appeal  to  some  other  court  did  not  absolve  them  from 

attending  the  appellate  court  and  addressing  arguments. 

The  mere  pendency  of  such  a  transfer  petition,  in  the 

absence  of  the  stay  order,  cannot  stop  a  court  from 

proceeding  with  the  case.  Therefore,  the  decision  of  the 

appeal  in  the  absence  of  the  petitioners,  the  petitioners 

have only themselves to thank for.  

20. 

In  the  result,  there  is  no  merit  in  this  petition,  and  it 

is, accordingly, dismissed, but in the circumstances of the 

case, there will no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

     JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON 29/04//2016 

Qamar Khan*  

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

       (JUDGE) 

Uploaded by IT Department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
