ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

C.R.No.35/2016 
Mst. Saadia Andaleeb 
VS
Mst. Farzana Zia and 5 others 

Date of Hearing: 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 

12.06.2018 
Mr. Sajid Abbas Khan, Advocate 
Mr.  Muhammad  Shoaib  Sheikh,  Advocate 
for  respondents  No.1  to  3;  and  Ms.  Sitwat 
Jehangir, Advocate for revspondent No.5. 
 _______________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

civil  revision  petition,  the  petitioner,  Mst.  Saadia  Andaleeb, 

impugns  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  21.01.2016,  passed  by 

the  Court  of  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West), 

Islamabad,  whereby  the petitioner's  appeal  against the judgment 

and decree dated 27.07.2015, passed by the Court of learned Civil 

Judge,  Islamabad,  was  dismissed.  Vide  the  said  judgment  and 

decree dated 27.07.2015, the learned civil Court decreed the suit 

for  declaration,  separate  possession  through  partition  and 

permanent injunction, instituted by respondent No.1 (Mst. Farzana 

Zia)  and  her  sister,  Mst.  Fakhra  Zia,  against  their  brother, 

respondent  No.4  (Ihtisham-ul-Haq)  and  the  petitioner  who  is 

respondent No.4’s wife.  

FACTUAL BACKGROUND: 

2. 

The  controversy 

in 

this  case 

is  primarily  regarding 

ownership  of  House  No.386,  Street  No.64,  Sector 

I-8/3, 

Islamabad,  measuring  355.55  square  yards  ("the  suit  house"), 

which  had  been  purchased  by  Mr.  Zia-ul-Haque  Zia,  who  died  on 

03.12.2007. He was survived by the following legal heirs:- 

(i)   Widow (Mst. Khadija Begum), who died on 10.04.2012 
(ii)   Son (Ihtisham-ul-Haq/ respondent No.4)    
(iii)  Daughter (Farzana Zia/respondent No.1) and 
(iv)  Daughter  (Fakhra  Zia),  who  died  on  15.01.2015,  and 
was survived by her husband/respondent No.2 (“Hafiz 
Nazir  Ahmed”)  and  her  daughter/respondent  No.3 
(“Aqsa Nazir”). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

C.R. No.35/2016 

3. 

For  the sake of  brevity,  Saadia Andaleeb/petitioner  shall be 

referred to as “Saadia”; Ihtisham-ul-Haq/respondent No.4 shall be 

referred  to  as  “Ihtisham”;  Farzana  Zia/respondent  No.1  shall  be 

referred  to  as  “Farzana”;  Fakhra  Zia  shall  be  referred  to  as 

“Fakhra”; and Farzana and Fakhra shall be collectively referred to 

as “the plaintiffs”.  

4. 

On  24.06.2013,  Farzana  instituted  the  said  suit  before  the 

Court  of  learned  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad.  The  prayer  made  in  the 

said suit, is reproduced herein below:-  

"In these circumstances, it is, therefore, respectfully prayed that a 
decree for declaration to the effect that Release Deed No.2894, 
dated 30.05.2009, may be declared null and void ab initio and 
ineffective upon the rights and interest of the plaintiff as obtained 
through fraud and misrepresentation and without  consideration 
may  please  be  passed in  favour  of  plaintiff  and  against  the 
defendants.  
It is further prayed that a decree for separate possession through 
partition of the suit house No.386, Street No.64, Sector I-8/3, 
Islamabad to the extent of 1/4 share of the plaintiff be passed in 
favour of plaintiff and against the defendants.  
It  is  also  prayed  that  the  defendants  be  restrained  from 
transferring or alienating the suit property in favour of any other 
person till the partition of the suit property.  
Any other relief which this Hon'ble Court deems just and proper be 
also awarded to the plaintiff." 

5. 

In  essence,  Farzana’s  case  in  the  said  civil  suit  was  that 

when  her  father  Mr.  Zia-ul-Haque  Zia  died,  all  his  legal  heirs 

became co-owners of the suit house; that in order to have the suit 

house  transferred  in  the  co-owners’  names,  Ihtisham  took  his 

mother  and  sisters  to  the  District  Courts  at  Islamabad  and 

obtained  their  signatures  and  thumb  impressions  on  a  stamp 

paper; that since Ihtisham’s mother and sisters reposed faith and 

confidence 

in  him, 

they  put 

their  signatures  and 

thumb 

impressions  on  the  stamp  paper;  that  Farzana  was"unaware of 

the business of the courts and legal languages and was unaware 

of the legal proceedings required for the transfer of the inherited 

property"; that subsequently, on 10.04.2012, Mst. Khadija Begum 

passed  away;  that  on  10.06.2013,  Ihtisham  asked  Farzana  to 

vacate the suit house which caused her to seek legal advice; that 

after seeking legal advice, she came to know that on  the basis of 

               
 
 
 
3 

C.R. No.35/2016 

release deed No.2894, dated 30.05.2009, the suit house had been 

transferred  on  18.06.2013  in  Ihtisham’s  favour;  that  Ihtisham had 

fraudulently  obtained  his  sisters’  and  mother’s  signatures  and 

thumb impressions on the said release deed; that the said release 

deed  had  not  been  executed  by  Farzana  with  her  free  will;  that 

Ihtisham  had  misrepresented  that  the  signatures  and  thumb 

impressions on the stamp paper were required for the transfer of 

the suit house in favour of Mr. Zia-ul-Haque Zia’s legal heirs; that 

Farzana  had  been  deprived  of  her  1/4th  share  in  the  suit  house; 

and 

that  Farzana  had  not  appeared  before 

the  Capital 

Development  Authority  and  the  Federal  Government  Employees 

Housing  Foundation  (“F.G.E.H.F.”)  for  the  transfer  of  the  suit 

house.  

6.  When  the said  suit was  instituted, Farzana’s  sister,  namely, 

Fakhra, was impleaded as one of the  defendants. On 23.09.2013, 

Fakhra  filed  an  application  praying  for  her  transposition  as 

plaintiff  No.2  in  the  said  suit.  Fakhra  asserted  that  she  had  also 

been  cheated  and  defrauded  by  her  brother  and  that  her  stance 

was similar to that of her sister, Farzana. The learned civil Court, 

vide  order  dated  23.09.2013,  allowed  the  said  application  and 

Fakhra was transposed as plaintiff No.2 in the said suit. 

7. 

On 04.10.2013, Ihtisham filed his written statement, wherein 

he  refuted  the  allegations  of  fraud  and  misrepresentation  made 

against  him  by  his  sisters.  Ihtisham  pleaded  that  Farzana  was  a 

well educated lady and her qualification was  B.A. and B(Ed); that 

she  was  teaching  in  the  Federal  Government  High  Secondary 

School,  Rawat,  since  the  past  14  years;  that  Farzana  was  well 

aware of the laws of inheritance and the procedure of the Courts; 

that  she  was  neither  illiterate  nor  a  'pardahnashin'  lady;  that 

Farzana had  also  authored  and  published  books  including Bazm-

e-Janaa, Khawab Zinda Hain  and  Zia Ilm'O'Paiker'O'Wafa;  that 

Farzana  had  willingly  gone  to  the  District  Courts  and  appeared 

before  the  Joint  Sub-Registrar  for  the  registration  of  the  release 

deed;  that  the  said  release  deed  was  duly  executed,  witnessed 

and  registered  in  accordance  with  the  law.  Ihtisham  took  the 

               
 
 
 
4 

C.R. No.35/2016 

position that he had already transferred the suit house in favour of 

his wife, Saadia.  

8. 

On  21.10.2013,  Saadia  filed  an  application  under  Order  1, 

Rule 10 C.P.C. for her impleadment as a party in the said suit. She 

asserted that she was a bonafide transferee of the suit house. The 

learned civil Court, vide order dated 08.01.2014, allowed Saadia’s 

application and she was impleaded as a defendant in the said suit. 

On  24.02.2014,  she  filed  her  written  statement,  wherein  it  was 

pleaded,  inter-alia,  that  she  being  a  bonafide  transferee  had 

become  the  lawful  owner  of  the  suit  house.  She  also  prayed  for 

the  dismissal  of  the  suit  with  special  costs.  Out  of  the  divergent 

pleadings  of  the  parties,  the  learned  civil  Court,  on  22.09.2014, 

framed the following issues:- 

"1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree for declaration 
to the effect that Release Deed No.2894 dated 30.05.2009 
be declared null and void ab-initio and ineffective upon the 
rights and interest of the plaintiff as obtained through fraud 
and misrepresentation and without consideration? OPP 
2.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree for separate 
possession through partition of the suit house, to the 
extent of 1/4 share of the plaintiff in favour of the plaintiff 
and against the defendants? OPP 

3.  Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action or locus standi 

to file the instant suit? OPD 

4.  Whether the suit of the plaintiff is false, frivolous and 

vexatious? OPD 

5.  Whether the suit of the plaintiff is barred by law? OPD 
  6. Relief." 

9. 

Farzana  gave  evidence  as  PW-1,  whereas  Fakhra  as  PW-2. 

The said witnesses were subjected to rigorous cross-examination. 

Mr.  Zaheer  Ahmed,  Assistant  Record  Keeper,  Federal 

Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation 

("F.G.E.H.F.") 

appeared  as  PW-3  and  produced  the  allotment  letter  of  the  suit 

house  as  Exh.P/3;  application  form  for  the  transfer  of  the  suit 

house  submitted  by  Ihtisham  as  Exh.P/4;  release  deed  as  Ex.P/5; 

proclamation  regarding  transfer  as  Exh.P/7;  transfer  letter  dated 

08.06.2011 in the name of Ihtisham, as Exh.P/9; and application for 

the issuance of N.O.C. as Exh.P/10, etc. 

10. 

Ihtisham  appeared  as  DW-1  and  produced  a  succession 

certificate as Mark D/A. Saadia Andaleeb gave evidence as DW-2, 

               
 
 
 
5 

C.R. No.35/2016 

whereas the marginal witnesses of the release deed, namely, Mr. 

Ahmed Nadeem Qaiser and Muhammad Ehsan, gave evidence as 

DW-3 and DW-4, respectively.  

11.  On 15.01.2015, Fakhra passed away. After Fakhra’s demise 

her  legal  heirs,  namely  Hafiz  Nazir  Ahmad/respondent  No.2  and 

Aqsa Nazir/respondent No.3 were impleaded as co-plaintiffs in the 

suit.  

12.  On 27.07.2015, the learned civil Court passed a preliminary 

decree regarding the suit house. Hafiz Ali Asghar, Advocate, was 

appointed  as  the  local  Commission  with  the  direction  to  suggest 

different modes of partitioning the suit house. It was also ordered 

that  if  the  suit  house  was  not  capable  of  being  partitioned,  the 

Local  Commission  was  to  submit  a  report  regarding  the 

determination of its market value. It was also held that the release 

deed  dated  30.05.2009  and  the  subsequent  transfer  of  the  suit 

house  was  void ab initio  and  ineffective  on  the  rights  of  the 

plaintiffs in the suit, and liable to be cancelled.  

13.  The  said 

judgment  and  decree  dated  27.07.2015  was 

challenged  by  Ihtisham  in  appeal  No.79/2015.  This  appeal  was 

filed beyond the limitation period provided by law. Vide judgment 

dated 27.10.2015, the said appeal was dismissed as time barred. 

Ihtisham did not assail the said judgment any further. 

14.  The  said  judgment  and  decree  dated  27.07.2015  was  also 

challenged  in  appeal  No.116/2015  by  Saadia  before  the  Court  of 

the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad.  Vide  judgment 

and  decree  dated  21.01.2016,  the 

learned  appellate  Court 

dismissed  the  said  appeal.  The  concurrent 

judgments  and 

decrees passed by the learned Courts below have been impugned 

by the petitioner in the instant civil revision petition.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  THE 
PETITIONER: 
15.  Mr.  Sajid  Abbas  Khan, 

learned  counsel 

the 

for 

petitioner/Saadia,  after  narrating  the  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of 

the instant civil revision petition, made submissions in reiteration 

of 

the  written  statements 

filed  by 

Ihtisham  and  Saadia. 

Furthermore,  it  was  submitted  that  the  release  deed  dated 

               
 
 
 
 
6 

C.R. No.35/2016 

30.05.2009 was executed by Ihtisham’s sisters and mother of their 

own accord and free will and without any compulsion or coercion 

on Ihtisham’s part; that through the said release deed, Ihtisham's 

sisters and mother had relinquished their ownership rights in the 

suit  house  in  Ihtisham’s  favour;  that  the  said  release  deed  was 

witnessed  by  two  attesting  witnesses  and  had been  registered  in 

accordance  with  the  law;  that  during  Mst.  Khadija  Begum’s 

lifetime,  the  validity  of  the  said  release  deed  had  not  been 

questioned;  that  in  their  suit,  the plaintiffs  admit the execution  of 

the said  release deed  but assert that  their  signatures  and  thumb 

impressions 

thereon  were  obtained 

through 

fraud  and 

misrepresentation; 

that 

no 

particulars 

of 

fraud 

and 

misrepresentation  had  been  given  in  the  suit;  that  the  plaintiffs 

claim  to  be pardahnashin ladies  and  were  not  aware  of  the  legal 

languages  but  it  is  an  admitted  position  that  both  the  plaintiffs 

were  educated  ladies  and  were,  therefore,  well  aware  of  the 

contents  of  the  release  deed;  that  since  Farzana  had  also 

authored books, she could not assert that she was unaware of the 

contents  of  the  release  deed;  and  that  the  plaintiffs  in  the  suit 

were unable to  prove that  the release  deed  was  executed  on  the 

basis  of  fraud  and  misrepresentation.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner/Saadia  prayed  for  the  revision  petition  to  be  allowed 

and  for  the  concurrent  judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the 

learned Courts below to be set-aside.  In making his submissions, 

learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the cases of 

Mian  Allah  Ditta  through  L.Rs.  VS  Mst.  Sakina  Bibi  (2013  SCMR 

868),  Nabi  Bakhsh  VS  Fazal  Hussain  (2008  SCMR  1454),  Habib 

Khan  and  others  VS  Mst.  Bakhtmina  and  others  (2004  SCMR 

1668),  Amir  Haider  VS  Shabbir  Ahmad  through  Legal  Heirs  and 

others (2000 SCMR 859) , Muhammad  Akhtar VS Mst. Manna and 

others  (2001  SCMR  1700),  Syed  Zulifqar  Hussain  Naqvi  VS  Syed 

Gulzar  Hussain  Shah  (2005  YLR  2817  Lahore)  and 

  Noor 

Muhammad VS Jamal Din and others (2000 CLC 305 Lahore). 

               
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

C.R. No.35/2016 

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  THE 
RESPONDENTS NO.1 to 3: 

16.  On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents No.1 to 

3  submitted  that  the  concurrent  judgments  and  decrees  passed 

by the learned Courts below do not suffer from any misreading or 

non-reading  of  evidence  so  as  to  warrant  interference  in  the 

revisional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court.  He  made  submissions  in 

reiteration  of  the  pleadings  in  the  suit.  He  further  submitted  that 

Ihtisham,  being  the  beneficiary  of  the  release  deed,  had  not 

proved  its  execution  in  accordance  with  the  law;  that  Ihtisham 

was  in  a  position  to  dominate  the  will  of  his  mother  and  sisters; 

that  although  the  plaintiffs  were  well  educated  ladies,  they 

observed  pardah  and  were  not  proficient  in  legal  matters;  that 

Ihtisham had given his mother and sisters the impression that they 

were executing  documents  for  the devolution  of  Mr.  Zia-ul-Haque 

Zia’s  ownership  rights  in  the  suit  house  amongst  his  legal  heirs; 

that  Ihtisham  had  caused  his  mother  and  sisters  to  execute  the 

release  deed  through  fraud  and  misrepresentation;  that  Fakhra 

who was a disabled person had not signed the release deed in the 

presence  of  the  Sub-Registrar;  that  Ihtisham  had  deprived  the 

plaintiffs  of  their  inherited  shares  in  the  suit  house;  and  that 

Ihtisham’s appeal against the judgment and decree passed by the 

learned  civil  Court  had  been  dismissed  by  the  learned  appellate 

Court  as  time-barred.  Learned  counsel  for  the  said  respondents 

prayed  for  the  revision  petition  to  be  dismissed.  In  making  his 

submissions,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  to  3  placed 

reliance  on  the  cases  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  Chatta  VS  Iftikhar 

Ahmad Cheema (2016 SCMR 763), Jehanzeb VS Muhammad Israr 

(PLJ 2014 Peshawar 92), Mrs. Nasreen Awan VS M. Sadiq (K.L.R. 

1990  Civil  Cases  520),  Shouket  Ali  VS  Muhammad  Anwar  (NLR 

2004 Civil 515), Sahib Noor and others VS Feroz Khan (1992 MLD 

2563  Peshwar),  Munir  Hussain  and  others  VS  Raja  Mushtaq 

Ahmad (PLD 2006 Lahore 48) , Ghulam Bheek and others VS Mst. 

Salamat Bibi and others (2001 CLC 1078 Lah), Taisei Corporation 

VS  A.M  Construction  Company  (PLD  2012  Lah  455),  Abdul 

Hameed  through  L.Rs.  and  others  VS  Shamasuddin  and  others 

               
 
 
 
 
8 

C.R. No.35/2016 

(PLD  2008  SC  140),  Muhammad  Ashraf  VS  Muhammad  Tahir 

Ismail and others (2011 MLD 1848 Lah), Kalsoom Akhtar VS Fazal 

Noor and others (2000 MLD 1653 Lah), Mst. Farzana Khatoon VS 

Mst.  Bushra  and  others  (PLD  1994  Karachi  92),  Mst.  Rasheeda 

Bibi and others VS Mukhtar Ahmad and others (2008 SCMR 1384), 

Ghulam  Ali  and  others  VS  Mst.  Ghulam  Sarwar  Naqvi  (PLD  1990 

SC 1), Baja through L.Rs. and others VS MSt. Bakhan and others 

(2015  SCMR  1704),  Muhammad  Nazir  VS  Khurshid  Begum  (2005 

SCMR  941),  Muhammad  Boota  VS  Mst.  Rashidan  BIbi  and  others 

(2008 SCMR 343), Syed Shabbir Hussain Shah VS Asghar Hussain 

Shah  and  others  (2007  SCMR  1884),  Fateh  Khan  (deceased) 

through L.Rs. VS Surriya Begum (2006 SCMR 930), Mst. Khurshid 

Bibi  and  others  VS  Ramzan  and  others  (2005  CLC  1714  Lah), 

Khair  Din  VS  Mst.  Salaman  and  others  (PLD  2002  SC  677),  Haji 

Khuda  Bukhsh  and  others  VS  Deputy  Registrar,  Cooperative 

Societies,  Punjab,     Lahore and  others  (PLD  2007 Lah  341),  Syed 

Muhammad  Baqir  Shah  VS  Farida  Sajid  (2013  CLC  52  Lah), 

Muhammad Idrees and others VS Muhammad Pervaiz and others 

(2010  SCMR  5),  Muhammad  Tufail  and  others  VS  Akbar  Ali  and 

others (2004 SCMR 1370), Abu Bakar and others VS Mst Khayber 

Jan (2014 YLR 178 Peshwar), Ayub Khan VS Mst. Makhnoon (2010 

CLC  870  Peshwar),  Ch.  Muhammad  Boota  VS  Mst.  Bano  Begum 

(2003  CLC  485  Lah)  and  Muzaffar  Khan  VS  Additional  District 

Judge and others (2014 CLC Lah 318). 

17. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties,  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  civil 

revision  petition  have  been  set  out 

in  sufficient  details 

in 

paragraphs 2 to 14 above and need not be recapitulated.  

18.  The pivotal question that needs to be determined is whether 

Mst.  Khadija  Begum,  Farzana  and  Fakhra,  had  relinquished  their 

respective shares in the suit house in favour of Ihtisham through a 

registered  release  deed  dated  30.05.2009.The  pleadings  in  the 

civil  suit  show  that  the  plaintiffs  therein  had  impeached  the  said 

release deed on the following grounds:- 

               
 
 
 
9 

C.R. No.35/2016 

"(1)  that  plaintiffs'  signatures  and  thumb  impressions  on  the 
release  deed  were  obtained  by  Ihtisham  through  fraud  and 
misrepresentation;  

(2)    that  the  plaintiffs  were  under  the  impression  that  they  were 
signing  documents  for  the  transfer  of  the  suit  house  in  the 
names of their father’s legal heirs;  

(3)    that  the  plaintiffs  had  signed  the  documents  on  the  basis  of 

confidence reposed by them in Ihtisham; and  

(4)    that  the  plaintiffs  were  “house ladies”  and  did  not  know  the 
“business  of  the  Courts,  and  legal  languages  and  were 
unaware of the legal proceedings required for the transfer of 
the inherited property."  

19.  The  release  deed  dated  30.05.2009  was  produced 

in 

evidence as Ex.P/5 by PW-3 who was the Assistant Record Keeper 

of  F.G.E.H.F.  The  said  release  deed  was  a  registered  document 

and  bears  registration  No.2894.  The certificate on  the reverse of 

the  said  release  deed  shows  that  it  was  registered  by  the  Joint 

Sub-Registrar, Islamabad, on 30.05.2009.  

20. 

In  order  to  prove  the  execution  of  the  said  release  deed, 

Ihtisham-ul-Haq  produced  his  two  marginal  witnesses,  namely, 

Mr.  Ahmed  Nadeem  Qaiser  and  Muhammad  Ehsan  as  DW-3  and 

DW-4, respectively. These witnesses, in their examination-in-chief, 

deposed  that  they  had  signed  the  release  deed  as  marginal 

witnesses.  In  his  cross-examination,  DW-3  deposed  that  he  was 

asked by Ihtisham-ul-Haq and his mother to sign the release deed 

as  a  witness;  that  Fakhra  did  not  sign  the  release  deed  in  his 

presence  but  before  his  arrival;  and  that  he  and  the  other 

marginal witness signed the release deed after its executants had 

signed  the  same.  Similarly,  DW-4,  in  his  cross-examination,  also 

deposed  that  he  was  asked  by  Ihtisham’s  mother  to  become  a 

marginal  witness.  There  is  nothing  in  the  cross-examination  of 

DW-3  and  DW-4  which  would  show  that  they  had  not  signed  the 

release deed as its marginal witnesses.  

21.  True,  marginal  witnesses  of  a  document  are  produced  not 

merely  to  identify  the  signatures  of  the  executants  but  also  to 

prove  that  the  executants  had  put  their  signatures  on  the 

document  within  their  view.  In  the  case  at  hand,  DW-3  deposed 

that  the  release  deed  had  been  signed  by  Fakhra  before  his 

arrival,  but  this,  in  my  view,  is  not  sufficient  to  hold  that  the 

               
 
 
 
 
10 

C.R. No.35/2016 

execution  of  the  release  deed  has  not  been  proved.  I  say  this 

because  neither  Fakhra  nor  Farzana  denied  their  signatures  on 

the  release  deed.  Since  the  executants  of  the  release  deed  had 

admitted their signatures thereon, there was no need to prove the 

execution  of  the  said  document  in  terms  of  Article  79  of  the 

Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  A  document  which  requires 

attestation  can  be  admitted  in  evidence  after  the  examination  of 

the attestor, only if the execution is specifically denied. Law as we 

all  know  postulates  that  an  admitted  document  need  not  be 

proved.  Article  81  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984 

provides that the admission of a party to an attested document of 

its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as 

against  him,  though  it  be  a  document  required  by  law  to  be 

attested.  In  the  case  of  Dr.Ijaz  Ahmad  VS  Mst.  Nasreen  Akhtar 

(2005 SCMR 1259), it has been held that where the executant had 

not denied his signatures on the sale deed, there was no need to 

put the same to the executant. In the case of Mst. Zainab Khatoon 

VS  Amir  Abdullah  Khan  (PLD  2004  Lahore  330),  the  Hon'ble 

Lahore High Court, after making reference to Article 81 (ibid) held 

that  where  the  execution  of  a  document  is  admitted  and  not 

denied,  admission  thereof  is  sufficient  proof  of  its  execution  and 

that such a document need not be proved in terms of Article 79 of 

the Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  Law  to  the  said  effect  has 

also  been  laid  down  in  the  cases  of  Mehmood  Ahmad  VS  Malik 

Abdul  Ghafoor  (PLD  2011  Lahore  522),  Iqbal  Ahmad  Sabri  VS 

Fayyaz  Ahmad  (2007  CLC  1089)  and  Bashir  Ahmed  VS  Akbar  Ali 

(2005 MLD 2830). 

22.  Given  the  fact  that  the  plaintiffs  did  not  deny  signing  and 

putting  their  thumb  impressions  on  the  release  deed  and  given 

that  the  marginal  witnesses  of  the  said  release  deed  in  their 

evidence  did  not  deny  signing  the  said  deed  as  marginal 

witnesses,  it  is  my  view  that  the  execution  of  the  said  release 

deed, which is a registered document, stands proved. In the case 

of Mirza Muhammad Sharif VS Mst. Nawab Bibi (1993 SCMR 462), 

it  has  been  held  that  a  “registered  document  has  sanctity 

attached to it and stronger evidence is required to cast aspersion 

               
 
 
 
11 

C.R. No.35/2016 

on its genuineness”. Law  to  the  said  effect  has  also  been  laid 

down  in  the  cases  of  Muhammad  Idrees  VS  Muhammad  Pervaiz 

(2010  SCMR  5),  Chaudhry  Manzoor  Ahmed  VS  Faisal  Manzoor 

(2016  YLR  671),  Asif  VS  Mst.  Sangeeta  (2013  CLC  1597),  Syed 

Imdad Hussin Shah VS Syed Makhdoom Hussain Raza (2010 CLC 

722),  Mrs. Khalida Azhar VS Rustam Ali Bakhshi (2007 CLC 339) 

and Muhammad Aslam VS Rehmat Ali (2000 MLD 1459).  

23.  Now, as regards the question as to proof of transaction, the 

release deed in question has features akin to a gift. The operative 

portion of the release deed is reproduced herein below:-  

“AND WHEREAS in consideration of love and affection which the 
releasers have for the transferee wish(s) to renounce their right, 
interest, claim etc. in the above said plot/property in favour of 
Mr.Ihtisham-ul-Haque. 
NOW,  this  deed  witness  that  the  releasers  hereby 
transfer/renounce their rights, interest, or claim in the above said 
plot/property, in favour of said Mr.Ihtisham-ul-Haque son of Zia-
ul-Haque Zia Late and hereafter releasers right interest or claim 
will cease and extinguish in the above mentioned plot/building.”  

24.  The three executants of  the release deed relinquished their 

shares in the suit house in Ihtisham’s favour without any monetary 

consideration.  They  divested  themselves  of  all  proprietary 

interest  in  the  suit  house.  In  effect,  the  three  executants  of  the 

release  deed  gifted  their  shares  in  the  suit  house  in  Ihtisham’s 

favour.  As  mentioned  above,  the  plaintiffs  do  not  deny  their 

signatures and thumb impressions on the said release deed, but in 

effect,  assert  that  they  did  not  know  what  they  were  signing  and 

putting  their  thumb  impressions  on.  Therefore,  they  dispute  the 

transaction under the release deed.  

25.  Since Ihtisham was the beneficiary of the said release deed, 

it  was  his  obligation  to  prove  the  contents  of  the  same  and  the 

transaction under the said deed. In the cases of Amjad Ikram VS 

Mst. Asiya Kauser (2015 SCMR 1), Rab Nawaz VS Ghulam Rasool 

(2014  SCMR  1181),  Noor  Muhammad  VS  Azmat-e-Bibi  (2012 

SCMR  1373),  Khan  Muhammad  VS  Muhammad  Din  (2010  SCMR 

1351)  and  Aurangzeb  VS  Muhammad  Jaffar  (2007  SCMR  236),  it 

has  been  held  inter-alia  that  it  is  the  duty  and  obligation  of  the 

beneficiary  of  a  transaction  or  a  document  to  prove  the  same  in 

               
 
 
 
 
12 

C.R. No.35/2016 

accordance  with  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  Such  a 

transaction,  be  it  a  gift  or  a  release,  has  to  be  proved  by 

convincing  evidence  satisfying  the  conscience  of  the  Court  that 

the document in question was executed by the donor in favour of 

the donee/beneficiary. 

26.  The essential ingredients of a valid gift are (i) declaration of 

the gift, (ii) acceptance of the gift, and (iii) delivery of possession 

to  the  donee.  In  the  instant  case,  the  satisfaction  of  the  first 

condition  has  been  disputed  by  the  plaintiffs.  Where  there  is  no 

declaration of a gift, the question of its acceptance will not arise. 

It is not disputed that Ihtisham continued to remain in possession 

of the suit house after the execution of the release deed. Ihtisham 

appeared  as  DW-1  and  deposed  that  the  plaintiffs  were  well 

educated  ladies  and  were  aware  of  the  contents  of  the  release 

deed. Therefore, the pivotal question that needs to be determined 

is whether the plaintiffs were aware of the contents of the release 

deed  and  voluntarily  signed 

the  same  mindful  of 

the 

consequences.  

27. 

In  paragraphs  5  and  6  of  the  plaint,  it  is  pleaded inter-alia 

that  the  plaintiffs  are  pardanashin ladies  and  do  not  know  the 

business  of  the  Courts  and  are  unaware  of  the  proceedings 

required  for  the transfer  of  a property  to  legal  heirs.  In  Pakistan, 

pardahnashin  illiterate  ladies  are  given  special  protection  due  to 

the  social  conditions.  They  are  presumed  to  have  an  imperfect 

knowledge  of  the  world,  as  on  account  of  their  pardah  they  are 

practically excluded from social intercourse and communion with 

the  outside  world.  Where  a  transaction  is  entered  into  with  an 

illiterate pardanashin lady, the burden of proof always rests upon 

the person  who  seeks  to  sustain  the transaction  to  establish  that 

the  document  in  question  was  executed  by  her  after  clearly 

understanding  the  nature  of  the  transaction.  This  burden  can  be 

discharged  not only  by proving  that  the document was  read over 

and  explained  to  her  and  that  she  understood  it  but  also  by 

proving that she was given independent advice as to the nature of 

the transaction. 

               
 
 
 
13 

C.R. No.35/2016 

28. 

It  is  also  well  settled  that  the  protection  given  by  the  rule 

relating to pardanashin ladies cannot be the exclusive privilege of 

the  class  commonly  known  as  pardanashin.  The  real  reason 

behind the rule is lack of understanding and appreciation that an 

illiterate  woman  without  independent  advice  has  when  entering 

into  a transaction. Where ignorance, capability  and  illiteracy  of  a 

woman  are  not  proved,  protection  under  the  rule  will  not  be 

available, whether or not the lady is pardanashin.  

29. 

In  the case at  hand,  Farzana gave evidence as  PW-1  and  in 

her  cross-examination,  she  admitted  that  she  had  two  graduate 

degrees; that she had been teaching in Rawat Model School since 

2002;  that  she  has  an  interest  in  poetry  and  has  also  authored 

books in Urdu called “Khwaab Zinda Hain” and “Bazme-e-Khana”; 

and  that  on  the  advice  of  her  father’s  friends  she  wrote  her 

father’s  biography  called  “Zia Ilm'O'Paikar'O'Wafa”.  As  regards 

Fakhra,  she  gave  evidence  as  PW-2.  In  her  cross-examination, 

Fakhra deposed that she was a graduate and remained a teacher 

between 1994 and 1999. In these circumstances, there is nothing 

which  could  engender  suspicion  in  my  mind  about  the  bona fide 

nature of the transaction.  

30.  The  registered  release  deed  was  impeached  and  sought  to 

be  cancelled  on  the  ground  of  fraud  and  misrepresentation.  The 

plaintiffs may well have been observing pardah but they were not 

rustic  villagers  or  illiterates  or  naïve.  This  is  not  a  case  of  a 

pardanashin lady or illiterate rural folk so as to tilt or shift onus to 

prove  the  aforesaid  facts  upon  defendants.  Here  the  plaintiffs 

were  well-educated  ladies  holding  graduate  degrees  and  having 

taught  in  schools.  Their  contention  that  they  did  not  know  or 

understand  what  they  were  signing  is  not  believable  given  their 

educational qualifications. It is difficult to accept that these ladies 

who  were  sufficiently  intelligent  could  have  fallen  victims  to  the 

nefarious  devices,  if  any,  of  their  brother.  The  conclusion  is 

inescapable  that  the  plaintiffs  executed  the  release  deed  after 

understanding  or  being  capable  of  understanding  the  same. 

Therefore,  the  protection  given  to  pardanashin  illiterate  ladies 

               
 
 
 
14 

C.R. No.35/2016 

could  not  be  made  available  to  them.  In  holding  so,  I  derive 

guidance from the law laid down in the following cases:- 

(i) 

In the case of Irshad Hussain VS Ijaz Hussain (PLD 1994 SC 

326), it has been held as follows:-  

 “Whether a lady is a Pardanashin is a question of fact. The 
burden of proof that any document purported to have been 
executed by a Pardanashin lady affecting her right in an 
immovable property was substantially understood by the 
lady and was her voluntary, intelligent, free and conscious 
act, is upon the person chiming any right under such deed. 
This rule has been extended to illiterate ignorant lady 
whether she is Pardanashin or not. This rule of wisdom and 
caution  thrown  round  the  Pardanashin,  illiterate  and 
ignorant  women  is  to  protect  them  from  exploitation, 
duress,  fraud  and  misrepresentation.  From  all  the 
judgments cited and discussed in the referred judgments it 
is clear that the cases involved Pardanashin or illiterate 
and ignorant ladies. But where the lady involved is an 
educated  lady  not  observing Parda  capable  of 
understanding transactions and has executed the deed on 
full  and  proper  understanding  of  its  implications,  the 
principle governing Pardanashin, ignorant and illiterate 
women will hardly be attracted.” 
(Emphasis added)  

(ii) 

In the case of Muhammad Tufail VS Muhammad Aslam Khan 

(1999  YLR  934),  the  petitioners/plaintiffs  had  challenged  a 

part  of  a  sale  transaction  on  the  ground  that  they  were 

pardanashin ladies  to  whom  the  contents  of  the  registered 

sale  deed  had  not  been  read  over  and  explained. 

Furthermore,  it  was  asserted  that  additional  land  had  been 

included  in  the  sale  deed  on  the  basis  of  fraud.  In  the  said 

case, the petitioners/plaintiffs had admitted the execution of 

the  sale  deed.  The  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  upheld  the 

concurrent  judgments  of  the  Courts  below,  whereby  the 

petitioners/plaintiffs  had  been  non-suited.  It  was  held  that 

“fraud is not only to be alleged specifically in the pleadings 

but also to be proved by convincing evidence beyond any 

shadow of doubt.”  Furthermore,  it  was  held  that “the mere 

allegation that the petitioners/plaintiffs did not read the 

contents of the documents before signing does not mean 

that fraud had been practiced upon them.”    Additionally,  it 

was held that since it was not proved on the record that the 

petitioners/plaintiffs  were 

illiterate  and  simpletons,  the 

               
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 

C.R. No.35/2016 

presumption would be that they were aware of the contents 

of  the  sale  deed  and  had  put  their  signatures  being  well 

conversant with the same.  

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  National  Bank  of  Pakistan  VS  Mst.  Hajra  Bai 

(PLD 1985 Karachi 431), it was held as follows:- 

“In fact the protective cloak is available to Pardanashin 
lady  more because  of  lack  of  understanding  and 
appreciation on her part than for merely observing Parda. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  a  woman  belonging  to 
a Pardanashin class may possess sufficient intelligence to 
understand the contents of the document to which she is 
party despite the restraints of Parda. Conversely there can 
be an illiterate woman totally devoid of understanding but 
not observing Parda. Therefore the criterion cannot be the 
social  status  in  the  Parda  class  but  the  ability  to 
comprehend the contents of the document in question. The 
emphasis is on factual understanding of the document with 
reference  to  the  individual  concerned  and  not  upon 
presumptive disability incidental to mere status.” 

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Aisha  Bai  VS  Usman  Muhammad  (PLD  1967 

Karachi 733), it has been held that a literate woman entering 

into  a  contract  having  full  business  aptitude  as  well  as 

capable of looking after her own interest was not entitled to 

any special consideration 

31.  One  other  important  feature  of  this  case  is  that  since  the 

plaintiffs  were  well  educated  ladies,  they  should  be  deemed  to 

have  understood  the  challenged  release  deed  before  signing  it. 

The  plea  of  non est factum  (Latin  for  “this  is  not  my  deed”)  is 

therefore,  not  available  to  them.  The  fair  assumption  is  that  they 

read  release  deed,  understood  it  and  signed  it.  In  the  case  of 

Martin  Cashin  VS  Peter  J.  Cashin  (AIR  1938 PC  103),  it was  held 

as follows:- 

“In a case where the person executing the deed is neither blind 
nor illiterate, where no fraudulent misrepresentation is made to 
him, where he has ample opportunity of reading the deed and 
such knowledge of its purport that the plea of non est factum is 
not open to him, it is quite immaterial whether he reads the deed 
or not. He is bound by the deed because it operates as a 
conclusive  bar  against  him  not  because  he  has  read  it  or 
understands it, but because he has chosen to execute it.” 

32. 

In  the  plaint,  the  plaintiffs  took  a  position  which  cannot  be 

reconciled  with  the  stance  taken  by  them  in  their  evidence.  As 

mentioned  above,  in  the  plaint,  the  plaintiffs  pleaded  that  they 

               
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 

C.R. No.35/2016 

were unaware of “legal languages”, whereas in their evidence, the 

plaintiffs  (PW-1 and  PW-2)  deposed  that  since there were papers 

lying  on  the  text  of  the  document  that  they  signed  they  were 

unaware of its contents. Not understanding the document that the 

plaintiffs  signed  and  not  having  read  the  same  are  two  different 

and 

inconsistent  positions.  These 

inconsistent  pleas  would 

disentitle the plaintiffs from the discretionary relief of declaration 

and injunction. It is well settled that a party cannot be permitted to 

assume inconsistent positions in the Court to the detriment of the 

opponent.  

33.  Zia-ul-Haque  Zia’s  estate  was  not  restricted  to  the  suit 

house.  He  owned  other  properties  including  land  in  Jhangi 

Syedan;  land  in  Revenue Estate  Noon;  a plot in  G-15;  and  a bank 

account. Farzana (PW-1), in her cross-examination, admitted that 

Ihtisham  sold  the  plot  in  G-15  and  with  its  proceeds  Ihtisham, 

Saadia, Farzana, Fakhra, Mst. Khadija Begum, Farzana’s husband 

and  his  mother  went  for  Hajj.  She  also  admitted  that  her  mother 

and Ihtisham had relinquished their inherited shares in the land in 

Jhangi Syedan in Fakhra’s favour. She also deposed that from the 

sale  proceeds  of  the  land  in  Revenue  Estate  Noon,  Ihtisham  had 

given  her  Rs.47,000/-  and  from  their  father’s  bank  account 

Ihtisham  had  given  her  Rs.1,00,000/-.  Fakhra,  in  her  cross-

examination, deposed that she was given Rs.1,00,000/- out of her 

father’s  bank  account  and  Rs.47,000/-  from  the  sale  proceeds  of 

the  land  in  Revenue  Estate  Noon.  Fakhra  also  admitted  that  her 

mother  and  brother  had  transferred  their  shares  in  the  land  in 

Jhangi  Syedan  in  her  favour.  Fakhra  along  with  Ihtisham  had 

appeared  before  the  Revenue  Officer  for  the  transfer  of  the  said 

land.  Fakhra  also  deposed  that  when  her  daughter  was  born, 

Ihtisham  had  given  her  Rs.2,75,000/-.  All  these  factors  indicate 

that  Ihtisham  was  not  a  crafty  brother  out  to  usurp  his  sisters’ 

inherited share in the suit house. Both the plaintiffs were married 

when  the  release  deed  was  executed.  Therefore,  they  could  not 

have  been  dependent  on  or  dominated  or  unduly  influenced  by 

their brother, namely, Ihtisham, to transfer their shares in the suit 

house  to  him.  Farzana  was  32  and  Fakhra  was  35  years  of  age 

               
 
 
 
17 

C.R. No.35/2016 

when  the  release  deed  was  executed.  They  were  not  gullible 

young girls so as to have been unduly influenced by their brother.  

34.  Now,  the  learned  civil  Court  held  that  Ihtisham  taking 

advantage  of  his  “dominant  position”  prepared  the  release  deed 

and  obtained  his  mother’s  and  sisters’  signatures  and  thumb 

impressions on the same. It was also held that the execution of the 

release  deed  and  its  registration  was  carried  out  in  a  “doubtful 

manner”.  It was not the plaintiffs’ case in the suit that they signed 

the  release  deed  due  to  undue  influence,  coercion  or  duress  on 

Ihtisham’s  part.  Their  case  was  that  Ihtisham  played  fraud  on 

them  by  misrepresenting  that  the  document  on  which  their 

signatures  were  required  was  necessary  for  the  suit  property  to 

devolve  on  Zia-ul-Haque  Zia’s  legal  heirs.  If  this  was  Ihtisham’s 

intention, he would not have been successful in his design only if 

the  plaintiffs  had  read  the  document  which  they  signed  and  put 

their  thumb  impressions  on.  The  two  sisters  also  deposed  that 

they  could  not  read  the  document,  because  there  were  papers 

lying on it. Fakhra, in her cross-examination, deposed that she did 

not  ask  any  one  to  lift  the  papers  off  the  stamp  paper.  Now,  the 

plaintiffs  singed  the  release  deed  at  four  different  places.  Just 

above  their  signatures,  the  words “plot/property in favour of Mr. 

Ihtisham-ul-Haque”  are  clearly  written.  Just below  the signatures 

of  the  executants  on  the  second  page  of  the  release  deed,  the 

words “TRANSFEREE / Mr. Ihtisham-ul-Haque” are written. This is 

not the case where the releasers signed blank papers. Most of the 

signatures overlap the writing. Farzana, in her cross-examination, 

deposed  that  she  was  not  pressurized  into  signing  the  release 

deed. Given all these facts, I am of the view that this is not a case 

of fraud or misrepresentation but, at best, a case of carelessness 

and  recklessness  on  the  part  of  the  plaintiffs.  Therefore,  the 

learned Courts below erred by cancelling the release deed on the 

ground  that  due  to  Ihtisham’s  dominant  position,  he  took 

advantage of his sisters.  

35. 

In  a case where a litigant intends  to  overlook  and  bypass  a 

registered  document  under  which  certain  rights  become  vested 

and under which third party (i.e., the petitioner in the instant case) 

               
 
 
 
18 

C.R. No.35/2016 

has acquired indefeasible rights then the challenging party should 

be  in  a  position  to  give  such  particulars  about  such  undue 

influence which should form the basis of his/her complaint. In the 

case  at  hand,  the  primary  ground  on  which  the  plea  of  undue 

influence  is  founded  is  based  on  the  relationship  between  the 

plaintiffs  and  Ihtisham.  It 

is  axiomatic  that  mere  proof  of 

relationship, however near, is not sufficient for a Court to assume 

that one was in a position to dominate the will of the other. 

36.  The  learned  civil  Court  observed  that  it  was  not  logical  for 

the plaintiffs  to  have transferred  their  shares  in  the suit house to 

Ihtisham  when  they  were  married  and  had  children  of  their  own. 

The  learned  civil  Court  erred  by  not  appreciating  that  this  was  a 

family  where  relinquishments  of  shares  in  property  in  favour  of 

siblings had taken place. For instance, the evidence on the record 

shows  that  entire  amount  in  the  bank  account  at  Habib  Bank 

Limited, Jhangi Syedan, was given by Ihtisham to Fakhra; with the 

proceeds  of  sale  of  a  plot  in  G-15,  Ihtisham    took  his  mother, 

sisters  etc.,  for  Hajj;  Ihtisham  contributed  towards  Fakhra’s 

marriage and gave her Rs.2,75,000/- when her daughter was born; 

Ihtisham  relinquished  his  share  in  the  plot  in  Jhangi  Syedan  in 

Farzana’s  favour;  Farzana’s  father  had  already  transferred  a 

house 

in  Kallar  Syedan 

in  her 

favour.  When  all 

these 

circumstances  are  taken  into  account,  the  execution  of  the 

release deed in Ihtisham’s favour does not seem illogical.   

37.  The signatures on the said instrument were not disputed by 

the  plaintiffs  though  they  tried  to  explain  that  the  same  were 

obtained  by  giving  them  an  impression  that  they  were  signing  a 

document necessary for the devolution of the ownership rights in 

the  suit  house  in  favour  of  Zia-ul-Haque  Zia’s  legal  heirs.  This 

explanation had to be proved by the plaintiffs but, in my view, they 

failed.  But  nothing  has  been  elicited  from  the  evidence  of  either 

PW-1 or PW-2 to infer that the release deed was obtained through 

fraud  or  misrepresentation.  As  the  plaintiff  in  their  evidence 

admitted that they had not even read the document they signed, it 

would not lie in their mouths to allege fraud or misrepresentation 

against their brother. 

               
 
 
 
19 

C.R. No.35/2016 

38.  The release deed was executed on 30.05.2009, whereas the 

suit was instituted by Farzana on 24.06.2013, i.e., four years after 

the execution  of  the release deed.  In  the suit it was  pleaded  that 

on 18.06.2013, Farzana came to know about the said release deed 

from  the  office  of  F.G.E.H.F.  Since  the  said  release  deed  is  a 

registered  document,  it  is  my  view  that  the  plaintiffs  would  be 

presumed  to  have  had  knowledge  of  the  release  deed  right  from 

the  day  when  it  was  executed  and  registered.  In  the  cases  of 

Abdul  Majeed  VS  Amjad  Farooq  (2008  YLR  61)  and  Khadim 

Hussain VS Rasheed Ahmad (2008 MLD 81), it has been held that 

registration of a document is notice to the public.  

39.  Prior  to  the  institution  of  the  suit,  Ihtisham  had  transferred 

ownership of the suit house to his wife, Saadia. The mere fact that 

Ihtisham’s  appeal  was  dismissed  on  the  ground  of  limitation  and 

not on merits, would not ipso facto deprive Saadia of her right to 

assail  the  said  judgment  and  decree  dated  27.07.2015  in  an 

appeal.  Saadia's  case in  her  appeal  would  be no  better  or  worse 

than Ihtisham’s would have been. She could and did agitate all the 

grounds that would have been available to Ihtisham in her appeal 

and the appellate Court decided the appeal on merits.  

40.  Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  to  3  vehemently 

argued  that  this  Court  could  not  interfere  with  the  concurrent 

findings of the learned civil Court and the learned appellate Court. 

Now, if concurrent findings of fact could, under no circumstances, 

be  disturbed  by  this  Court,  this  would  make  the  provisions  of 

Section  115  C.P.C.  redundant.  It  is  well-settled  that  if  material 

evidence is not considered by the lower Courts, the High Court, in 

exercise  of  its  revisional  jurisdiction,  can  interfere  in  concurrent 

findings. An authority of recent vintage is the case of Nizamuddin 

VS Sheikh Zia-ul-Qamar (2016 SCMR 24), wherein it has been held 

as follows:- 

“It is settled law that ordinarily the revisional court would not 
interfere in the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the first 
two courts of fact but where there is misreading and non-reading 
of evidence on the record which is conspicuous, the revisional 
court shall interfere and can upset the concurrent findings, as 
well as where there is an error in the exercise of jurisdiction by 
the courts below and/or where the courts have acted in the 

               
 
 
 
20 

C.R. No.35/2016 

exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.” 

41.  No  exception  could  be  taken  to  the  exercise  of  revisional 

powers  for  the  setting-aside  of  concurrent  findings  of  the  Courts 

below  if  the  same  were  based  on  non-reading  or  misreading  of 

evidence  on  the  record.  In  the  case  of  Habib  Khan  VS  Mst. 

Bakhtmina  (2004  SCMR  1668),  it  has  been  held  that  concurrent 

findings  could  not  be  termed  as  “sacroscant”  and  could  be 

reversed  by  the  High  Court  in  revisional  jurisdiction,  if  the  same 

were based on insufficient evidence, misreading of evidence, non-

consideration  of  material  piece  of  evidence,  erroneous 

assumption of facts and patent error of law.  

42. 

In  the case at  hand,  the learned  Courts  below  concurrently 

erred  by  not  appreciating  that  the  plaintiffs  were  well  educated 

ladies;  that  they  were not young  vulnerable  girls  but in  their  30s; 

that  they  were  both  married  and,  therefore,  not  financially  or 

otherwise,  dependent  on  their  brother, 

Ihtisham;  that  the 

protection that the law gives to pardanashin illiterate ladies could 

not  be  extended  to  the  plaintiffs;  that,  at  best,  the  plaintiffs  had 

been  reckless  or  negligent  in  executing  the  release  deed  which 

cannot be a valid ground for its cancellation; that the plaintiffs had 

only  themselves  to  blame  for  not  reading  the  documents  which 

they  signed  and  affixed  their  thumb  impressions  on;  that  the 

plaintiffs' stance that they did not come to know about the release 

deed  dated  30.05.2009  until  June,  2013, 

is  not  believable, 

because  the  same  was  a  registered  document  and  operated  as 

notice to the public; that Ihtisham had given the plaintiffs their due 

shares  in  his  father’s  other  properties;  that  Ihtisham  had  also 

relinquished  his  own  share  in  the  land  in  Jhangi  Syedan  in 

Fakhra’s favour; that Farzana had deposed that she had not been 

pressurized  into  signing  the  release  deed;  that  the  plaintiffs  had 

not  pleaded  in  the  plaint  that  Ihtisham  had  abused  his  dominant 

position  by  making  his  sisters  execute  the  release  deed  in  his 

favour; that Ihtisham had produced the two marginal witnesses of 

the  release  deed  who  deposed  that  they  had  signed  the  release 

deed  as  witnesses;  and  that  the  plaintiffs  did  not  deny  that  the 

said marginal witnesses had  signed the release deed. The errors 

               
 
 
 
 
21 

C.R. No.35/2016 

in  the  observations  and  conclusions  reached  by  the  learned 

Courts below are thus writ large. 

43.  For  the  reasons  stated  above,  I  am  of  the  considered  view 

that  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  cannot  stand.  The 

same  are  accordingly  set-aside.  The  revision  petition  is  allowed 

and  the  suit  is  accordingly  hereby  dismissed.  There  shall  be  no 

order as to costs.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
                           JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2018 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan* 

(JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
