ORDER SHEET

IN

BAD
TUDICIAL  DEP

Civil Revision  No. 478/2019.

Adnan Asghar

VS

Noureen  Afizal.

S. No. of
orde{

Date of
orde{

Order with signature  of )udge  and  that  of parties or
counsel  where necessily.

06.12.2019.

Mr. M. Kowkab Iqbal,  Advocate  for petitioner.

Through  this Civil Revision,  the petitioner  has

assailed  the order dated  1'6.11'.2019,  passed  by learned

Acting District Judge (East), Islamabad,  whereby

transfer  application  U/S 24 CPC filed by the petitioner

was dismissed.

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner  inter-alia

contends that petitioner  has filed two separate

applications  for transfer of two separate execution

petitions  titled Noreen Afzal VS Adnan Asghar from the

Court of Mrs. Riffat  Mahmmod Khan, learned Judge

Family Court (East), Islamabad  to any other court on the

ground that due to conduct  & demeanor demonstrated

by learned Presiding Officer, petitioner  },as lost

confidence  upon the said cour| that petitioner  is

judgment-debtor  in the execution  proceedings,  whereby

he was directed to pay the balance decretal amount,

faiting which,  he shall be sent to civil prison  through

non-bailable warrants; that learned Acting  District

Judge (Iiast),  Islamabad  while hearing the transfer

C.R No.47812019

2

applications  has not considered the concerns  of the

petitioner, whereby petitioner  has alleged  that learned

Presiding  Officer has strong  bias  against him.

3. 

'4. 

Arguments heard, record perused.

Perusal of record  reveals  tha! petitioner  is

judgment debtor  in terms  of judgment  & decree dated

30.07.201.5, passed by learned Judge Family Court,

whereby  petitioner is under obligation to satisfy  the

decree  which includes the dowry articles or in alternate

pay cash amounting to Rs.2,00,000f  -, however, as Per

the petitioner's  claims before this Court, the decree  has

not yet been satisfied and he is still under obligation to

pay the decretal amount in the Executing  court.

5. 

Learned  counsel  for the petitioner  has  been

confronted  regarding  the conduct  and demeanor of the

learned  Judge Family Court who is dealing  with

execution  application  whereby it has been contended  by

the learned  counsel that conduct of the learned  Judge is

not due to any personal  bias against  the petitioner

rather she was compelling  the petitioner for satisfaction

of the decree,  passed by the Judge Family  Court. This

aspect of the case clearll, spells out that there is no

personal vendetta  or biasness of the learned  Executing

Judge  against the petitioner  rather  she is performing her

duty in accordance  with law while dealing with the

execution  of 

decrce and as such allegation  and

. 

appretrenr-ion  raisecl b3' the t,etitioner  are not justifled

C.R No.47812019

3

on record. A11 these  questions  have already  been heard

and considered by leaned Acting District ]udge  (East),

Islamabad in the impugned  order dated L6.11'.2019,

which  has been passed  within four corners  of law,

therefore, instant civil revision petition is  not

maintainable  and the same is hereby  dismissed  in

limine. However,  the petitioner may approach the

learned  Executing  Court  in accordance  with order dated

1.6.1L.2019.

Zehid

(MOH

IUDGE

