JUDGMENT 

This  is  an  appeal  against  judgment  dated  26.11.2021  in  which  the  learned  Judicial 
Magistrate Section-30 East-Islamabad acquitted respondent No.1, Khan Afzal, who had been 
charged under Sections 427 and 447, P.P.C. for mischief causing damage to p roperty and for 
criminal trespass, respectively. 

2.  The prosecution's case was that Khan Afzal tore down a wall that separated a house 
owned by him and a property constructed on a 03 Marla in Kehwat No.402, Khatooni No. 515, 
Khasra  No.  1430/11-15  in  Khanna  Dak  ("Property")  owned  by  the  appellant,  who  was  the 
complainant  in  the  case  ("Complainant").  It  was  the  Complainant's  contention  that  he 
purchased the Property from his aunt, who was the ex-wife of Khan Afzal, and the marriage 
of Khan Afzal and the Complainant's aunt Mst. Shehnaz Parveen had broken-down after Khan 
Afzal  contracted  another  marriage.  The  prosecution  claimed  that  by  tearing  down  the  wall 
separating Khan Afzal's house from that of the Property claimed by the Complainant, Khan 
Afzal had rendered himself liable for charges under Sections 427 and 447, P.P.C. After framing 
of charge Khan Afzal denied the same and demanded a trial. 

3.  The learned Judicial Magistrate has summarized the evidence adduced during the trial 
in  sufficient  detail,  which  need  not  be  rehearsed  here.  After  considering  the  evidence,  the 
learned trial Court concluded that the ingredients of the offences that the appellant had been 
charged  were  not  made  out.  The  learned  trial  Court  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the 
Complainant as PW-1 was unaware of the existence of the utility connections at the Property, 
the ownership of which was claimed by him and trespass against which was being alleged by 
him. It further noted that the Complainant as PW-1 had acknowledged that he did not have 
possession of 06 Marlas house within which Khan Afzal had allegedly broken a wall resulting 
into the charges brought against him. The learned trial Court observed in relation to PW -2 that 
the Investigating Officer had not investigated where the Complainant resided along with his 
family and had not scrutinized the titled documents presented by the Complainant in relation 
to the Property, trespass against which formed the subject-matter of the charges against the 
Khan Afzal. The learned trial Court found  that there was no ocular testimony other than that 
of  the  Complainant  himself  supporting  the  prosecution's  case  regarding  the  breaking  of  the 
wall by Khan Afzal or intimidation of the Complainant by Khan Afzal and that consequently 
offence  under  Section  447  of  P.P.C.  was  not  made  out.  It  further  found  that  the  site  map 
reflected the place of occurrence at the back end of the house and the wall identified as having 
been broken by Khan Afzal was not the wall that separated the house of Khan Afzal and the 
Property claimed by the Complainant. It further found that there was no finding with regard to 
the cost of damage inflicted on the Complainant's Property and consequently the ingredients 
of offence under neither Section 427 nor Section 447, P.P.C. were made out. The learned trial 
Court while relying on the judgment of the august Supreme Court Ishtiaq Ahmed Mirza and 2 
others v. Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 2019 SC 675) observed that the USB and 
photographs presented by the Complainant could not be read into evidence as their authenticity 
had not been proved in accordance with the law laid down by the august Supreme Court. The 
learned  trial  Court,  therefore,  concluded  that  the  prosecution  had  failed  to  bring  forth 
confidence-inspiring evidence against Khan Afzal in the case filed by the complainant, who 
was the nephew of Khan Afzal's ex-wife, and consequently acquitted Khan Afzal. 

 
 
 
4.  Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  took  the  Court  through  record  of  the  learned  trial 
Court  and  emphasized  that  Khan  Afzal  had  admitted  before  the  police  authorities  in  an 
Iqrarnama filed by him that he had initiated the demolition of wall and that he would suspend 
further demolition but then he demolished the entire wall which led to the registration of the 
FIR  by  the  Complainant.  He  submitted  that  the  learned  trial  Court  had  not  appreciated  the 
testimony of the Complainant as PW-1 and that it had been held by the august Supreme Court 
in Asfandiyar v. The State (2021 SCMR 2009) that even the statement of the solitary witness 
was sufficient to prove a criminal charge. He further submitted that there was no mandatory 
requirement  for  police  authorities  to  prepare  a  scaled  site  plan  and  the  learned  trial  Court's 
disregard of the site plan was not in accordance with law. He submitted that the Complainant 
had established his ownership of the Property by placing on record as Exh-P1/1-2 the sale deed 
between the Complainant and Mst. Shehnaz Parveen wife of Khan Afzal. He submitted that 
the learned trial Court had not taken into account the fact that Khan Afzal was the owner of 03 
Marlas of land that he had purchased from Mst. Ejaz Parveen and that such land was separate 
from the land that the Complainant had purchased from Mst. Shehnaz Parveen on which the 
Property in question was built. He submitted that the prosecution had successfully established 
that the  appellant  had trespassed  the  Property  and  had  caused damage  to  the  Complainant's 
Property and 4 consequently the ingredients of offences under Sections 427 and 447, P.P.C. 
were  made  out  as  could  be  verified  from  the  evidence  adduced  through  the  USB  and 
Photographs presented before the Court. 

5.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submitted  that  there  is  double  presumption  of 
innocence attached to an accused who had been found not guilty by a trial Court. She submitted 
that  the  prosecution  presented  no  evidence  regarding  the  Complainant's  possession  of  the 
Property.  The  testimony  of  the  Complainant  as  PW-1  established  that  he  was  neither  in 
possession  of  the  Property  nor  was  aware  of  who  had  installed  utility  connections  at  such 
Property. And further acknowledged in his testimony that he had not undertaken construction 
of  the Property.  In  the absence of  proof  of possession  of  the Property,  no  case  for  criminal 
trespass  or  causing  damage  to  the  Property  of  the  Complainant  could  be  made  out.  She 
submitted that as the Complainant was not in possession of the Property as has been tacitly 
acknowledged  by  PW-2  in  his  testimony  who  stated  that  the  Complainant  was  resident  of 
Haripur and that as part of the investigation, PW-2 did not investigate where the Complainant 
resided along with his family. That the ownership of the Property was in dispute in two cases, 
which were pending adjudication before the civil Courts and the possession of the Proper ty 
was not established through evidence. Thus, neither the offence of criminal trespass nor that 
of causing damage under Sections 447 and 427, P.P.C. were made out. She stated that the fard 
produced  as  Exh-P1/2  also  appeared  to  be  a  fake  document  as  it  stated  that  payment  of 
consideration was made on 01.09.2020 and the Property was transferred on 07.09.2020 by the 
ex-wife of Khan Afzal to the Complainant but the deed was documented on 10.09.2020. She 
sought for the appeal to be dismissed. 

6.  The fact that the ownership of the Property is the subject matter of civil suits pending 
before the Courts of competent jurisdiction in which the appellant and respondent are parties 
is not disputed. The question of ownership of the land on which the Property is construc ted is 
therefore  presently  subjudice.  The  prosecution  could  not  establish  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
learned trial Court that the Complainant was in possession of the Property. The testimony of 
Complainant as PW-1 supports the finding of the learned trial Court that the Complainant could 

 
 
not  establish  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the  Property.  The  Complainant  as  PW -1 
acknowledged  that  he  was  unaware  of  the  number  of  utility  connections  available  at  the 
Property and could adduce no evidence establishing his possession. It should not be hard for a 
person in possession of a property to establish the same through direct and secondary evidence 
in the event that such person resides at such property. The Investigation Officer as PW -2 had 
also admitted that he never investigated where the Complainant customarily resided with his 
family. The site map produced as Exh-P10 reflects that identification mark 1 is the place where 
the wall was allegedly torn down by Khan Afzal. But such wall is reflected as back wall of the 
property being claimed by the Complainant and not the adjoining wall between the house of 
Khan  Afzal  and  the  Property  being  claimed  by  the  Complainant.  The  appellant  could  not 
establish before the Court that the learned trial Court misappreciated the law l aid down by the 
august Supreme Court in Ishtiaq Ahmed Mirza as to how pictorial and video evidence was to 
be adduced in evidence. 

7.  Notwithstanding  the lack  of  consideration  of such  video  evidence,  even  if there  was 
any photographic or video evidence regarding Khan Afzal tearing down a wall, such secondary 
evidence would not constitute an offence under Section 427 or 447, P.P.C. unless it was first 
established that such wall was torn down within property that belonged to someone else. In the 
instant case, the ownership and the possession of Property being claimed by the Complainant 
is in dispute. The question of ownership is pending adjudication before two civil Courts. And 
the possession of the Property by the Complainant has not been established by the prosecution. 
In the absence of establishing through credible evidence that the property within which a wall 
was  broken-down  by  Khan  Afzal  belonged  to  the  Complainant,  neither  an  offence  under 
Section 427, P.P.C. could be made out nor that under Section 447, P.P.C. It is also well settled 
law that acquittal carries with it double presumption of innocence. 

8. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  Court  finds  the  impugned  judgment  suffers  from  no  legal 

infirmity. The instant appeal is without merit and is accordingly dismissed. 

Disclaimer: The content available In this document are just for Information. Users are advised not to depend 
on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High Court, Islamabad is not responsible for 
any damages arising in contract from the use of the content of this documen 

Uploaded by IT department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
