ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 739 OF 2022 

Doctor Nadia Zaheer and another  
VS    
Zamir Naeem Khan and another 

Petitioner by 

:  Mr. Javed Iqbal Khan, Advocate. 

Respondents by 

:  Mr. Asad Ullah Khan Ghalib, Advocate. 

(for Respondent No.1) 

Mr. Abid Hussain Chaudhary, Advocate 
(for Respondent No.2) 

Date of hearing   

: 

01.06.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J. :- 

The  Petitioner 

[Doctor  Nadia  Zaheer] 

through special attorney, Doctor Asad Zaheer, filed the instant writ petition under 

Article  199  of 

the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 

(“Constitution”)  to assail the Divorce Certificate dated 03.11.2021 issued in Case 

No.  MFL-ID/2021-547  by  the  Respondent  No.  2  [Chairman,  Union  Council, 

Islamabad]  alleging  it  to  have  been  issued  without  fulfilling  the  formalities  as 

envisaged in Section 7 of the Muslim Family  Laws Ordinance, 1961 (“MFLO”) 

and as such prayed for it to be declared null and void ab-initio. 

2. 

Brief  facts  as  per  the  Memo  of  Petition  are  that  the  Petitioner  No.1  and 

Respondent  No.1  entered  into  a  contract  of  marriage  on  01.06.2007.  On 

04.06.2011,  the  Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.1  were  blessed  with  one  daughter 

namely,  Leena  Zamir  Khan.  The  Petitioner  got  spouse  visa,  leave  to  enter  and 

leave to work in the United Kingdom (“U.K.”) and moved there in May, 2019. In 

March 2021, the Petitioner came to Pakistan in an emergency, during which time 

Respondent No.1 communicated to her that he will contract another marriage of his 

choice. Due to his alleged misbehaviour, maltreatment and obnoxious remarks, the 

Petitioner  proceeded  back  to  London  on  18.05.2021  along  with  her  daughter. 

Keeping  in  mind  the  threats  of  dire  consequences  by  the  Respondent  No.1, 

Petitioner on 06.06.2021 filed an application in the court of U.K. for a Prohibited 

Steps Order and Child Arrangements Orders to prevent removal of her daughter, a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 739/2022 

British Citizen, from the U.K.  According to the Petitioner, the said application was 

acknowledged  as  the  Respondent  No.1  filed  his  written  statement  accepting  the 

jurisdiction  of  the  court  of  U.K.    The  Respondent  No.1,  who  is  also  a  citizen  of 

U.K. filed a cross application on 30.06.2021 in the court of U.K. seeking return of 

his daughter to Pakistan.  

3. 

It has been further stated that a suit for Divorce was filed by the Petitioner 

on  03.08.2021  in  the  court  of  U.K.,  which  is  pending  adjudication.      On 

30.07.2021, the  Respondent No.1 filed an application for divorce  in the office of 

Respondent No.2 with malafide intention and by concealing the facts and without 

disclosing  the  litigation  pending  in  the  competent  court  of  U.K.  The  Petitioner 

alleged that the Respondent No.1 has no locus standi to file such application before 

Respondent  No.2  and  that  the  Respondent  No.2  has  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain 

applications of U.K. nationals whose spouses are residing in the U.K.  According 

to the Petitioner, the Respondent No.1 filed the application as a counter blast to the 

proceedings  already  pending  in  the  court  of  law  of  England  and  Wales.  It  is 

admitted  that  the  Respondent  No.1  conveyed  the  divorce  on  03.09.2021  at  the 

residence, 141 John Arid Court, London, W2 1UU, United Kingdom through Peter 

Hayes, 48 Watling Street, Redlett, Hertis WD7 7NN, Notary Public but neither the 

application  submitted  in  the  Arbitration  Council  nor  any  notice  thereof  was 

conveyed to the Petitioner.    

4. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  argued  that  the  Respondent  No.1 

instituted  divorce  proceedings  against  the  Petitioner  before  the  Respondent  No.2 

despite the fact that he was aware that the Petitioner is in the U.K. which is evident 

from  the  fact  that  he  filed  a  response  before  the  Courts  and  Tribunals  Service 

Center  in  the  U.K.  He  further  submitted  that  the  Respondent  No.2  has  no 

jurisdiction  as  both  the  Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.1,  are  foreign  citizens  and 

lastly  that  even  otherwise,  the  Respondent  No.2  did  not  hold  any  reconciliation 

proceedings as required under 7(4) of MFLO. .  

5. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  No.1  controverted  the  arguments 

presented on behalf of the Petitioner  and submitted that the parties entered into a 

Nikahnama on 01.06.2007 in Islamabad, therefore he argued that the Respondent 

No.  2  had  the  jurisdiction  to  conduct  proceedings  and  issue  the  Certificate  of 

Divorce  dated  03.11.2021.    He  drew  this  Court‟s  attention  to  the  Divorce  Deed 

P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 739/2022 

dated 30.07.2021 whereby the Respondent No.1 has pronounced divorce upon the 

Petitioner. He also referred to the Notice of proceedings dated 11.08.2021 sent by 

the HM Courts & Tribunals Service (U.K) to the Respondent No.1 containing the 

divorce  application  filed  by  the  Petitioner  in  the  U.K.  wherein  she  has  disclosed 

that  the  Respondent  No.1  has  religiously  divorced  her  on  30.07.2021  and  on  the 

basis  of  the  aforementioned  argued  that  the  Petitioner  was  well  aware  of  the 

divorce  proceedings  before  the  Respondent  No.2.  The  learned  counsel  submitted 

that it  was only after that i.e., on 06.09.2021 that the Respondent No. 1 filed his 

Answer 

to  Divorce 

/  Dissolution 

/ 

(judicial)  Separation  or  Nullity 

Petition/Application  before  the  Courts  and  Tribunals  Service  Center.    He  also 

mentioned that both the parties are Pakistani citizens who have dual nationality and 

as such the provisions of MFLO apply to them. He explained that the address that 

the  Respondent  No.  1  provided  to  the  Respondent  No.  2  for  the  Petitioner  is  the 

Petitioner‟s parents‟ current address. He also apprised this Court that the Petitioner 

has  not  disclosed  in  the  instant  petition  the  fact  that  she  had  initially  instituted  a 

civil suit before the Senior Civil Judge, West-Islamabad, praying for a decree for 

declaration that divorce proceedings before the Respondent No.2 be declared null 

and void due to lack of jurisdiction as divorce proceedings are already pending in a 

competent  court  of  law  in  the  U.K.,  which  suit  was  withdrawn  by  her  on 

14.10.2021.  

6. 

The  learned  counsel for  Respondent  No.2  submitted that the  notices to the 

parties to appear before the Respondent No.2 were duly served upon the Petitioner 

at  the  address  provided  by  the  Respondent  No.  1  in  his  notice  to  divorce.    He 

further stated that in response thereto, the Petitioner‟s brother, who is her attorney 

in  the  present  proceedings  before  this  Court,  appeared  on  23.08.2021  before  the 

Respondent No. 2 to join the proceedings.  He also confirmed that under Section 

1(2)  MFLO  the  provisions  thereof  apply  to  all  Muslim  citizens  of  Pakistan 

wherever they may be.  

7. 

Arguments addressed by learned counsel for the parties have been heard and 

perused the available record.  

8. 

The undisputed facts that have emerged from the record before this Court is 

that the parties entered into the contract of marriage in Islamabad, Pakistan.  The 

Respondent No. 1 executed a Divorce Deed dated 30-07-2021 pronouncing divorce 

P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 739/2022 

upon  the  Petitioner  and  gave  notice  of  the  same  to  the  Respondent  No.  2  on  the 

same  date.    Whereas  the  Petitioner  filed  a  suit  for  Divorce  on  03.08.2021  in  the 

court of U.K.  The above timeline shows that the Respondent No. 1 instituted the 

proceedings  before  the  Respondent  No.  2  prior  to  the  proceedings  filed  by  the 

Petitioner  in  the  U.K.    Therefore,  the  question  of  the  Respondent  No.  1  being 

aware of the divorce proceedings in the U.K., simply does not arise. 

9. 

In so far as Petitioner‟s argument is concerned that MFLO does not apply to 

the  Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.1  as  they  are  U.K.  citizens,  the  same  is 

misconceived and legally without merit in view of sub-section (2) of Section 1 of 

the MFLO which provides that MFLO applies to all Muslim citizens of Pakistan, 

wherever they may be. Admittedly both the Petitioner and the Respondent No.1 are 

Muslims  who  have  dual  citizenship  and  as  such  the  provisions  of  MFLO  are 

applicable upon them.  

10.  Next  I  come  to  the  contention  of  the  Petitioner  that  the  Respondent  No.1 

could not have filed proceedings before the Respondent No.2 when he knew that 

the Petitioner is in the U.K.  However, nowhere has the Petitioner mentioned in the 

instant  petition  that  she  informed  the  Respondent  No.1  before  proceeding  to 

London  on  18.05.2021.  On  the  other  hand  Respondent  No.1  has  stated  in  his 

parawise comments that the Petitioner took the minor daughter of the parties to the 

U.K. without the  knowledge or permission of the Respondent No.1  who came to 

know  of  his  daughter‟s  removal  from  the  airport  authorities  on  03.06.2021.  It  is 

settled law that this Court cannot adjudicate upon factual disputes in exercise of its 

Constitutional jurisdiction, however, what is evident is that the Respondent No.1, 

admittedly, knew that the Petitioner was in the U.K. on 03.06.2021.  

11. 

In such circumstances the relevant provisions that appear to be attracted in 

the  instant  case  are  Rules  3(b)  and  3-A  of  the  West  Pakistan  Rules  under  the 

Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  (“MFLO  Rules”),  which  are  reproduced 

herein below: 

„3. (b) in the case of notice of talaq under sub-section (1) of section 7, it shall be 
the Union Council of the Union or Town where the wife in relation to whom talaq 
has been pronounced was residing at the time of the pronouncement to talaq: 

Provided  that  if  at  the  time  of  pronouncement  of  talaq  such  wife  was  not 
residing  in  any  part  of  West  Pakistan,  the  Union  Council  that  shall  have 
jurisdiction shall be— 

P a g e  | 5 
W.P.No. 739/2022 

(i) 

in  case  such  wife  was  at  any  time  residing  with  the  person  pronouncing 
the talaq in any part of West Pakistan, the Union Council of the Union or 
Town where such wife so last resided with such person; and 

(ii) 

in  any  other  case,  the  Union  Council  of  the  Union  or  Town  where  the 
person pronouncing the talaq is permanently residing in West Pakistan. 

3-A. Where the whereabouts of the wife who is to be supplied a copy of the notice 
of talaq under sub-section (1) of the Ordinance, are not known to the husband and 
cannot, with due diligence, be ascertained by him, he may, if so permitted by the 
Chairman  give  notice  of  the  talaq  to  the  wife  through  her  father,  mother,  adult 
brother or adult sister, if any, and if the wife has no father, mother, adult brother 
or adult sister if their whereabouts are not known to the husband or cannot, with 
due  diligence,  be  ascertained  by  him  he  may,  with  the  permission  of  the 
Chairman,  serve  the  notice  of  talaq  on  her  by  publication  in  a  newspaper, 
approved by the Chairman, having circulation in the locality where he last resided 
with the wife.  [Emphasis added]. 

12.  The record reflects that the Petitioner was not residing in Pakistan at the time 

of pronouncement of divorce therefore the proviso to Rule 3(b) would apply.  Rule 

3(b)(i) would come into play if  the Petitioner last resided with the Respondent No. 

1 within the jurisdiction of the Respondent No. 2.  In any other case, Respondent 

No.  2  would  have  jurisdiction  pursuant  to  Rule  3(b)(ii)if  the  Respondent  No.  1 

permanently resides within the jurisdiction thereof.  Even otherwise, the Petitioner 

has not alleged that the Respondent No.1 was aware of the Petitioner‟s address in 

the U.K., in which case service on the Petitioner‟s brother would be in accordance 

with  Rule 3-A of the MFLO Rules.  

13.  As per the comments filed by the Respondent No. 2, the Petitioner‟s brother 

appeared before  Respondent No.2 on 23.08.2021 to join the proceedings.  In fact, 

the Petitioner herself has attached a copy of her application dated 04-11-2021 filed 

with the Respondent No. 2 through her counsel to stop the proceedings due to lack 

of jurisdiction.  Even otherwise knowledge of divorce has not been denied and in 

fact  has been  specifically  admitted  by  the  Petitioners  vide the  Memo  of  Petition. 

While the Petitioner claims that divorce was conveyed to her London address on 3-

09-2021, the divorce application filed by the Petitioner in the U.K., which was sent 

to the Respondent No. 1 along with the notice of proceedings dated 11.08.2021 by 

the  HM  Courts  &  Tribunals  Service  contains  an  acknowledgement  that  the 

Respondent No.1 has religiously divorced the Petitioner on 30.07.2021.  Therefore, 

even if it were to be assumed for argument‟s sake that notice of divorce was not 

served upon the Petitioner, the question arises as to whether a pronouncement of 

divorce is valid if knowledge of divorce is admitted.    

P a g e  | 6 
W.P.No. 739/2022 

14.  The Honourable Supreme Court in the case of Allah Dad VS Mukhtar, 1992 

SCMR 1273 held that it is now evident that the notice of  Talaq to the Chairman, 

Arbitration  Council  is  not  mandatory  under  the  injunctions  of  Islam  and  any 

divorce pronounced or written by the husband cannot be ineffective or invalid in 

Shariah  merely  because  its  notice  has  not  been  given  to  Chairman,  Arbitration 

Council.  

15. 

In the present case the pronouncement of divorce and its communication to 

the Petitioner is admitted by both the parties.  The requisite notice under Section 

7(1)  of  the  MFLO  was  also  served  by  the  Respondent  No.  1  to  the  Respondent 

No.2.  The notice was sent to the address which is reflected as the address of the 

Petitioner‟s  attorney  in  the  instant  petition  before  this  Court.    The  Petitioner‟s 

denial of receipt of notice of the proceedings before the Respondent No. 2 is belied 

by her application dated 04-11-2021 to the Respondent No. 2 through her counsel 

to  stop  the  proceedings,  a  copy  of  which  has  been  filed  by  the  Petitioner  herself 

along  with  the  instant  petition.    Therefore,  keeping  in  view  the  aforementioned 

judgment of the Honourable Supreme Court, the effectiveness of  talaq cannot be 

denied by the Petitioner. 

16.  For  all  the  foregoing  reasons,  the  instant  petition  is  dismissed  for  want  of 

merit.  

Announced in the open Court on 3rd of June, 2022. 

(SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
