ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD. 

(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 333 of  2019 

Muhammad Sajjad 
VS 
The State and another 

Appellant  by: 

Mrs. Shehnaz Zafar, Advocate. 

Respondent No.1 by: 

Mr. Mansoor Malik Advocate, 

State By: 

Ch. Abdul Jabbar, Assistant Attorney 
General along with Humaira Aslam, Sub  
lnspector/10/ FIA. 

Date of Hearing: 

02.03.2020. 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANI,  J.:-  Through  the  instant 

appeal, the  appellant/  convict  (Muhammad  Sajjad)  has assailed the 

judgment  dated  11.10.2019, passed by the learned Sessions Judge, 

Islamabad,  in  case  F.l.R  No.09  dated  03.12.2018,  under  Sections 

20/  21  &  24  Prevention  of  Electronic  Crimes  Act,  2016,  read  with 

Section  509  of  Pakistan Penal Code,  1860 (hereinafter  be referred 

as the  "PPC"), registered at Police Station F.l.A/Cyber Crime Circle, 

Islamabad, whereby  the  appellant  was  convicted  under  Section  20 

of  PECA, 2016 and sentenced to 03 years  RI  & fine  Rs.200,000/- in 

default  whereof  to  further  undergo  S.I.  for  six  months  and  under 

Section  21  of  PECA,  2016  for  05  years  RI  &  fine  Rs.300,000/-  in 

default  whereof  to  further  undergo  S.I.  for  six  months.  All  the 

sentences  were  to  run  concurrently  and  benefit  of  Section  382(8), 

Cr.P.C. was also extended to the appellant/ convict. 

2 

Crl.  .AJ1peal No.333  of  2019 

2. 

Briefly  stated  the  allegation  against  the  appellant/  convict  is 

that  he  with  malafide  intentions  and  ulterior  motives,  illegally  and 

unauthorizedly 

created 

a  Facebook  Profile  having  URL 

https://www.facebook.com/hafiz.sajjad.752, 

in 

the 

name 

of 

Muhammad  Sajjad  and  uploaded,  generated,  posted  personal  and 

sexually  explicit  pictures  of  the  complainant/  respondent  No.2, that 

damaged  her  repute  as well  as destroyed  her  honour  and  modesty 

among  her family,  community and further  sent those  naked pictures 

and  chat  to  her  husband namely Azhar  Mehmood on  his  Facebook 

Account, consequently, her marriage was broken. 

3. 

After  registration  of the  F.l.R  and  usual  investigation,  challan 

under  Section  173  Cr.P.C  was  submitted  before  the  learned  trial 

Court.  After  fulfilling  codal  formalities  by  the  learned  trial  Court, 

charge  was  framed  against  the  accused  to  which  he  pleaded  not 

guilty and claimed trial. 

4. 

In  order  to  prove  its  case,  the  prosecution  examined  the 

following witnesses:- 

t. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 

PW-1, Sumaira Bibi, Complainant, 
PW-2 Muhammad Abbas, grandfather of complainant, 
PW-3 Azhar Mehmood, Ex-husband of complainant, 
PW-4 Haider Ali, Constable FIA, 
PW-5 Masud Ali, Deputy Director Forensic, FIA 
PW-6 Humaira Aslam, SJ/Investigation Officer, FIA. 

After closure of the prosecution evidence, the statement of appellant 

under  Section  342  Cr.P.C  was  recorded  wherein  he  has  denied 

veracity  of  prosecution  version  and  did  not  produce  any  defence 

evidence. The  learned Trial Court after hearing the arguments of the 

learned  counsel  for  the  parties  announced  the  judgment  dated 

3 

Crl. Appeal  No. 333 of  2019 

17.03.2015  (hereinafter  be  called  as  "impugned judgment')  by 

awarding  above  mentioned  sentence  to  the  appellant  hence,  the 

instant appeal. 

5. 

Learned  counsel 

for 

the  appellant  contended 

that 

the 

impugned judgment  is  against the law and facts of the case; that the 

prosecution failed to prove the case against the appellant; that there 

are  material  contradictions  in  the  statements  of  the  prosecution 

witnesses  but  the  same  have  not  been  considered  by  the  learned 

Trial Court while  passing the impugned judgment;  further contended 

that  the  learned  trial  Court  has  not  appreciated  the  evidence 

properly  and  erred 

in  convicting  the  appellant  /convict.  Also 

contended that there is a  delay of about two months in  lodging of the 

F.l.R.  Lastly,  contended  that  impugned judgment  be  set-aside  and 

the appellant be acquitted of the charge. 

6. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  Assistant  Attorney  General 

supported the judgment  of the learned trial Court contending that the 

appellant  is  specifically  nominated  in  the  F.l.R;  that  the  forensic 

report  confirmed  the  display  of  nude  picture and  messages  sent  by 

the  appellant  /convict;  that  the  appellant  has  committed  a  heinous 

offence  and  that  PW-3 Azhar  Mehmood,  Ex-husband  of  the  victim/ 

respondent  No. 1  confirmed  and  endorsed  the  charges  leveled 

against the  appellant with  regard to  sending of  nude  picture of the 

complainant by the accused/appellant to his cell phone number. 

4 

Crl. AppealNo.333 of 2019 

7. 

Heard  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 

perused the available record. 

8. 

Minute  perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  complainant 

submitted  an  application 

to  the  Deputy  Director  Cyber  Cell, 

Islamabad,  on  18.10.2018  but  the  instant  F.l.R  was  lodged  on 

03. 12.2018  after  a  delay  of  about  one  and  a  half  month.  PW-1 

Sumaira Bibi stated in  her examination in  chief that:- 

"My engagement  was solemnized with Hafiz M.  Sajjad prior to 

two  year  ago.  Due  to  close  relative  he  used  to  contact  me 

through  mobile  phone  No.0315-5744314  on  my  mobile 

No. 0344-5712935" 

whereas in  her cross-examination she stated that:- 

"It is  incorrect  to suggest  that accused  M.  Saiiad is  mv close 

relative and I am concealing this fact from the Court." 

She further admitted that:- 

"I  have  not  attached  any  message  of  the  accused  with  my 

complaint  Ex.PA  in  which  he  threatened me  and  called  me  in 

his house." 

She further stated that:- 

"At  the  time  of  committing  of Zina  I  shouted.  I  neither  told  to 

my parents about zina nor did I get medical for this purpose." 

She further stated that :- 

"It  is  correct  that  we  have  a  property  dispute  over  our joint 
property.  It is incorrect  to suggest that accused is a convicted 

person". 

She further stated that:- 

"It  is  correct  that  I  have  not  attached  any  data  of  my  own 

mobile having No.0344-5712935 with my complaint Ex.PA". 

She further admitted that:- 

"It is correct that it is mentioned in the divorce deed that Azhar 

divorced me on my demand and my parents demand." 

5 

Crl.  AppeaJNo.333  of  2019 

She further admitted that 

"I have given  the alleged pictures  to the FIA. It is correct that 

in those pictures I was wearing full clothes." 

She further admitted that:- 

"Accused  sent  the  pictures  on  facebook  of my  five  maternal 

uncle  and  other  relatives.  It  is  correct  that  I  have  not  given 

their mobiles at the time of investigation to the FIA." 

9. 

PW-2,  Muhammad  Abbas  (grandfather  of  the  complainant), 

during his cross-examination stated that :- 

"I  have  stated  in  examination-in-chief  that  accused  uploaded 

the photo  of my granddaughter which fact was not mentioned in 

the statement under section  161  Cr.P.C." 

He further admitted that :- 

"The  accused  uploaded  the  pictures  to  Azhar  Chohan  on 

28.08.2018.  Some  nude  pictures  were  thrown  in  my  house 

and some of were thrown in the houses of Malik Hussain and 

Tariq Mehmood. It is correct that they are not witnesses in the 

instant case." 

He further stated that :- 

"I  have  not  seen  him  at  the  time  of  throwing  pictures  again 

stated  that  I  have  seen  him.  It  was  evening  when  he  thrown 

the pictures.  The distance between  the  house  of accused  M. 

Sajjad and my house is about one kilometer." 

He further stated that :- 

"It is correct that F.l.R No. 283118 in police station Jatoli is also 

lodged  against  him.  It  is  correct  that  so  many  other  criminal 

cases are also registered against him." 

10.  Azhar  Mehmood  PW-.3  during  his  cross-examination  stated 

that:- 

"It  was  in  my  knowledge  that  Hafiz  Sajjad  was  arranged  an 

engagement  with  complainant  seven  years  ago,  but  later  on 

the engagement was broken." 

6 

Crl. Jl9peal No.333 of 2019 

He further admitted that :- 

"Hafiz  Sajjad  sent  me  the  pictures  of  complainant  on  21h 

August,  2018.  The  accused  send  me  10  pictures  of 

complainant  Sumaira Bibi. It is  correct  that in  10 pictures,  the 

complainant was dressed." 

11.  PW-4,  Haider  Ali,  F.C,  FIA  Cyber  Crime  Circle,  Islamabad, 

while appearing as PW-4 in  his examination-in-chief stated that :- 

"Mr.Azhar Mehmood slo Arshad Mehmood Gu jar Khan District 

Rawalpindi  joined  the  office  and  presented  the  cell  phone 

Samsung  Grand  Prime  dated  24.10.2018. 

I 

took 

into 

possession  the said mobile through seizure memo  Ex.PW411 

which is signed by me Ex.PW 412. 

Whereas during cross-examination he stated that:- 

"Azhar  handed  over  mobile  to  the  I. 0  in  front  of  me  on 

24. 10. 2018. Mobile phone was not in my custody." 

12.  PW-5,  Masud Ali,  Deputy Director  Forensic, F.l.A,  Islamabad, 

in  his examination-in-chief stated that:- 

"The  data  extracted  from  mobile  phone  bearing  /MEI  No. 

354466073884137  Samsung  SM-G531F.  During  the  analysis 

the  keywords  Hafiz  SaUad Sumaira  and  facebook  profile  ID 

10006550217172 could not be retrieved or found." 

During his cross-examination he stated that:- 

"/ do not remember the date when the cell phone  was handed 

over  to me.  The  cell phone  was in position  of seal.  I  recorded 

my  statement  before  the  I. 0  regarding  Forensic  Report.  I 

handed over the Forensic containing 08 pages alongwith DVD. 

It is correct  that 04 pictures  are attached  with my report.  In all 

pictures  the  girl  has  wearing  clothes.  Beside  these  picture  in 

all other pictures girl  was wearing clothes.  There was no nude 

pictures." 

7 

CrL &meal No.333 of 2019 

13.  Humaira  Aslam  S.I 

(1.0)  FIA  Cyber  Crime  Circle 

Rawalpindi/Islamabad, in  her cross-examination stated that:- 

"I  am  aware  of  the  fact  that  at  the  time  of  submission  of 

cha/Ian under  section 173 Cr.P.C all  the  relevant  material  are 

attached  with  it.  It  is  correct  that  I  have  not  mentioned  the 

record of DVD with the cha/Ian." 

She further admitted that 

"I sent to her to Doctor for medical examination, but I have not 

attached  the  medical  report  of  the  complainant  with  the 

record." 

She further admitted that 

"It is  correct  that I have put  on record  all  those nude pictures 

which  were  thrown  by  the  accused  in  different  houses  of the 

relatives of the complainant.  It is correct that I have not placed 

the said pictures at the time of cha/Ian." 

She further admitted that 

"I  have  not  recorded  any  witness  in  whose  presence  the 

accused has thrown the nude pictures in the houses." 

She further admitted that 

"It  is  correct  that  at  the  time  of submission  of cha/Ian the  18 

pictures  which are Ex.PW-0611-18 were not attached." 

She further admitted that 

"I do not have collected the mobile data of complainant." 

She further admitted that 

"It  is  correct  that  the mobile  data  produced  by  Azhar  was  of 

May, 2018. Self stated that the complaint was registered in the 

month of September." 

She further admitted that 

"It is correct that I have not attached any record of verification 

of ID of Sajjad accused." 

8 

Crl. AppeaJNo.333  ol  2019 

14. 

The  appellant  /convict,  Muhammad  Sajjad,  while  recording 

statement  under  section  342  Cr.P.C,  replied  the  question  No.3,  as 

under:- 

"It  is  incorrect.  I  have  not  called  the  complainant  in  my 
House. She was engaged with me for last seven years and 
without  permission  of  her  parents  she  contracted  Nikah 
with me by  Qari Saeed, who due to the fear of her parents 
did  not  disclose  and  gave  me  Nikah  Nama.  The 
complainant  herself  come  to  my  house  and  ask  me  to 
declare  Nikah  to her parents,  which  I  refused.  There is no 
evidence  of  uploading  a  picture  blackmailing  and 
threatening.  That  the  complainant's  parents  contracted 
Nikah  with  other  person  Azhar  Mehmood  but 
the 
complainant  herself  was  not  willing  to  marry  with  Azhar 
Mehmood,  therefore,  before  Rukhsati  she  executed  an 
affidavit and demanded divorce from the Azhar  Mehmood. 
Talak Nama of the complainant marked in her evidence as 
Mark-A." 

In  reply to Q.No.5, he replied that:- 

" I  have  not  sent  text  messages  to  Azhar  Mehmood  on 
07. 05. 2018. Neither I sent nude pictures of the complainant 
Sumaira  which  is  also  proved  by  evidence  of  Forensic 
Expert PW-05." 

In  reply to Q.  No.6, he stated that:- 

"lt is incorrect. DVD is not exhibited by the Forensic Expert. 
Neither  any  mobile  phone  is  produced  before  the  Court. 
The DVD  produced  by  the  I. 0. PW-06  must  be  tempered 
because  Masud Ali, Deputy Director stated in his evidence 
that  no  nude  pictures  were  extracted  from  the  mobile 
phone." 

In  reply to question No.  07, he replied that:- 

for 

" It  is  incorrect.  I. 0  has  not  taken  my  mobile  in  her 
possession.  Neither  sent 
I. 0 
produced  fake  pictures  neither  any  witness  stated  about 
I. 0  only  involved  me  in  criminal  case 
136  pictures. 
collected  pictures  from  complainant  and  exhibited  in  the 
Court to strengthen the case but inspite of that prosecution 
badly failed to prove its case." 

forensic  analysis. 

Q.No.9.  "Why  this  case  was  registered  against  you  and 

why PWs deposed against you.  What do you say about it? 

Ans.  Complainant  was  engaged  with  me  from  last  seven 

years.  Due  to  family  and property  disputes parents  of  the 

9 

Crl. AppeaJNo.333 of 2019 

complainant  refused  to  contract  our  marriage  during  this 

period.  The complainant contracted Nikah with me but Qari 

Saeed  did  not  given  Nikah  Nama, 

therefore,  during 

investigation  my parents  filed  an  application  and  asked  to 

the  I. 0  to summon  Qari Saeed  and investigate  the matter 

but  I. 0  did  not  accept  my  request,  therefore,  when 

complainant herself refused Rukhsati with Azhar Mehmood 

PW-.3  and  demanded  divorced, 

the  parents  of  the 

complainant 

to  take  revenge  from  me  instigated 

the 

complainant  to  file  false  and  frivolous  application  against 

me and involved me in a false case." 

15.  Record  further  shows  that  the  complainant  is  permanent 

resident of  Ranjaani Tehsil Gujar  Khan, District Rawalpindi, but with 

malafide  intention,  she  lodged the  complaint  at the  Deputy  Director 

Cyber  Cell,  Islamabad, stating therein  that  she  is  resident of  Golra  

More,  Islamabad.  Further,  the  grandfather  of  the  complainant  is 

involved  in  criminal  cases  which  fact  has  been  admitted  by  him 

during his cross-examination that:- 

"It is  correct  that  F.l.R  No.  283118 in  police  station  Jatoli  is 

also  lodged  against  me.  It  is  correct  that  so  many  other 

criminal cases are also registered against me. 

The  prosecution  failed  to  produce  the  independent  witnesses  to 

prove  the  charge  against  the  appellant  before  whose  houses  the 

appellant allegedly thrown  nude pictures of the complainant.  Further 

Deputy Director Forensic FIA deposed in  his statement that the data 

was 

extracted 

from 

mobile 

phone 

bearing 

IMEI 

No.354466073884137 Samsung SM-G531 F,  but during the analysis, 

the  keywords  Hafiz  Sajjad  Sumaira  and  facebook  profile 

ID 

10 

Crl. Appeal  No.333 of  2019 

10006550217172  could  not  be  retrieved  or  found.  In  his  cross- 

examination,  PW.5 stated that:- 

"I  do  not  remember  the  date  when  the  cell phone  was 
handed  over  to  me.  The cell  phone  was  in  position  of 
seal.  I  recorded  my  statement before  the  I. 0  regarding 
Forensic  Report.  I  handed  over  the  Forensic  Report 
Humaira  Aslam,  S.I  (/.0). 
I  handed  over  over  my 
Forensic  Report containing 08 pages  alongwith  DVD. It 
is  correct  that  we mention all material  which  we extract 
from  mobile  phone.  It  is  correct  that  04  pictures  are 
attached  with  my  report.  In  all  pictures  the  girl  has 
wearing  clothes.  Besides  these  picture  in  all  other 
pictures  girl  was  wearing clothes.  There  were  no  nude 
pictures". 

16.  All  these  facts  and  circumstances  makes  the  case  of  the 

prosecution  highly  doubtful.  The  complainant  engaged  with  the 

accused  for  last  seven  years  and  without  the  permission  of  her 

parents,  she  contracted  nikkah  with  the  accused  by  Qari  Saeed, 

and due to fear of her parents, she could not disclose and gave copy 

of Nikahnama to the accused. The parents of the complainant forced 

her to enter into Nikha with Azhar  Mehmood against her wishes that 

is  why  the  complainant  was  not  willing  to  marry  with  Azhar 

Mehmood,  and  got  divorce  from  Azhar  Mehmood,  vide  "Mark-A". 

Further,  no  photograph  were  got  exhibited  during  the  course  of 

evidence  by  any  of  the  prosecution  witnesses.  When  the  F.l.R 

No.09/2018 was  lodged against the  appellant /convict,  father  of the 

appellant  moved  an  application 

(Mark-A/1) 

to 

the  Deputy 

Superintendent  of  Police Wah  Cantt stating therein  that  Qari Saeed 

who  has  conducted  the  Nikah  of  his  son  Muhammad  Sajjad  with 

Mst.Sumaira  Bibi  in  the  presence of  Hafiz  Sarwar  according  to  law 

and sharia and after one year of the said Nikah, when the parents of 

11 

CrL Appeal No.333 of 2019 

said Sumaria Bibi refused to give "rishta" due to a family dispute, the 

accused  /appellant  informed  about  the  said  Nikah,  thereafter  the 

said application was  moved with the  prayer that  legal action against 

Nikah  Registrar  (Qari  Saeed)  may  be  taken  up.  The  1.0  did  not 

record  the  statement  of  said  witness  namely  Qari  Saeed.  There  is 

inordinate  delay  in  lodging  of  the  F.1.R.  No  independent  witnesses 

were  produced by the  prosecution who could confirm the sending of 

picture by the accused to any of the prosecution witnesses. 

17.  All these facts and circumstances leads to the conclusion that 

the  prosecution  has  failed  to  drive  home  the  charge  and  to  prove 

guilt  of  the  appellant  beyond  shadow  of  doubt  by  producing 

convincing and confidence inspiring evidence. 

18. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  appeal  is  accepted,  the  impugned 

judgment 

recording  conviction  and  awarding  sentence  to  the 

appellant  is  set-aside.  The  appellant  is  acquitted  of  the  charge.  He 

be released forthwith,  if not required in  any other case . 

..(GH:Ull.AM'AZAiii QltlilfRANI) 

JUDGE 

Announced  In  Open Court, On J.4-day  of March, 2020. 

"Rana.M.lft." 

