ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 
·ISLAMABAD 

WRIT  PETITION  N0.2031-Q  OF  2020 

AMBR;EEN  DILSHAD 
VS 

SSP PS KORAL  AND OTHERS. 

Petitioner  by 

Ms.  Kulsum  Khaliq,  Advocate. 

State  by 

Hazrat  Vounas,  State  Counsel. 
Mr.  Ameer  Ali,  A.S.I.,  P.S.  Koral, 
Islamabad. 

Respondent  No.3  by 

Nemo. 

Date  ofDecision 

07 .02.2022. 

SAMAN  RAFAT  IMTIAZ,  J.:- 

The  Petitioner,  Ambreen  Dilshad  filed  the 

instant  writ  petition  under  Article  199 of the  Constitution  of Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan,  1973 read  with  section  561-A,  Cr.P.C.  for quashing  of FIR  No.390/2020 

dated  09.07.2020  registered  for offences  under  Sections  345/506(ii)/148/149,  PPC 

at P.S.  Koral,  Islamabad. 

2. 

Necessary 

facts  of 

the  case,  as  per  contents  of  FIR,  are 

that 

Complainant/Respondent  No.3  is residing  with  her  husband,  Shahzad  Ahmed  in a 

rented  house  located  at  Alipur,  Nai  Abadi,  Islamabad,  and  working 

in  HBS 

Hospital  as  janitorial  staff.  Her  husband  had  contracted  second  marriage  a  year 

ago  with  one,  Shumaila,  without  informing  the  Complainant  and  kept  her  in  the 

dark.  On  06.0(.,2020  at  about  12  noon  when  the  Complainant  came  to  know  about. 

the  above  fact  a  quarrel  ensued  between  them.  Thereafter,  according  to  the  FIR, 

the  Complainant's  husband  along  with  several  of  his  relatives  as  named  in  the 

FIR  including  the  Petitioner  beat  up  the  Complainant  and  her  brother  Touqeer 

Ahmed  with  sticks.  The  Complainant  was  threatened  with  dire  consequences  at 

gunpoint  and  her  clothes  were  torn  off.  During  the  fight,  Complainant's  brother's 

passport  was  snatched  and  Complainant's  salary  of four  months  equivalent  to  Rs. 

50,000/-  was  stolen.  Her  Nikkahnama  as  well  as  marriage  photo  have  also  gone 

missing.  Two  mobile  phones, 

i.e.  Hot-8-Infinix  having  value  of  Rs. I 0,000/-  and 

J-5  having  value  of Rs.5,000/-,  Complainant's  dowry  articles  having  approximate 

value  of Rs. l 00,000/-,  fridge,  LCD,  bed  and  sofa  set  were  also  taken  away.  On 

Ambreen Dilsilatl v.  SSP PS Koral, etc  2 

W.I'  No  203  I  of  2020 

I 

09.07.2020 

the  police  recorded'  the 'statement  of the  Complainant's  brother  and 

witness,  Mr.  Touqeer  Ahmed,  who  also  named  the  Petitioner  as  one  of  the 

miscreant. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  submitted  that  there  is  a  delay  of three 

days  in  lodging  of FIR  which  makes  the  prosecution  story  doubtful;  it  is evident 

from  the  contents  of  the  FIR  that  no  offence  has  been  made  out  against  the 

Petitioner  as  the  contents  of  the  FIR  is  of  theft  of Nikkahnama  and  house  hold 

items;  that  the  dispute  is purely  of family  nature  and  instead  of filing  family  suit, 

Respondent  No.3  has  registered  the  subject  FIR  for  criminal  proceedings;  that  it 

will  be  futile  and  an  abuse  of process  of the  court  to  proceed  with  the  matter  as 

there  are  no  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  Petitioner  has  committed  any 

offence;  and  now 

the  Complainant  herself  is  not  appearing 

in 

the 

trial 

proceedings.  Learned  counsel  in view  of said  contentions  prayed  for  quashing  of 

subject  FIR. 

4. 

Conversely, 

learned  State  Counsel  contended 

that  the  High  Court  has  no 

jurisdiction  whatsoever  to  take  the  role  of  investigating  agency  and  to  quash  the 

F.I.R.  while  exercising  constitutional 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  of the  Islamic  Republic  of Pakistan  or  under  Section  561-A,  Cr.P.C., 

unless  and  until  very  exceptional  circumstances  exist,  which  surely  are  missing  in 

the  instant  case.  It  is  also  contended 

that  challan  to  the  extent  of  the  present 

Petitioner  has  been  submitted  before  the  trial  court  on  I  1.03 .2021  therefore,  the 

Petitioner  has  an  alternate 

remedy 

to  move  application  under  Section  249-A 

Cr.P.C.  They  prayed  for  dismissal  of instant  writ  petition. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard.  Record  perused. 

The  most  basic  prerequisite  for the  maintainability  of a petition  under  Article 

199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  is  that  there  is  no 

other  adequate  remedy  available  to  the  Petitioner.  This  most  basic  requirement  is 

not  met  by  an  accused  person  seeking  quashing  of FIR  as  multiple  remedies  are 

available  to  her  before  constitutional  jurisdiction  can  be  resorted  to.  Such  remedies 

include  Section  249-A  and  265-K  Cr.P.C.  which  are  available 

to  the  present 

Petitioner. 

Ambreen  Di/shad v.  SSP  PS Koral, etc  3 

IV.I'  No.2031  of  2020 

I 

7. 

The  inherent  power  of  this  Court  under  Section  561-A  Cr.P.C.  can  be 

invoked  in  extraordinary  cases  where  no  offence  is  made  out  or  any  illegality  has 

been  committed  causing  grave  miscarriage  of justice.  However,  in the  instant  case 

the  Petitioner  has  been  specifically  nominated 

in 

the  F.I.R.  wherein 

the 

Complainant  has  alleged 

that 

the  Petitioner  along  with  others  beat  up  the 

Complainant 

in  addition  to  committing 

theft  of  valuables  and  other  house  hold 

items,  therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  that  no  offence  is  made  out.  The  power  under 

Section  561-A  Cr.P.C.  cannot  be  used  to  interfere  with  or  interrupt  ordinary  course 

of criminal  procedure. 

8. 

In  view  of  the  above  discussion,  I  find  the  instant  petition  for  quashing  of 

FIR  without  merit,  which  as such  is, hereby,  dismissed. 

(SAMAN-RAFA'i'  IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

JUNAIO 

