ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

Mst. Saima Bibi 

VS

Additional Sessions Judge (East), Islamabad etc.  

PETITIONER BY: 

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr.  Mudassar  Rizwan,  Ms.  Saba  Batool  Mumtaz  and 
Ms. Bushra Raja Chishti, Advocates alongwith petitioner. 

Raja Gul Nawaz, Advocate for respondent No.4 alongwith 
Mst. Javaria. 
Jamshed  Khan,  Inspector/SHO  and  Muhammad  Aslam, 
Inspector, P.S Lohi Bher, Islamabad. 
Sajid,  S.I,  Azra,  Lady  Constable,  Shoaib  Khan,  H.C  and 
Rab Nawaz Constable, Adyala Jail, Rawalpindi.  

DATE OF DECISION: 

30.05.2018. 

………………………………………………………………………………………………………  

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI  J. Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  petitioner  has  prayed  for 

recovery  of  her  minor  daughter  Umme  Hani  aged  about  10  months,  who  is  in  illegal  and 

improper custody of Nasir Raza/respondent No.4. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  case  are  that  the  petitioner/Mst.  Saima  Bibi  is  facing 

trial  for  allegation  of  murder  of  her  husband  in  case  FIR  No.  63/18,  dated  22.02.2018,  U/s 

302/365/34,  P.S  Lohi  Bher,  Islamabad  and  is  presently  in  judicial  custody  at  Adyala  Jail 

Rawalpindi, whereas her minor daughter namely Umme Hani aged about 10 months at that time 

was snatched by respondents No.2 & 3 (police officials) and handed over the same to the Nasir 

Raza/respondent No.4 (complainant of the case). 

3. 

Notice  was  issued  to  the  respondents  side  as  well  as  to  jail  authorities  to  produce  the 

petitioner  before  this  Court,  in  compliance  whereof,  Nasir  Raza/respondent  No.4  appeared  in 

person  before  this  Court  on  28.05.2018  and  requested  for  some  time  to  engage  services  of  a 

counsel. 

The 

request  was 

allowed 

alongwith 

the 

direction 

to 

produce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

the minor Umme Hani before this Court for today i.e. 30.05.2018. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

4. 

Learned counsel for petitioner contends that Mst. Saima Bibi/petitioner is the real mother 

of  Umme  Hani  and  no  one  else  can  lookafter  the  minor  better  than  the  mother.  He  further 

contends  that  petitioner  could  not  be  deprived  of  the  right  of  Hazanat  of  the  minor,  who  is  a 

suckling baby and in the light of principles laid down in the Holy Quran, the minor could only be 

retained  by  the  mother.  He  further  contends  that  Rule  326  of  the  Pakistan  Prisons  Code  

(Jail  Manual)  empowers  the  mother  (Women  Prisoners)  to  keep  their  children  with  them  in 

prison till attaining the age of six years. 

5. 

Conversely, 

learned  counsel  respondent  No.4  and  Mst.  Javaria  contend 

that 

petitioner/Mst.  Saima  Bibi  is  an  accused  in  case  FIR  No.  63/18,  dated  22.02.2018,  U/s 

302/365/34,  P.S  Lohi  Bher,  Islamabad.  He  further  contends  that  petitioner  has  been  arrayed  as 

accused in the murder of her own husband namely Raja Yasir Murtaza and she has confessed the 

crime  while  recording  her  statement  U/s  164  Cr.P.C  before  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  and 

Investigation Officer has finally submitted a report U/s 173 Cr.P.C against the petitioner, who is 

facing the trial of the said criminal case. He further contends that minor is in proper custody of 

Nasir  Raza/respondent  No.4,  whereby  respondent  No.4  while  appearing  before  this  Court 

contends that minor Umme Hani is with Mst. Javaria Paternal Aunt 

)
یھپوھپ
(

 of the minor, who is 

wife of Nasir Raza/respondent No. 4. He further contends that environment of jail is not suitable 

for the minor and the learned Additional Sessions Judge (East), Islamabad has rightly dismissed 

the petition of the petitioner while  considering the background of the case. Mst. Javaria  is also 

present before the Court alongwith minor. 

6. 

7. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

From the perusal of record, it has been observed that petitioner/Mst. Saima Bibi is facing 

trial in case FIR No. 63/18, dated 22.02.2018, U/s 302/365/34, P.S Lohi Bher, Islamabad against 

allegation  of  murder  of  her  husband  Raja  Yasir  Murtaza  and  she  filed  petition  U/s  491  Cr.P.C 

before learned Additional Sessions Judge (East), Islamabad to recover her minor daughter Umme 

Hani  aged  about  10  months,  born  on  26th  April,  2017  as  provided  in  the  birth  registration 

certificate,  issued  by  the  Union  Council  (Tumair),  Islamabad,  the  said  minor  was  allegedly 

snatched  by  respondents  No.  2  &  3  (police  officials)  and  handed  over  the  same  to  Nasir 

Raza/respondent  No.4  at the  time  of  investigation  of  the  criminal  case,  although  at  present  the 

minor Umme Hani  is with the Mst. Javaria Paternal  Aunt 

)یھپوھپ   of the  minor, who is wife of 

(

respondent No. 4. 

3 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

8. 

On  the  direction  of  the  Court,  the  minor/  Umme  Hani  has  been  produced  by  Nasir 

Raza/respondent  No.4  as  well  as  by  Mst.  Javaria  in  Court  today  i.e.  30.05.2018,  whereas 

petitioner/Mst. Saima Bibi was also produced by the jail authorities. It has further been observed 

that minor  is suckling  baby, who requires the  special attention and care of the  mother and  it  is 

settled proposition that there is no substitute of real mother, but in these peculiar circumstances, 

the respondents side  has argued their case on the strength that present petitioner  is  murderer of 

the  father  of  minor  and  as  such  she  is  not  entitled  for  the  custody  of  minor  in  any  situation. 

Learned counsel for respondent No. 4 further contends that petitioner herself acknowledged the 

commission  of  murder  of  her  husband  while  recording  her  statement  U/s  164  Cr.P.C  before 

learned Judicial Magistrate and is in league with the other co-accused in the said criminal case. 

He  further  contends  that  petitioner  has  disentitled  her  for  the  custody  of  minor  and  even  both 

Nasir Raza and his wife Mst. Javaria has filed guardian petition titled “Raja Muhammad Nasir 

etc.  VS  Public  At  Large  etc.”  before  learned  Guardian  Court,  Islamabad.  He  further  contends 

that  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (East),  Islamabad  while  deciding  the  petition  U/s  491 

Cr.P.C has rightly observed the reasons and considering the welfare of the minor dismissed the 

petition which further confirms the custody of Mst. Javaria and Nasir Raza. 

9. 

I have considered each and every aspect of the case and gone through the relevant rules 

dealing with the Women Prisoners and children under Pakistan Prison Code (Jail Manual), which 

are reproduced as under:- 

Children to be allowed to remain with their mothers. 

Rule 326 

Women  prisoners  shall  be  allowed  to  keep  their  children  with  them  in 

prison till they attain the age of three years. 

Amendment for the Punjab, Sindh and NWFP Provinces: 

Children with mothers 

Rule 326 

Women  prisoners  shall  be  allowed  to  keep  their  children  with  them  in 

prison till they attain the age of “six” years.   

Amendment for Sindh Province Only      

In  rule  326,  for  the  words  “three  years”  the  words  “six  years”  shall  be 

substituted. 

Cases in which a child cannot be kept in a prison 

    
 
 
 
 
4 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

Rule 327         

No woman prisoner shall be allowed to keep a child who is over the age of 

three  years.  On  a  child  becoming  disqualified  for  further  retention  or 

when  a  woman  prisoner  dies  or  is  executed  and  leaves,  a  child,  the 

Superintendent  shall  inform  the  [District  Coordination  Officer]  of  the 

place  where  the  prisoner  resided  and  the  latter  shall  arrange  for  the 

proper care of the child. Should the relatives or friends of the prisoner be 

unable  or  unwilling  to  support  the  child,  the  [District  Coordination 

Officer)  shall  arrange  for  the  removal  of  the  child  to  healthy  nursery 

surroundings  through  the  special  societies  managing  such  institutes.  The 

child shall be returned to the mother on release provided she is ready and 

also capable to look after it. 

(ii) 

If  the  child  is  a  girl  who  has  attained  the  age  of  puberty  and  the 

relatives are unable or unwilling to support and take care of the girl, the 

Sessions Judge of the District Shall, with the help of any welfare society or 

individual, arrange for her marriage. 

Diet and clothing for children 

Rule 328    

Children  in  prison  shall  be  provided  with  such  clothing  as  the 

Superintendent may prescribe in writing. The scale of the diet for children 

is prescribed in rules pertaining to dietary.    

10. 

The above referred rules clearly permits the women prisoners to keep their children with 

them in prison till attaining the age of six years and as such the minor is presently 13 months old 

and is a suckling baby and requires special care of the real mother. Even otherwise I am guided 

by the verse 233 of Sureh Baqarah, whereby translation of Quranic injunction has been provided 

which are reproduced as under:- 

 نےپلا ھدود روا ،ہےچا 

نکر یرپو تمد کی نےپلا ھدود جو ہے لئے کے سا )حکم( یہ ئیںپلا ھدود 

ت سر

 ب ود ےرپو کو ںبچو پنےا ئیںما روا

 [233]

 کے سا کو ںما نہ )روا( ،ئےجا ید نہ تکلیف

کر ھر

 ب سے 

قطا کی سا کو نجا کسی ،ہے مزلا پر پا

 ن کے بچے بقمطا کے رستود پہننا روا 

نکھا کا ںؤما لیاو

 ۔ہلبقرا ۃرسو ۔ نالقرا 

 یمند ضار ہمیا

 ن ں

نوود پا

 ن ںما گرا پھر ،گاہو ئدعا حکم یہی بھی پر ںثوراو روا ،سے 

 س کے دلاوا کی سا کو پا

 ن نہ روا ئےجا ا

 نپہنچا ننقصا 

عا

 ن کے بچے

ب ہو ھتے ر ہدارا کا نےالوا ھدود )سے یہاد( کو دلاوا نی ا م  گرا پھر روا ،

نہیں ہا

گ ئیکو پر نا تو ہیںچا ا

ناچھڑ ھدود )ہی پہلے سے سر

 ب ود( سے ےرمشو روا

 ﷲ سےا

ا ہو تےکر م  کچھ جو بیشک کہ لو نجا یہ روا ہور تےرڈ سے

 ﷲ

ا روا ،ود کر ادا نہیںا ہو یتےد بقمطا کے رستود م  جو کہ 

 ج نہیں ہا

گ ئیکو پر م  بھی

،ہے لااو یکھنےد بخو

 
 
   
 
 
ا
 
ک
 
ک
ک
ا
 
 
 
ث
 
 
 
 
ک
 
 
 
 
5 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

Similarly, another authoritative decision rendered by the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) in 

his lifetime also provided me a deep insight of the proposition. The relevant  Hadith recorded in 

Sahee Muslim Sharif on serial No. 4432 is as under:- 

 کیا ا

نز روا پر نجا نی ا کیا ظلم نے میں !

ؐللہا لسور 

 ن لگے کہنے روا سا

 ن کے

 ﷺ

 للہا لسور بجنا

 ئےٓا

 ؓسلما لکما

 بن عزما ہے 

 باور سے

 ہؓ

 ب تحضر
 یر

مسلم صحیح 

 کو نا نے پٓا ۔کیا ا

نز نے میں !للہا لسورا

 ن لگے کہنے روا ئےٓا پھر ہو

 تو اہو ند

ا  

سرود 

 ج 

 ند

 پھیر کو

 نا نے پٓا یںکر کا

 ن کو مجھ پٓا کہ ںہو ہتاچا میں

 رفتو کچھ تو ہم کہا نے ںنھوا ؟یکھید تا

 ن ئیکو نے م  روا ہے رفتو کچھ میں عقل کی نا ا

 ناکر فتا

 نرد روا بھیجا کو

 کسی سا

 ن کے مقو کی نا کے سا بعد ۔ا

 ند پھیر

 ںنھوا

 ناکر  

 فتا

 نرد یہی 

 روا بھیجا پھر سا

 ن کے مقو کی نا نے پٓا ئےٓا

 ؓعزما را

 ن یتیسر پھر

۔ہیں 

 سمجھتے ہم

ت ںجہا ہے چھیا عقل کی نا

 نتےجا نہیں روا

 نکہلاحا کیجئے کا

 ن کو مجھ ہے کیا 

نز نے 

 میں کہا یہی نے ںنھوا روا( ئےٓا ہو را

 ن تھیچو 

 ج ۔ہے رفتو

 کچھ میں عقل کی نا نہ نہیں یربیما ئیکو کو نا کہا نے

 بعد کے سا گئے کئے جمر ہو 

 ن

د

 حکم پھر 

 ناوکھد

 لئے کے نا

 ھار

گ 

 تا نے پٓا تو )

ہو نہ لقبو بہتو 

 ی
ا کہ اہو 

ک کو 

 ن 
ؓعزما گر  تھی کتی ہو کیا

بہتو سےبھی

 ںکیو مجھے پٓا

ؐللہا لسور 

 ن کہا نے سا

اہو ند اسرود 

 ج 

 ند پھیر کو سا نے پٓا

کیجئے کا

 ن کو مجھ کیا 

نز نے میں للہا لسورا

 ن لگی کہنے روا ئیٓا ترعو کی مدغا

 نہیں تو گرا چھاا 

 نمار

ف نے پٓا )ہے ک کیا میں 

نز با تو( ںہو ملہحا تو میں کی اد

خ

قسم تھا 

 ناپھر کو

ؓعزما جیسے ہیں ہتےچا 

نا پھر یسےا پٓا 

 یا
ا ہیں تےا

نلو

 نے پٓا ئیلا کر لپیٹ میں ےکپڑ 

 تا کو بچہ

 تو جنی ہو 

 ج ۔ا

نٓا بعد کے

جننےجا تو )ہے ہتیچا ہی اسز کی نیاد بلکہ ہتیچا نہیں 

نہو کا

 ن کےکر بہتو روا( ٹتیلو

 بھی بعد کے جننے گے یںکر نہ جمر کو ترعو کہ ہے لقو یہی کا

ؒقحٰس
ا رو

ؒحمدا روا
ا 

ؒفعیا

ا( 

ٓا تو چھٹے ھدود کا سا 

 ج پلا ھدود کو سا جا با

جنا نے تو

 کو سیا

 نمار
ف  

 ھٹا ھدود کا سا 

 ج )گے یںکر جمر ہی جنتے 

 تدر

ب کے 

ؒلکما روا 

ؒحنفیہ بوا مماا روا گے یںکر رنتظاا 

 ھدود نہرو ہو نہ بستوبند کا ھدود 

ت 

 ج

ٹھ چ
ن
ت ے

 پٓا ۔ہے لگا نےکھا ا

نکھا یہ روا ا

 ند ا

چھڑ ھدود کا سا نے میں کے

للہا

 نبی ےا لگی نےکر ضعر روا

تھا اٹکڑ 

 تا کا

یور میں ھ ات کے سا ئیٓا ر  ے  

کو بچے ہو تو

 بن لدخا ۔کا نےکر رسنگسا کو سا

 ند حکم کو ںگولو روا 

ت 

 سی کے سا گیا ادکھو ھار

گ 

 تا روا

 ند حکم پھر 

لیے کے شروپر ا

 ند ےد کو نمسلما 

 تا بچہ ہو نے

 پٓا

ُس نے 
لیا 

ؐللہا لسور بجنا کا سا کہنا ار

 ب یہ ۔کہا ار

 ب کو سا نے لدخا ۔ار

ِ گ پر منہ کے لدخا کر ڑُا نخو تو

ارما پر سر 

کے سا روا ئےٓا کر ے  پتھر 

 تا

ؓلیدو

 پر ںگولو جو( لااو لینے لمحصو 

بجاا

ن گرا کہ ہے کی بہتو یسیا نے سا ہے نجا یمیر میں ھ ات کے جس کی سا قسم کہو 

م یساا !لدخا

ےا رادخبر 

 نمار

ف نے

 ہے میں 

 بحد یسرود نکہلاحا

ئےجا (

 ند بخش بھی ہا

گ کا سا تو ےکر بہتو یسیا )ہے 

نستا کو ںمسکینو روا ہے ا

نہورفتاگر میں دلعباا قحقو روا ہے 

نکر ظلم

۔گئی کی فند ہو روا گئی ھیپڑ زنما پر سا نے

 پٓا

کیا حکم پھر ۔)گا ئےجا نہ میں 

 ج شخص یساا کہ

11. 

The above referred Islamic injunctions clearly reflect that feeding the suckling baby is of 

great importance and sentence can be postponed while the child is being feed by his/her mother 

and  the  child  cannot  be  deprived  of  this  right  if  his  mother  is  available  and  willing  to  feed  the 

child.  Similarly  the  said  authoritative  directions  of  Quran  have  been  explained  in  Hadiths  of 

Muslim  Sharif,  in  which  Prophet  Hazrat  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  has  suspended  the  sentence  of 

rejam till the minor started eating by himself/herself. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
د
ک
  
ا
 
 
ا
 
 
ک
 
  
ا
ا
 
 
ا
ث
د
 
 
ا
ا
ا
 
 
 
ا
 
 
ا
 
 
ا
 
د
ث
 
 
ا
 
ا
 
ا
 
 
ا
 
 
 
 
ا
 
 
 
 
ث
 
 
 
  
 
 
ک
 
 
ک
 
 
  
 
 
 
ا
 
 
ا
ک
 
 
 
 
 
 
ُ
ُ
 
 
 
ا
 
 
ر
 
 
 
ک
 
ا
 
ا
ک
ک
ا
ک
ث
ک
 
   
 
 
6 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

12. 

The above referred position of Quran and Sunnah persuaded the lawmakers to protect the 

minor  and  the  child  as  referred  in  Rule  326  to  328,  in  which  State  has  to  provide  the  diet  and 

clothing  for  the  children  in  every  manner  in  all  situations.  Even  otherwise  the  constitutional 

provisions  of  Article  35  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  imposed 

obligation upon the State in the following manner:- 

“The State shall protect the marriage, the family, the mother and the child.”  

13. 

In view of above constitutional provision, the State is responsible to provide every basic 

need to the minor and the mother, whether they are in judicial custody or otherwise.  

14. 

I  have  gone  through  the  impugned  judgment  of  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge 

(East), Islamabad, whereby application U/s 491 Cr.P.C filed by the petitioner has been dismissed 

on the  basis  of  alleged  involvement of  the  petitioner  in  case  FIR  No.  63/18,  dated  22.02.2018, 

U/s  302/365/34,  P.S  Lohi  Bher,  Islamabad  while  considering  the  statement  U/s  164  Cr.P.C 

recorded  by  the  petitioner  before  learned  Judicial  Magistrate,  whereas  in  my  humble  view  the 

fact of the statement recorded U/s 164 Cr.P.C as well as allegation of murder is yet to be proved 

by the learned Trial Court and as such the minor could not be given to any person, who is not in 

a  prohibitory  degree  with  reference  to  child  (Umme  Hani),  especially  when  respondent  No.4/ 

complainant of the said criminal case  is the cousin of deceased  having no relationship with the 

petitioner, however, at this stage respondent No.4 has taken the stance that minor is in custody of 

Mst. Javaria Paternal Aunt (یھپوھپ) of the minor, but in my humble view the Mahommedan Law 

clearly  carved  out  the  situation,  which  deals  with  such  kind  of  eventuality  where  mother  is 

handicapped due to certain disabilities in such like situation or where natural guardian are absent 

or when none of them are qualified or willing to take the charge of  minor, the custody of child 

devolves  on  the  Court,  who  should  place  the  infant  in  care  of  trustworthy  person,  however,  in 

these  circumstances,  the order of  preference  provided  under  Personal  Law  in  Hanafi  School  of 

thought  (referred  in  Mahommedan  Law  compiled  by  Ameer  Ali  Syed  Ch-V,  the  custody  of 

children Al-Hizanat) is as under:-   

According  to  the  Hanafis,  the  order  runs  thus  (1)  the  mother.  (2)  the 

mother’s  mother  how  remote  so  ever;  (3)  then  the  father’s  mother  how 

high so ever; (4) then the grandfather’s mother how high so ever; (5) full 

sister;  (6)  uterine  sister;  (7)  full  sister’s  daughter;  (8)  uterine  sister’s 

daughter;  (9)  consanguine  sister;  (10)  full  maternal  aunt;  (11)  uterine 

maternal aunt; (12) consanguine maternal aunt; (13) consanguine sister’s 

 
 
 
7 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

daughter;  (14)  brother’s  daughter;  (15)  full  paternal  aunt;  (16)  uterine 

paternal  aunt;  (17)  consanguine  paternal  aunt;  (18)  mother’s  maternal 

aunt of the full blood; (19) mother’s uterine  maternal aunt; (20) then the 

consanguine;  (21)  father’s  maternal  aunt  of  the  full  blood;  (22)  uterine; 

(23)  consanguine;  (24)  mother’s  paternal  aunt  of  the  full  blood;  (25) 

uterine; (26) consanguine; father’s father’s sisters. The general principle 

upon which the right is founded, is common to both the schools, viz., that 

“the  custody  of  an  infant  belongs  by  right  to  the mother’s  relations,  and 

those  connected  through  her  (that  is,  uterine  relations)  are  preferred  to 

those  connected  with  the  child  on  the  father’s  side  only  (that  is,  the 

consanguine relations).”    

According  to  the  Hanafis,  if  there  be  no  female  relations,  or  if  none  of 

them be legally qualified to exercise the right, it passes (a) to the father; 

(b)  failing  him,  to  the  paternal  grandfather;  (c)  to  the  lineal  male 

ascendant to the third degree, or still higher; (d) to the full brother; (e) to 

the consanguine brother; (f) to the brother’s son’ (h) full paternal uncle; 

(i) to the half-paternal uncle on the father’s side, and (j) to the son of the 

paternal uncle in the same order. Among these relations, also, the nearer 

always excludes the more remote.      

15. 

It is trite law that in matter pertaining to custody of minors of tender age, the High Court 

is empowered to issue directions in the nature of habeas corpus U/s 491 Cr.P.C, if the custody of 

the minor was illegally or improperly disturbed. Section 491 Cr.P.C provides a more efficacious, 

speedy  and  appropriate  remedy  in  a  case  of  illegal  or  improper  custody  of  minor  and  the  High 

Court  can  pass  an  order  regarding  the temporary  custody  without  prejudice  to the  rights  of the 

parties  for  final  determination  of  the  dispute  pertaining  to  the  custody  of  the  minor  by  the 

Guardians  and  Wards  Court.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  (2004  SCMR  990  titled  “Mst.  Shahista 

Naz VS Muhammad Naeem Ahmed and another”).  

16. 

 While considering the above ratio, the respondents have filed the Guardian petition titled 

“Raja  Muhammad  Nasir  etc.  VS  Public  At  Large  etc.”,  which  is  presently  pending  before 

Guardian Court (East), Islamabad, the said petition was also filed before learned Guardian  Court 

on 09.05.2018, but this Court shall not go into the disputed question of facts for determination of 

eligibility of guardianship in terms of Section 17 read with 7 of Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 

as  it  will  affect  the  either  party’s  case  before  the  Guardian  Court.  However,  at  this  stage, 

paramount, importance and significance of right of suckling child has  to be seen  in the  light of 

principle of welfare of minor under Quranic injunctions, Hadiths and the law. 

 
8 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

17. 

There  is  no  disqualification  attached  to  the  real  mother  at  this  stage  except  that  she  is 

facing  the  murder  trial  and  as  such  no  Court  has  yet  decided  the  murder  case  nor  question  of 

welfare of minor, therefore, while considering the law on the subject and circumstances brought 

before the Court, I am of the considered view that petitioner is eligible person to take the custody 

of minor Umme Hani, who is presently with Mst. Javaria Paternal Aunt (یھپوھپ) and respondent 

No.  4,  although  they  have  their  own  four  children  to  feed,  therefore,  in  these  peculiar 

circumstances,  I  am  fortified  with  the  Quranic  injunctions,  Hadith  and  law  on  the  subject  and 

while  exercising  the  powers  under  constitutional  mandate  provided  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read with powers U/s 491 Cr.P.C to pass such 

directions to the respondents, who are holding the custody of Umme Hani  in  an  improper way, 

even otherwise, Rule 328 of the Pakistan Prisons  Code (Jail Manual)  imposes the obligation to 

the State to provide the basic necessities to the minors in terms of mandate of Article 35 of the 

Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  therefore,  the  order  passed  by  the  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  whereby  application  U/s  491  Cr.P.C  filed  by  real 

mother/petitioner  was  dismissed  is  hereby  set-aside  and  the  petition  U/s  491  Cr.P.C  is  allowed 

while exercising the extraordinary jurisdiction available to this Court to protect the interest of the 

minor at this stage. The Guardian Petition filed by the respondent No.4 and his wife is pending 

before  learned  Guardian  Court,  Islamabad,  therefore,  learned  Guardian  Judge  seized  with  the 

matter is directed to decide the same within a period of two (02) months in accordance with law 

and  as  such  this  Court  is  persuaded  while  considering  the  law  as  well  as  tender  age  of  minor 

Umme  Hani,  who  is  suckling  baby  requires  the  mother  feed  as  well  as  love  and  affection  of 

mother, therefore, instant writ petition is allowed. 

18. 

These are the reasons of short order dated 30.05.2018, which is reproduced as under:- 

“For  the  reasons  to  be  recorded  later  on,  the  instant  writ  petition  is 

allowed,  order  dated  14.05.2018,  passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge (East), Islamabad is hereby set-aside and minor Umme Hani aged 

about  12  months  approximately  (daughter)  of  the  petitioner/Mst.  Saima 

Bibi has been handed over to the petitioner and she is allowed to take the 

minor alongwith her to Central Jail Adayala Rawalpindi.  

2. 

In  view  of  above,  Superintendent  Adayala  Jail  Rawalpindi  is 

directed  to  register  Umme  Hani  (minor)  in  the  jail  record  as  per  law 

alongwith petitioner Mst. Saima Bibi (mother), who is under trial prisoner 

in case FIR No. 63/18, dated 22.02.2018, U/s 302/365/34, P.S Lohi Bher, 

9 

W.P No. 2057/2018 

Islamabad  and  she  is  allowed  to  retain  the  custody  of  the  minor  Umme 

Hani with her.  

(Copy Dasti)” 

19. 

Office  is  directed  to  send  the  copy  of  this  judgment  to  the  Superintendent  Adyala  Jail 

Rawalpindi as well as to the Judge Guardian Court for necessary action.       

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
                   JUDGE 

Approved for reporting.  

Ramzan 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
