ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl.  Misc. No.606/B/2019. 

Ali Haider 

VS

The State etc. 

S.No.  of 
order/ 
proceedinzs 

Date  of  order/  Order with  signature  of Judge  and  that of parties  or counsel 
Proceedings 

where  necessary. 

21.10.2019.  Mr. Ali Hussain Bhatti, Advocate for the petitioner. 

Mr. Farid Hussain Kaif, State Counsel. 
Rao Sabir Hussain, Advocate for respondent No.2. 
SP Omer Khan, DSP Khalid Mehmood Awan, Iqbal Gujjar SJ, 
Malik Mumtaz SJ and Safdar ASI. 

Through  instant  petition,  the  petitioner  has  prayed  for  his 

post arrest bail in case FIR No.435, dated 03.09.2019, U/S 365-B 

PPC, P .S  Golra Sharif, Islamabad. 

2.  Brief  facts  as  referred  in  this  case  registered  on  the 

complaint  of respondent  No.2/ Amna  Bibi  are  that  her  daughter 

namely Nadia aged 17 /18 years gone to her daily routine work on 

02.09.2019  and  when  she  did  not  come  back,  she  received  a 

telephone  call  from  two  unknown  numbers,  who  extended  life 

threats  and  it  has  been  alleged  that  her  daughter  has  been 

kidnapped for the purpose of Zina. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  the 

petitioner is innocent and has falsely been implicated in this case; 

that  as  per  medical  evidence  no  mark  of  violence  has  been 

observed  by the  doctor on the  body of the  alleged  abductee and 

even no rape has been committed with the alleged abductee; that 

sixteen (16) cases of different nature have been registered against 

the  family  of complainant,  which  shows  their  state  of mind  to 

2 

Crl. Misc. No.606-8/2019. 

involve  the  petitioner  without  any  basis;  that  the  doctor  has 

neither taken  into possession the  last worn  clothes  of the  victim 

nor there is any chemical examiner report, through which it could 

be  verified  that  rape  has  been  committed  with  the  alleged 

abductee; that DNA test report has not yet been received and the 

LO has declared the petitioner  innocent in his  investigation; that 

statement  U/S  164,  Cr.P.C  recorded  by  the  Judicial  Magistrate 

has  to  be  appreciated  at  the  time  of  trial  as  such  there  is  no 

corroborative evidence to link the petitioner with the crime. 

4.  Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned 

counsel for respondent No.2 contends that the petitioner has been 

nominated in the instant case with specific role of commission of 

Zina  with the  alleged  abductee  and  as  such the  petitioner  is not 

entitled for concession of bail. 

5. 

6. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal of record reveals  that  the petitioner  has nominated 

as  accused  in case  FIR  No.435,  dated  03.09.2019,  U/S  365-B 

PPC,  P.S  Golra  Sharif,  Islamabad  through  supplementary 

statement  of  alleged  abductee  Nadia  Bibi,  who  has  been 

abducted  and  raped  by  the  petitioner  and  other  co-accused 

persons.  The  tentative  assessment  of  the  record  reveals  that 

respondent  No.2/complainant/ Amna  Bibi  lodged  the  FIR  with 

the  allegations  that  her  daughter  Nadia  Bibil  aged  17/18 years 

was  got  missing  on  02.09.2019,  when  she  went  to  her  daily 

routine  work.  The  alleged  abductee  was 

recovered  on 

06.09.2019,  who  reached  at  Police  Station  and  recorded  her 

statement  in  which  she did  not  nominate  any  individual  except 

four  un-known  persons,  who  have  committed  Zina  with  her, 

3 

Cr!. Misc. No.606~B/2019. 

however,  on  07.09.2019,  she nominated  Nisar,  Iftikhar,  one un- 

known person  and Ali Haider present  petitioner  in her statement 

recorded U/S  164, Cr.P.C as well  as in her  statement before the 

1.0,  however,  the  medical  report  is  silent  qua  any  mark  of 

violence.  The  sample  for  the  purpose  of  DNA  has  been  taken, 

however, the  result  has  not  yet  been  received.  The  statement of 

.,r;, 

alleged abductee reveal~role  of the present  petitioner  as well as 

others, even she has stated in categorical terms that the 1.0 took 

her  to  the  market  and  got  new  clothes  for  her,  which  were 

changed  in  the  car  of  the  police  inspector  and  stained  clothes 

were  removed.  This  Court  called  SP  Investigation  as  well  as 

concerned  doctor  alongwith  1.0, which  further  substantiate that 

Iqbal  Gujjar,  S.I  has  not  investigated  the  matter  in  proper 

manner, even he retained the alleged abductee with some lady for 

two  days,  thereafter  the  alleged  abductee  has  been  produced  in 

Police  Station and  later on in the  hospital  for  medical, even the 

doctor Nasreen Butt did not take notice of clothes of the alleged 

abductee  neither  she  asked about  the  clothes  for  the  purpose  of 

evidence  and  as  such  the  1.0  and  one  of  the  alleged  S.I  have 

misused their authority, which is apparent on record. 

7. 

The  entire  background  reveals  that  the  petitioner 

is 

involved  in  the  hideous  crime  and  the  police  officials  have 

separately  been  inquired  by  the  SP  Investigation,  who  has 

highlighted roles of the  police officials, who  remained negligent 

and inefficient during the investigation process. Therefore, at this 

stage  DNA  report  has  not  yet  been  received.  The  tentative 

assessment  of the  record  connects the  petitioner  with the  crime, 

which  otherwise  falls  within  prohibitory  clause  of  section  497, 

4 

Crl. Misc.  No.606-B/2019. 

Cr.P.C.  Prima  facie  the  petitioner  is  well  connected  with  the 

alleged crime. 

8. 

For what has been discussed above,  instant post  arrest bail 

petition is dismissed. 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR 7y ANI) 

JUDGE 

R.Anjam 

