Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.2939/2020 

Rana Muhammad Arshad 
VS
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  
03 

Date of order/ 
proceedings  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

03-11-2020  Mr  Muhammad  Sajid  Khan  Tanoli,  Mr  M.  Aftab 
Alam, Mr Usman Warraich, Mr Khateeb Hussain, 
Mr Faheem Ahmed, Mr M.  Haider Imtiaz and Mr 
Babar Hayat Samor, Advocates for the petitioner.  
Syed Muhammad Tayyab, Dy. Attorney General. 
Mr Qaiser Masood, Additional Director, FIA. 
Sh. Amer Sohail Anjum, A.D. (Legal), FIA. 
Mr M. Ayaz Mahar, A.D./I.O., FIA.  

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.- 

"If  liberty  means  anything  at  all,  it 

means  the  right  to  tell  people  what  they  do 

not want to hear" 

George Orwell  

The petitioner is a journalist and one of the 

most important functions of his occupation is reporting 

and  informing  the  public  regarding  matters  of  public 

importance.  He  was  summoned  by  the  Federal 

Investigating  Agency  (hereinafter  referred  to  the 

'Agency'),  which  served  him  an  undated  notice.  The 

notice  did  not  disclose  the  purpose  for  which  he  had 

been summoned. The latter alleges that officials of the 

Agency  had  also  raided  his  house  with  the  intent  to 

arrest  him  in  retaliation  for  his  critical  reporting.  The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 2 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

petitioner, through the instant petition, has invoked the 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Constitution”), 

challenging  the  notice  and  the  alleged  actions  of  the 

officials of the Agency pursuant thereto.  

2. 

The Investigation Officer who had served the 

notice  and  had  allegedly  raided  the  house  of  the 

petitioner  has  appeared  today  and  has  submitted  a 

written report. He has informed that he had visited the 

house of the petitioner solely to verify the address. He 

has 

further  stated 

that,  during 

the  course  of 

investigation,  no  incriminating  material  whatsoever 

could be collected against the petitioner. In response to 

the query of this Court, he explained that the petitioner 

was summoned because the cellular number mentioned 

in  the  complaint  was  registered  in  his  name.  He  could 

not give a plausible explanation for sending the undated 

notice or failure to disclose the purpose for summoning 

the  petitioner. The  Investigating  Officer could  also  not 

satisfy this Court regarding any evidence amounting to 

the  commission  of  an  offence  under  the  Prevention  of 

Electronic  Crimes  Act  2016  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  "PECA  2016")  which  authorized  the  Agency  to 

proceed with such haste and recklessness and which had 

obviously caused harassment and intimidation, not only 

to  the  petitioner  but  his  family  members  as  well.  The 

 
 
 
 
Page - 3 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

explanation that the house of the petitioner was visited 

merely to verify the address is not persuasive because 

the undated notice had been sent to the same address.      

3. 

The  learned  counsel,  who  has  appeared  on 

behalf  of  the  petitioner,  has  argued  that  the  undated 

impugned  notice  had  caused  unnecessary  harassment 

to  the  latter.  He  has  argued  that  it  is  a  statutory 

obligation  of  the  Federal  Investigation  Agency  and  its 

officials  to  disclose  in  the  notice  itself  the  purpose  for 

which a person is being summoned. There is no cavil to 

the  proposition  that  the  Federal  Investigation  Agency, 

or  any  other  entity  empowered  to  investigate  criminal 

offences,  is  obligated  to  disclose  sufficient  information 

in the notice so that the person knows the purpose for 

being summoned.  

4. 

The august Supreme Court, in the case titled 

"Dr Arsalan Iftikhar VS Malik Riaz Hussain and others", 

[PLD 2012 Supreme Court 903], while interpreting the 

provisions 

of 

the 

National 

Accountability 

Ordinance,1999 has observed and held as follows:- 

"The  clear  and  unambiguous  pronouncements 

given in the case titled Ghulam Hussain Baloch 

and 

another 

v. 

Chairman, 

National 

Accountability  Bureau  Islamabad  and  2  others 

(PLD 2007  Karachi  469)  were  violated  by  NAB 

in its two letters. In the cited precedent NAB has 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 4 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

been  given  express  guidelines  as  to 

its 

responsibilities  while  summoning  or  requiring 

the  attendance  of  persons/witnesses  in  an 

inquiry.  As  per  ratio  of  the  case,  before 

summoning  a  person  to  attend,  NAB  was  duty 

bound 

to 

identify  and  particularize 

the 

information sought from any witness etc. and to 

state the nexus between such information and 

the  subject  of  the  inquiry  being  conducted  by 

NAB. It was observed by the Court that "while 

calling  [for]  the  information  from  any  person, 

the person must be informed of the fact, point, 

allegation, offence, name of accused, specified  

matter, if any, concerning the matters ... in the 

notice  so  that  the    person  can  furnish  such 

information". 

5.    

It 

is  noted  that  the  above  guidelines 

regarding the responsibilities of an investigating officer 

while  summoning  a  person  would  also  be  attracted 

incase of proceedings relating to criminal offences dealt 

with  by 

the  Agency.  The  officials,  particularly 

investigating  officers  of 

the  Agency,  are  public 

functionaries  vested  with  expansive  powers 

to 

investigate and inquire into criminal offences. It is their 

duty to ensure that their actions are not in breach of the 

essential and elementary principles of fairness. It is their 

obligation to exercise coercive powers in such mode and 

 
 
 
 
Page - 5 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

manner  that  does  not  appear  to  be  arbitrary  nor  that 

powers are being used recklessly for other than bonafide 

purposes. The august Supreme Court, in the case titled 

“Adeel ur Rehman and others VS Federation of Pakistan 

and  others”  [2005  SCMR  1],  has  observed  that  public 

functionaries  disobey  the  command  of  the  law  when 

they exercise powers in derogation to the direction and 

intent of the law. Like any other public functionary, the 

officials of the Agency are obligated to act justly, fairly, 

equitably  and  reasonably.  Their  actions  ought  to  be 

within the mandate of law and must demonstrably show 

lack  of  the  elements  of  discrimination,  partiality  or 

malafide.  

6. 

There is another crucial aspect of the case in 

hand  i.e. the petitioners occupation. As a journalist, it 

is  his  professional 

function  to  report 

facts  and 

disseminate  opinions  for  the  information  of  the  public. 

The  reporting  by  an  independent  and  professional 

journalist could invariably be critical of or perceived to 

be such by the state functionaries or other powers to be. 

It  is  the  case  of  the  petitioner  that  the  Agency  had 

recklessly  exercised  its  powers  in  an  attempt  to  deter 

him  from  performing  his  functions  as  a  journalist 

without fear or favour. Such an apprehension or fear in 

the mind of a person who is engaged in the occupation 

of  reporting  and  dissemination  of  information  to  the 

public  not  only  undermines  the  independence  of  the 

 
 
 
 
Page - 6 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

occupation but is intolerable in a society governed under 

a Constitution. Freedom of speech and expression is the 

most  cherished  human  right  and  fortifies  the  other 

constitutionally guaranteed rights.  

7. 

Article  19  of  the  Constitution  guarantees  to 

every  citizen  the  right  to  freedom  of  speech  and 

expression  and  the  framers  have explicitly  guaranteed 

that there shall be 'freedom of the press'. Article 19 A 

makes  it  a  constitutional  right  to  have  access  to 

information  in  all  matters  of  public  importance.  Both 

these  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  are  not 

absolute  but  are  subject  to  the  exceptions  clearly 

described in the respective Articles.  When these rights 

are denied to the people, or are allowed to be breached 

by  state  functionaries,  then  other  constitutionally 

guaranteed  rights  are  also  profoundly  affected.    The 

august Supreme Court, in the case titled ”Syed Mansoor 

Ahsan  and  others  VS  Ardeshir  Cowasjee  and  others” 

[PLD  1998  SC  823],  has  eloquently  highlighted  the 

significance  of  protecting  the  right  of  free  speech  and 

expression  by  declaring  it  to  be  one  of  the  pillars  of 

individual liberty and has stressed on the duty of a Court 

to  faithfully  uphold  its  sanctity  in  terms  of  the 

constitutional mandate. The function and duty of a free 

press to act as a watchdog and disseminate information 

cannot be compromised. The benefits of protecting the 

right of having a free press are infinite. Freedom of the 

 
 
 
 
Page - 7 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

press would be elusive and would become a mere farce 

if journalists lose their independence and function under 

fear of being  exposed to harm or retaliation because of 

their  reporting  and  performing  of  other  occupational 

functions. Even such a perception created by the actions 

of the agents of the state would be enough to undermine 

and violate the constitutionally guaranteed rights under 

Articles  19  and19  A  of  the  Constitution.  The  threat, 

whether  real  or  perceived,  of  direct  or  indirect 

censorship  because  of  functions  performed  by  an 

independent journalist would amount to a breach of the 

constitutionally guaranteed rights under Articles 19 and 

19 A of the Constitution. The duty of the state to protect 

the independence of the individual journalist and that of 

the  occupation  is  a  constitutional  obligation  because  it 

is an integral part of Articles 19 and 19 A.  

8. 

It  is  noted  that  it  is  an  acknowledged 

proposition  that  the  protection  of  free  press  and  free 

speech  has  a  direct  nexus  with  ensuring  economic 

stability  and  growth.  A  society  that  values  democratic 

principles and is committed to upholding the rule of law 

would  manifestly  advance  the  cause  of  protecting 

freedom  of  the  press  and  free  speech.  The  evils  of 

corruption, inequality and injustice are alien to a state 

which  demonstrably  shows  its  commitment  and  will  to 

jealously  guarding  any  attempt  of  violating  or 

undermining the freedoms enshrined under Articles 19 

 
 
 
 
Page - 8 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

and  19  A  of  the  Constitution.  Free  press  is  crucial  for 

encouraging  and  ensuring  creativity,  innovation  and 

socio  political  evolution  of  a  society.  A  society  that 

inhibits creativity and innovation  recedes to the status 

of  regression  and  morbidity.  Blocking,  inhibiting  or 

limiting  free  speech  and  thus  undermining  freedom  of 

the  press  are  hallmarks  of  regressive  states  and  are 

unacceptable in a society governed under a Constitution 

which guarantees fundamental rights. Free press is the 

key to development and progress and thus a panacea to 

evils like poverty, corruption and inequality. Freedom of 

the press ensures peace because it is the most effective 

antidote  against  violence,  aggression,  anarchy  and 

extremism.  It  serves  as  a  safety  valve  by  enabling 

citizens,  groups  and  sections  of  the  society  to  vent 

grievances, anger and frustration. A free press functions 

as  a  bulwark  against  resolution  of  disputes  through 

violent  means. 

Poverty, 

corruption, 

injustice, 

discriminatory  treatment  of  marginalized  citizens  and 

minorities,  violence  and  extremism  are  all  common 

characteristics of a repressive state that limits, restricts 

and undermines the freedom and independence of the 

press.  

9. 

It 

is 

inherent 

in 

the  constitutionally 

guaranteed  rights  under  Articles  19  and  19  A  that  no 

citizen, group or section of the society would be denied 

access to a free press. No State or society can progress 

 
 
 
 
Page - 9 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

or  rid  itself  of  evils  such  as  poverty,  corruption  and 

violence  if  its  citizens  or  members  are  unable  to 

communicate and articulate ideas without fear or threat 

of retaliation. It denies to the people an opportunity of 

meaningful  participation  in  the  society  when  the  state 

functionaries resort to intimidating the independent and 

professional journalist as retaliation for their work. The 

development of a nation and its prosperity depends on 

protecting the right of every citizen, group or section to 

have  an  equal  voice  and  thus  have  the  right  to  speak 

without fear or being intimidated. The lack of access of 

the  people  to  a  free  press  affects  the  weaker  and 

marginalized segments of the society the most because 

it empowers the elite and makes them unaccountable. 

The  most  effective  accountability  of  the  state  and  its 

powerful  elite 

is 

through  an 

independent  and 

responsible  press.  The  state  and  its  agents  cannot  be 

allowed to use power and authority to silence voices and 

to  retaliate  against  critical  reporting  or  dissent.  Only 

informed citizens having access to an independent and 

free press can ensure progress, prosperity and security 

of  the  state.  Nothing  can  inhibit  the  constitutionally 

guaranteed  right  under  Article  19  of  the  Constitution 

more than the fear of an independent journalist that he 

or she, as the case may be, could be exposed to harm 

because  of  what  the  latter  reports,  says  or  writes.  No 

one  is  above  the  law,  not  even  a  journalist,  but  if  the 

 
 
 
Page - 10 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

law is allowed to be used in a manner that has the effect 

of  intimidation  or  creates  the  perception  of  retaliation 

against reporting which may appear to be critical to the 

public functionaries then it violates the constitutionally 

guaranteed rights. In such an eventuality it becomes a 

constitutional  obligation  of 

the  state  and 

the 

government  to  assure  the  people  through  its  actions 

that they are not complacent. As a corollary, the state 

functionaries have to demonstrably show a clear will and 

commitment to protect the freedom of the press and the 

independence  of  journalists.  There  is  wisdom  in  the 

words  of  James  Madison,  the  fourth  President  of  the 

United States of America who had stated that “a popular 

Government, without popular information, or the means 

of acquiring it, is but a Prologue to a Farce or Tragedy, 

or perhaps both.”  

10.   

The reckless action of the Agency in the case 

in hand is not an exception. This constitutional Court has 

observed a surge in the filing of petitions wherein similar 

grievances have been raised. This creates a perception 

of abuse of the provisions of the PECA 2016. Either the 

provisions  are  being  misinterpreted  or  they  are  being 

invoked  in  a  reckless  manner  for  other  than  germane 

considerations. It is not only the duty of the Agency but 

the  government  as  well  to  demonstrably  dispel  any 

perception  of  abuse  of  coercive  powers  as  retaliation 

against  independent  and  free  press  and  individual 

 
 
 
Page - 11 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

journalists. In the case in hand, the apprehensions and 

fears  of  the  petitioner  for being  targeted  as retaliation 

for his work as a journalist were not misplaced because 

of the reckless and unprofessional manner in which the 

proceedings  under  the  PECA  2016  were  conducted  by 

the Agency. The proceedings definitely amounted to an 

abuse of exercising of powers under the PECA 2016. 

11.   

Keeping  in  view  the  above  discussion  and 

having  regard  to  the  paramount  public  importance  of 

protecting 

the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights, 

particularly  under  Articles  19  and  19  A  of  the 

Constitution, it is observed and directed as follows;  

i. 

The Director General of the Agency is expected 

to  formulate  guidelines  for  the  investigating 

officers,  inter  alia,  having  regard  to  the 

principles  highlighted  in  the  aforementioned 

judgment  of  the  august  Supreme  Court.  It  is 

further expected that the Agency will consider 

prescribing 

special  guidelines 

regarding 

proceedings  against  persons  engaged  in  the 

profession  of  journalism  on  account  of  the 

profound  effect  on  the  freedom  of  press  and 

independence of a journalist when the coercive 

powers are abused, giving rise to a perception 

of 

retaliation 

to  professional 

functions 

 
 
 
Page - 12 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

performed.  In  this  regard  the  Agency  may 

consult the key stake holders.   

ii. 

The Federal Government i.e. the Prime Minister 

and  members  of  the  Federal  Cabinet  are 

elected representatives of the people  and this 

Court  has  no  reason  to  doubt  their  will  and 

commitment  to  jealously  guard  against  any 

attempt to undermine the freedom of the press 

and  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  of 

the people of Pakistan whom they represent. It 

is  their  constitutional  duty  to  dispel  any 

perception  of  inhibiting,  limiting  or  restricting 

freedom of the press through abuse of coercive 

powers by the state functionaries. This Court is 

confident 

that,  as  democratically  elected 

representatives of the people, they would take 

prompt  and  effective  action  to  prevent  the 

abuse of coercive powers under the PECA 2016 

in  general  and  against 

independent  and 

responsible journalists in particular.  

iii. 

A  Bill  titled  'Protection  of  Journalist  Act  2014'  

was  tabled  before  the  lower  House  of  the 

Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament).  The  Federal 

Government  may  consider  proposing  similar 

legislation,  inter  alia,  having  the  object  of 

providing  an  effective  forum  for  redressing 

 
 
 
Page - 13 

W.P. No. 2939/2020 

complaints  of  journalists,  which  relate  to 

freedom of the press.       

iv. 

The  Federal  Government  may  also  consider 

meaningful  consultation  with  all  the  key 

stakeholders  i.e.  All  Pakistan  Newspapers 

Association,  The  Federal  Union  of  Journalists, 

the Council of Pakistan Newspapers Editors etc 

regarding  dispelling 

the  perception  of 

apprehensions and intimidation of independent 

journalists  and  abuse  of  coercive  powers  by 

public  functionaries,  particularly  in  relation  to 

exercising powers under the PECA 2016. 

12.        The petition stands accordingly disposed of. 

                         (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Saeed /* 

Approved for reporting.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
