ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT ISLAMABAD

CIAL DEPARTMENT

RFA No.1722015
Javaid Arshad
VS
TahirMehmood&2others

Appellant by:

Mr. Muhammad  Ilyas Sheikh,  Advocate.

Respondents by:

Mr. Muhammad  Aslam Chishti, Advocate
for Respondents  No.1  and  3.

Date of Hearing:

04.03.2020.

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI,  I: Through the instant  RFA,  ]avaid

Arshad  (appellant)  has assailed  the judgment  and decree  dated  11.05.2015,

passed  by Civil Judge  1st Class (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  the suit filed by the

appellant for declaration,  cancellation  of documents  and permanent  injunction

has been dismissed.

2.  Brief facts narrated by the appellant in appeal are that in the year 1990,

when he planned  to purchase  a house in Islamabad,  his younger  brother  namely

Tahir Mehmood (respondent No.1)  requested  him to arrange his emigration

abroad as he was jobless  and dependent  upon the appellant,  whereafter  the

appellant  in order to accommodate  Respondent  No.L incorporated  his name as

joint owner and benamidar  of the appellant in House  No.1,05, Street  No.88,  Sector

I-1,0, Islamabad  (suit house), which was  purchased from  one Ghazanfar  Ali by

the appellant without anything  being paid by Respondent No.L. The appellant

filed a suit on 23.09.2011,  with the prayer  to declare him as the sole owner  of suit

house and transfer of the suit house in the n.une of Respondent  No.1  as a benami

transaction and such transfer be cancelled. The suit was contested by respondent

No.1. by way of filing his written statement and took the stance that the story

narrated by appellant  is false and fabricated as the suit house was purchased  out

of remittances  made by their elder brother namely Khalid  Waheed,  who died in

t

R.f.A. No.172/2015

Page  | 2

USA in the year  1989  and a huge  sum of insurance  claim  on account  of his death

as well as life saving and pension  corunutation  of his father had been  utilized  to

purchase the suit house.  Respondent  No.1 has also denied  the factum of

incorporating  his name on the advice  of some  overseas employment promoter

for emigrating  Respondent No.1 abroad as he got his passport  issued  on

27.06.2006  and went to UK thereafter  and as such, he is not a benami owner,

rather is a genuine bona fide co-sharer of the suit house  as at present  he is

occupying a portion  of the suit house along with his family and mother. The

learned  trial Court on the basis of evidence recorded  by the parties  has dismissed

the suit of the appellant vide impugned  judgment  and decree dated  L1.05.20L5,

hence, the instant regular  first  appeal.

3. 

Learned counsel  for appellant  contended that the learned Trial  Court has

not appreciated  the evidence  in its true perspective,  especially  when all four

ingredients  of benami transaction were  justified  by the appellant  on record; that

the findings given  by the learned  Trial Court are based  upon misreading and

non-reading  of evidence, even the document  Exh.Pl was produced by the

appellant  and respondent  No.1 has acknowledged  that entire  consideration  was

paid by the appellant,  but he could not prove that remittances  of Khalid Waheed

were  transferred and utilized  for the purchase of suit house

4.  Conversely,  learned  counsel for respondents No.1 and 3 contended  that

the learned  Trial  Court has rightly  appreciated  the evidence  as agreement  to sell

Exh.D1  has been  produced  by respondent  No.L in the evidence  and he is in

possession  of one portion of the suit house and as such, minimum requirements

of benami  kansaction  have not been proved by the appellant and the suit has

rightly been dismissed  by the learned  trial Court.

5. 

Arguments  heard,  record perused.

t

No.1

2015

3

6. 

Perusal  of record  reveals that the learned Trial Court  while adjudicating

upon the counter versions  and claims of the parties  has framed  the following

nine (09) issues vide order dated 24.09.201,4.

1. Vllutlur the suit of plaintiff  is baned by ti*r, tlurefore,  same  is

liable tobe dismissed? OPD 1 A3

2. lNhetlur tlu suit of plaintiffis  bad for misjoinder  and non  joinder of

necessnry parties? OPD 1 83

3. lNlutlrcr ttu plaintiff hns no cause of action to file tlu instant  suit,

lunce his suit is liable to be dismissed? OPD  1. 83

4. tvVluther  the suit of plaintiff is false, frioolous  and  aexatious
moreoT)er,  plnintiff has concealed  tlu materinl facts from this C-ourt
and is filed to harass  the defendant  No.3,  therefore, his suit is liable
tobe dismissed?  OPD  1. A3

5. lNhether the suit house  was purchased from tlrc remittance  of
Khalid Waheed  the elder brother  of plainffi  defendant NoJ- I  3?
oPD  1. &3

6. Wlutlur tlu defendant NoJ. €t  3 are co-sharer in the possession  of

suithouse?  OPD  1, €r3

7. lNhetlur tle suitlwuse was purchasedby  tlu plaintiffin  tlu name  of
defendant  No,1 on the adaice  of some  oaerseas  employment  promoter
for sending the dcfendnnt  NoJ. to abroad?  OPP

8. lMether the plaintiff  is entitled fur the decree for declaration,

cancellation  andpermanent  injunction  as prayedfor? OPP

9. Relief.

7. 

The proposition  in hand  is based upon  the claim  of benami transaction of

the appellant as he has taken the stance that he has purchased  the suit house

from one Ghazanfar Ali, but at the time of transfer of same, he incorporated  the

rulme of respondent No.L  on1y to help him out for emigration  purposes.

8.  However,  before  going into evidence, it is necessary to go through the

minimum  requirements  of benami  transaction,  whereby word "bennmi" means

"without n name,  nameless,  or fictitious" and as such, it is used to denote  a

transaction  which  is really done by a person without using his own name, rather

the same is done in the name of another.  Reliance  is placed upon PLD  2077

lslamabad 375 (Muhammad Naanaz  os. Shahida  Perueml  and 2079 CLC  770

Lahore  (Ghulam  Haider  os. Ghulam Qadirr. Similarly,  this Court  has also  gone

through cases on the subject matter  reported  as 2005 SCMR 577 (Abilul  Maieed,

.A.No.772/2015

4

7

Muhatnrtad  A nut ar Huss ainl - 2009 cLc 324 Karachi (Chuttal  Khan Chachar  os.

Mst. Shahiila  RaniL PLD  2072 Lahore  747 (Mst, Sharifan  Bibi o. Abdul  Maieeil

Raull and 2008 CLC 887 Lahore (Ghulam Qailir os. Muhammail  Younail,

wherein the following guiding factors have been outlined  for the Court to

determine as to whether  a transaction  is a benami  one or otherwise.

o
(it
(iil
@)

(o)
(ot

source  from which purcluse  money came;
nafure and possession  of property, after  purchase;
motiae,  if any, for giaing  t-ransaction  abenami  complexion;
position  of parties  and relationship, if any, between  clnimant  and
allegedbenamidar;
custody  of title deeds after transaction;  and
conduct  of partics concerned  in dealing  with property after  sale,

9. 

In order to prove  the case of benami  transaction  on the basis  of above

mentioned  ingredients,  the appellant  appeared as PW-1 and contended that

when his father  retired in the year 1969, he started  his banking  career  in the year

1970 artd took the responsibility of his entire family and at that time respondent

No.1 was not even  admitted in Class  1. In the year 1994,  when the appellant

carne to Pakistan  after visit from USA, respondent No.1  asked  him to arrange  his

emigration and on the advice  of an overseas  employment promoter  a property

has to be purchased in the name  of respondent No.L to arrange  his immigration

abroad. The appellant further  stated that he out of his personal  bank account

savings purchased the suit house in January, 1990 from one Ghazanfar Ali

against the sale consideration  of Rs.1,000,000/-, which has nothing to do with

respondent No.1, who had already left Pakistan for England and he has no share

in the suit house. The appellant  has produced  allotment  letter  Exh.Pl, dated

25.07.7990,  property  tax receipts  Exh.P2 to P5, electricity bill Exh.P6,  sui gas bill

F;.hP7, telephone bills  Exh.P8 and Exh.P9,  bank appreciation  letter Exh.PlO and

site map of suit house Exh.P11. However, during the course of cross

examination, PW-L Javaid  Arshad/appellant  acknowledged  that Khalid Waheed

R.IF.A.  No.172/2075

I

Page | 5

r,rias settled in USA, where  he died,  and he is not aware  as to when Respondent

No.1 had left the country, but he acknowledged  about his financial status in the

following  manner:

{ th Z'v'fifr uvt -i,r t 20 I 22 $ g s vt I gg  O dv -t! ;,,3  50,t f O r,J, tgt 0 6 i? "
-7t/r *.l.d,i :t -c-{ :,h,y,! yq,,! &-,!  6,1, * * * i L },i t-& u, 6 /-z-

10.  The  above  referred  stance,  if considered in the light of cross-examination

of respondent No.3 i.e. the other brother of appellant, following  facts have  been

reiterated.

-d 6i remittance  {,tv lz  t ! 4 og 
Q t *.,-(., -ld, i :t r! d ui 6 ct'6 - f [r - u( i, lu 

-A v ) i U, stZOOO Jv et JL,> t t el -'l
rt,/ :,I,,.t -,,,,./  t * i 6 /,.f
" -,! O' /re /{*  elfare { d u L * h,!,f i, ) t,,y{r L )v - L

" 

" 

11.  While considering  the above  positiory  the initial burden to prove  that the

transaction in question is of a benami character  is upon  the appellant  and he has

to discharge this burden  as he is claiming  himself to be the real owrrer  of suit

house and declaring respondent  No.L as ostensible  owner and a benamidar  for

him. Reliance  is placed  upon 7997 SCMR  703

Saiiad. Hussain  zts-

Muhammad Anw ar Huss ain\.

72.  Similarly,  the appellant has placed  on record transfer  letter Exh.Pl and is

also in possession  of the suit house,  except a portion of it, which  is presently

occupied by respondent  No.L and this factum has also been  acknowledged  by

the appellant. The third  ingredient to prove  the benami transaction is the motive

part and as per version of the appellant he has transferred  the property  in the

name of respondent No.1 with the motive  that:

L et -'<-g  y I n 4 -(d LL / *u - ; -A fuu:4t o ),y1 J t, - I 7  r ut ur! 199 4 Jv"
Lut 4.1 - L ctv'i vr / ru h / *v u /, i tg il 4 aJ / 1v L q ul t $ L sn 1!,>y a- ) r 4
f ,, /-,!  P L L.t! et! lgg O tJ ia tt{ct * vt ct, L 6 tt +) t!, t,e O$
$tt l0  ?- ? { +i 
" -Ayt./t!  u tr t v L t A p(! / lu  L $ tr -A  t +i

" 

No.772/2075

l6

1,

The above referred motive  part could only be justified by production  of

such promoter,  who was not produced  by the appellant  before the learned Trial

Court and even otherwise,  the suit house was purchased from  Ghazanf.ar  Ali,

who confirmed  this fact through agreement  Exh.DS  and receipt Exh.D6, whereas

it is admitted  by appellant  himself in his own evidence that:

9  8 a Jv lt {' i :  t -{ rrU,.t ZO0 6 J v' / rv,'$ a.i $ 199 0 Jv 

t r> ct(, -(7 u, t.>g ."
" -gtr,,v,/f  $4n/ttt.-

" 

1.4. The above  referred  evidence clearly  establishes  that the motive part as

alleged  by the appellant is not substantiated as Respondent  No.L was settled in

UK in the year 2006 i.e. after 16 years of purchase  of the suit house and whether

the property in question has been  made  basis  for immigration of Respondent

No.1  as per the stance  of the appellant  which is not visible  from the record,  even

there is no documentary  evidence  to suggest that respondent No.L had been

given immigration  of UK on the strength of ownership/entitled  record of the suit

house, therefore,  the motive part is not established

15.  The learned  Trial Court  has also framed the issue regarding remittances

made by Khalid  Waheed  (deceased brother  of the parties) in the purchase  of suit

house  vide Issue  No.S and this aspect has already  been  admitted  by appellant

that some of the amount had been transmitted by Khalid Waheed,  but he had

spent the same on the welfare of their mother. On the other hand,  the respondent

side has produced  Exh.D7,  which is an international  money order, dated

30.09.1988,  amounting to US $20,000.00,  issued by Bank of America  Corporation

on the instruction  of Khalid Waheed (deceased brother) in the name of the

appellant. Similarly, another document (a stub) of Bank of America amounting  to

Rs.50,000/-,  dated  08.01.1984, in the name of appellant  has also  been placed on

record  as Exh.D8.  Both these documents have  not been  refuted by the appellant

i. *y  manner/  rather the said documents spell out that a huge sum of money

No.172/2075

7

wls transferred by Khalid  Waheed in the name of appellant, whose monthly

salary  at the time of purchase  of suit house was about Rs.20,000/- or Rs.22,000/  -,

which renders  the situation  that a property worth of Rs.1,000,000/-  cannot  be

managed  by such meager salary, rather it could safely  be considered that it was

the remittances made by Khalid  Waheed  (deceased  brother)  from America

through  banking  transaction.

16.  In view of above position, we have  gone through  the findings  of the

learned  Trial Court  qua Issues  No.7 and 8 and there is nothing on record to

j,rst fy that the appellant  could arrange  such a huge sum of money  at his own to

pay the sale consideration  of Rs.1,000,000/- to the said Ghazanlar  AIi i.e

ex-owner  of suit house,  therefore,  findings on Issues No. 7 and 8 have rightly

been passed  by the learned Trial Court  against  the appellant,  who has failed to

discharge  his onus to prove his own sources, especially when he is not able to

place any banking instrument,  bank statement  or the ex-owrrer  of suit house i.e.

Ghazanfar  Ali to justify  that the sale consideration  was paid by him.

77.  The last important element is the timeframe  for filing of suit, which  was

filed in the year  2011, while  the property was purchased  in the year 1990,  which

clearly establishes  that the suit was filed alter  21, years of the transfer of property

in the n,une of respondent  No.1,  although  the agreement  to sell was executed on

31..12.1989,  therefore, the limitation for the purpose of such kind of suit has to be

considered  in terms of Article 9'/., of the Limitation  Act, L908,  which  provides

limitation  of three (03) years  for filing  of such kind of suit and as such, similar

question was dealt  with by the Sindh  High Court  in case  reported as 20U) CLC

324 Karachi  (Chuttal Khan  Chachar os. Mst. Shahiila  Ranil.  even othennzise,  it

has been  argued by the appellant  that Article 120 of the Limitation Act, 1908 will

apply  in this case, whereby  the time from which period  begins to run is"when  tlu

R.F.A.  No.172l2015 

page  | 8

ight to sue Accntes".  For the purpose of clarity,  Articles  9L and 120 of the

Limitation  Act, 1908 are reproduced hereunder:

Article Description of suit

97

720

To cancel  or set  aside  an
instrument  not othenoise
prooided  for.

Suit for which  no period of
limitation  is proaided
elsewhere in this  scludule.

Perioil "f
limitation
Three years

Tirue fro* uthich peioil
begins  to run
lNhen the facts entitling  the
plaintifftohaoe  the
instrument cancelled  or set
aside become knoutn to him.

Six years Wlun  the ngfu b sue
acques,

18.  Perusal of the above  referred provisions  establishes  that since the

appellant is seeking  cancellation of instrument of transfer in favour of

respondent No.1,  his case is covered  under Article 9'L of the Limitation Ac! 1908

and the time from which  period begins  to run clearly  places an obligation upon

the appellant  to seek a remedy  of cancellation when  the said instrument came  to

his knowledge  and as such, the Exh.P1  transfer of the suit house was in the

knowledge  of the appellant but the suit was filed beyond the period of limitation

as it is not dependent  upon  the cause  of action  or refusal.  Although, the appellant

has relied upon 7995  SCMR  284 flVali  os. Akbar\ with the contention  that fresh

cause  of action  would arise  from the date of last denial by respondent No.L in the

year  2017, but the said judgment is not applicable to the case of appellant  as the

instrumenf  which requires  settlement  of right and cancellation  of which  has

been sought  by appellant,  is covered  under  Article 97 ol the Limitation Act, 1908.

Even otherwise,  this question  of limitation  has rightly been  adjudicated  by the

learned  Trial Court while deciding  Issue No. 1., therefore,  nothing is left in favour

of appellant, who has failed to prove the motive part, the sources/sale

consideration of the suit house and is not having exclusive  possession  of the suit

house, hence, all requirements of benami transaction as set out in the cases

mentioned supra are missing.

No.172/2015

9

1

At last, if the appellant's  version be considered  as true, even  then  he has to

prove the concept of agreement  between  the two brothers  for return of the

property  as claimed by the appellant with this commihnent that when  he will

immigrate  to foreign  country the purpose will be achieved  and such

arrangement  has been discussed by the apex Court in case reported  as PLD  2070

SC 569 (Ghulam Murtaza os. Asia Bibi\  and PLD  2008  SC 746 (Ch. Ghulam

Rasood  os. Mst. Nusrat Rasooll. whereby such kind of contract  and promises

are to be proved, farling which  such arrangement could not be considered  valid,

even otherr,rrise,  the appellant  has failed to discharge  his basic onus to prove  the

transaction of transfer of suit house in the name of respondent No.1 being

benamiilar in terms of Articles 777 and720 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,7984,

which  interpret  that the burden of proof, if not discharged in a proper manner,

the suit fails, like the case in hand.

20.  The last argument  advanced  by the appellant  is based upon the cross

examination  of respondent  No.3 i.e. the other brother of the parties, whereby  it

has been referred on record in the cross examination that:

" -Oy{ p Llv ! Lurl 4 !,l rrv i-,,t 

/ r> db -fz{ ."

" 

This aspect is only brought on record with the help of respondent  No.3, who

himself has not appeared  in the Court to establish and help out the appellant,

therefore,  such suggestion  and admission  in the evidence of appellant  by indirect

method has no bearing as it was not the question  put by respondent  No.1.

21,. Besides the above referred contention,  learned  counsel for appellant has

also drawn attention  of this Court towards filing of application  for submission  of

additional documents i.e. the cheque books and counter files of the cheques,

which  was not allowed by the learned Trial Court, but surprisingly  the said

application  was filed in the Court  on 29.11,.2014 and same was contested by

respondent  No.1, and the learned Trial Court while considering all these

No.172/2075

Page  | 10

contentions  of the appellant  dismissed  the said application  vide order dated

10.12.201.4  mainly on the ground that Order XIII Rule  2 CPC places an embargo

upon  the party  to produce  any documentary  evidence,  which was in possession

or power  of the pafty,  which should have been but has not been  produced in

accordance  with requirement  of Order  XIII Rule 1 CPC,  however  such document

could be received  at a subsequent stage of proceedings, unless  good cause is

shown to the satisfaction of the Court for non-production thereof. We have gone

through the said application  and considered  its effects at this appellate  stage,

which is without any reasonable cause  to believe that the private  record  of

appellant  which  was in his possession,  was not produced  due to any restriction

or difficulty  or non-availability,  therefore,  such  belated plea is not acceptable  and

the learned Trial Court  has rightly rejected the same. Even otherwise, if the

cheque  book and counter files of the cheques  are considered  at this stage by way

of additional evidence,  even  then it will not help out the appellant  as he has

otherwise  failed to prove  other important elements  and ingredients of benami

transaction  in his favour.

22.  In view of above  discussion, the instant regular first appeal  is

misconceived  and the same is hereby DISMISSED.

(LUBNA  SATEEM PERVEZ)
IUDGE

(MOH

IUDGE

Announced in open Court  on / 7K l/rlrrn,  zozo.

E

IUDGE

Khalid  z.

