ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

F.A.O  No.57 of 2020 

Muhammad Multazim Raza Khan 
VS
Muhammad Ayub Khan and others.  

Appellant by:  
Respondents No.1 & 3 by:  Mr. Sheraz Butt, Advocate. 
Respondent No.2 by: 

Mr. Misbah ul Mustafa, Advocate. 

Mr. Najm-us-Salehean, Advocate.  

Date of hearing: 

03.02.2021 

GHULAM    AZAM    QAMBRANI,  J.:-  This  First  Appeal 

against  Order  has  been  filed  against  judgment  dated  11.03.2020 

passed  by  the  learned  Intellectual  Property  Tribunal,  Islamabad, 

whereby 

the  plaint  was  ordered 

to  be 

returned 

to 

the 

plaintiff/appellant  in  terms  of  Order  VII  Rule  10  CPC,  for  want  of 

jurisdiction 

2. 

Brief  facts  necessary  for  adjudication of  this appeal are that 

the  appellant 

filed  a  suit 

for  perpetual 

injunction  against 

infringement  of  registered  trade  mark  against  the  defendants 

contending  therein  that  the  plaintiff  and  defendant  No.1  entered 

into a partnership agreement at Islamabad on 28.11.2013, forming 

a Firm in the name and style of  “M/S Zakori International”  with its 

office  at  Murree  Road,  Rawalpindi;  that  the  said  Firm  was  duly 

registered with Registrar of Firms Rawalpindi under the partnership 

Act; 

that  after  establishing  M/S  Zakori 

International, 

the 

appellant/plaintiff  became  busy  in  his  other  business  ventures 

abroad.  The  appellant/plaintiff  had  to  act  as  a  dormant  partner  of 

M/S  Zakori  international,  hence  he  reposed  his  complete  trust  in 

respondent/defendant No.1 on the basis  of family  relationship and 

past  association;  that  respondent  No.1  was  running  all  the  day  to 

day  affairs  of  the  Firm  since  beginning  and  all  the  record  of 

business  and  accounts  was  in  his  control.  However,  as  per 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

“F.A.O No. 57/ 2020” 
(Multazim Raza Khan V. M.Ayub Khan etc.) 

business  needs,  the  appellant/plaintiff  used  to  inject  capital  in  the 

business as required by respondent No.1; that bank account of M/S 

Zakori  International  was  also  operated  by  respondent  No.1,  who 

was  also  having  control  over 

the  business  of  M/S  Zakori 

International  and  the  appellant/  plaintiff  had  complete  trust  and 

confidence  in  him;  that  M/S  Zakori  international  is  currently 

operating  two  successful  brands  i.e.  Mr.  COD  with  22  branches 

across  Pakistan,  two  in  Afghanistan  and  one  in  Bahrain  and 

Ranchers,  an  indigenous  brand  of  Zakori  International  having  two 

branches  one  in  the  Rawalpindi  and  the  other  in  Islamabad;  that 

trade  mark  Ranchers  has  been  registered  jointly  in  the  name  of 

respondent/defendant  No.1  and 

the  appellant/plaintiff  under 

Section 33 (4) of the Trade Mark Ordinance, 2001 by the Registrar 

of  Trade  Mark  vide  No.401490  dated  06.11.2015,  which  means 

that all the Intellectual property  rights relating to the Ranchers are 

vested  in  Zakori  International,  which  in  equal  shares,  is  jointly 

owned  by  the  appellant/plaintiff  and  respondent  No.1; that  despite 

the  fact that  the  appellant and respondent No.1  were  joint  owners 

of  the  registered  trade  mark  namely  “Ranchers”,  respondent  No.1 

initiated  the  process  of  granting  master  franchising  rights  of 

Ranchers to respondent No.2 without obtaining prior consent from 

the appellant by executing a Joint ventures partnership agreement 

for  Ranchers  the  J.V  agreement  was  made  on  01.04.2017,  at 

Islamabad. The grievance of the appellant is that respondent No.1 

without  consent  of  the  plaintiff  and  in  violation  of  the  partnership 

deed  dated  28.11.2013,  is  executing  joint  venture  partnership 

agreement  of  “Ranchers”  with  defendant  No.2,  through  defendant 

No.3  in  violation  of  Section  24(5)  of  the  Trademark  Ordinance, 

2001;  that  signing  of  the  joint  agreement  by  defendant  No.1  with 

defendant No.2 without consent and approval of plaintiff constitutes 

infringement of registered trade mark of plaintiff within the meaning 

of Section 40(5) read with Section 46 of the Trademark Ordinance, 

2001.  

3. 

After  hearing  both  the  sides,  the  learned  Tribunal  vide  the 

impugned  order  dated  11.03.2020  reached  to  a  conclusion  that 

 
 
 
 
3 

“F.A.O No. 57/ 2020” 
(Multazim Raza Khan V. M.Ayub Khan etc.) 

there was no infringement of trade mark, therefore, the suit was not 

maintainable  before  the  Intellectual  Property  Rights  Tribunal, 

hence,  ordered  return  of  the  plaint  in  terms  of  Order  VII  Rule  10 

CPC.  Feeling  dissatisfied  with  the  same,  the  instant  appeal  has 

been preferred. 

4. 

Learned counsel for the appellant argued that Section 18 of 

the  Trade  Mark  Ordinance,  deals  with  the  jurisdiction  of  the 

Tribunal,  which  clearly  provides  that  all  suits  and  other  civil 

proceedings  regarding  infringement  of  intellectual  Property  Laws 

shall  be  instituted  and  tried  in  the  Tribunal;  that  the  instant  suit, 

seeking  a  decree  for  protection  from  infringement  of  rights,  ibid, 

was  very  much  covered  by  Section  18,  ibid,  hence  the  learned 

tribunal  was  having  jurisdiction  in  the  matter;  that  the  learned 

Tribunal was quite competent to entertain the matter, try the same 

and  grant  the  relief  claimed  but  it  has  failed  to  exercise  its 

jurisdiction  properly;  that  the  learned  tribunal  has  technically 

knocked-out  the  appellant  from  the  lis;  that  the  impugned  order  is 

not in accordance with law; that valuable rights of the appellant are 

involved  in  the  litigation;  that  impugned  order  suffers  from  legal 

perversity  and  is  not  sustainable  in  the  eyes  of  law;  that  the 

respondent  No.1  has  infringed  the  rights  of  the  appellant  and 

violated  Section  24  (5)  of  the  Ordinance,  2001;  that  controversy 

between  the  parties  could  be  settled  by  disposal  of  suit  on  merits 

and not otherwise; that the impugned order being not sustainable is 

liable to be set aside. Ultimately, acceptance of appeal was prayed 

for. 

5. 

Learned counsel for the respondents, on the contrary argued 

that first of all, the learned tribunal has to determine the question of 

its  jurisdiction;  that  the  appellant  has  no  case  of  infringement  of 

trade  mark,  as  the  trade  mark  in  question  was  never  physically 

violated  or  infringed;  that  the  defendant  No.1  was  a  joint  partner 

and he was entering into a contract with defendant No.2 qua use of 

the  trade  mark  in-question;  that  civil  suit  has  already  been  filed 

before  the  civil  court;  that  the  learned  tribunal  was  not  having  the 

 
 
 
 
 
4 

“F.A.O No. 57/ 2020” 
(Multazim Raza Khan V. M.Ayub Khan etc.) 

jurisdiction, hence it has rightly passed the impugned order, which 

does  not  call  for  any  interference,  hence  dismissal  of  the  appeal 

was prayed for. 

6. 

I  have  considered  the  arguments  advanced  from  both  the 

sides  and  have  gone  through  the  material  available  on  record, 

which  reveals  that  the  appellant  has  not  been  ousted  from  the 

litigation  on  merits  but  on  the  basis  of  lack  of  jurisdiction  by  the 

Tribunal.  The  main  proposition  falling  for  determination  is  as  to 

whether  the  learned  Tribunal  has  the  jurisdiction  or  not..?  The 

jurisdiction  of  the  tribunal  has  been  defined  in  Section  18  of  the 

Trade Mark Ordinance and it would be advantageous to reproduce 

the same hereunder to understand the issue:- 

18.  Jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunals:-  (1)  All  suits  and  other 
civil  proceedings  regarding  infringement  of  intellectual 
property laws shall be instituted and tried in the Tribunal” 

7. 

Similarly, the phrase “Intellectual Property Law” is defined in 

the  IPO  Act,  which  means  the  laws  specified  in  the  schedule 

annexed  thereto.  This  court  has  to  examine  whether  the  dispute 

qua infringement of trade mark by a co-partner is a violation of the 

relevant laws or not and whether a claim in this behalf can be made 

before the IPO or not.  

8. 

Admittedly,  Section  40  of  the  Trade  Mark  Ordinance,  2001 

deals with the infringement of the trade mark, whereas Section 46 

(1) and (2) of the Trade Mark Ordinance, 2001 relates to action for 

infringement.  In  this  context  following  are  the  ingredients  of  a  suit 

for infringement of a trade mark:- 

(i)   The plaintiff trade mark must be registered;  
ii) 

 The  defendant  trade  mark  is  identical  with  or 
deceptively  similar  to  the  registered  trade  mark  of 
the plaintiff; 
 The defendant “Uses in the course of trade” a trade 
mark identical to that of plaintiff; 

(iii) 

 (iv)   The  use  of  mark  by  the  defendant  must  not  be 

accidental, but in “course of trade”; 

 (v)   The  mark  of  defendant  is  causing  confusion  in  the 
minds of the customers of the goods and services of 
the plaintiff. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

“F.A.O No. 57/ 2020” 
(Multazim Raza Khan V. M.Ayub Khan etc.) 

9.   Here  the  question  arises  that  whether  mere  usage  of 

registered  trademark  belonging  to  a  person  by  another  person 

constitutes  infringement  and  whether  that  usage  need  to  be 

necessarily in the course of trade and whether usage of trade mark 

while  executing  any  agreement  ,constitutes  infringement.  The 

contention  of  the  appellant  side  is  that  agreement  between 

defendants  No.1  and  2  has  been  executed  in  violation  of  Section 

24  (5)  of  the  Trade  mark  Ordinance,  2001,  therefore,  the  same 

constitutes an infringement within the meaning of Section 40 (5) of 

the  Ordinance,  ibid,  and accordingly  the  same is  actionable under 

Section  46 (1)  & (2)  of the Trade mark Ordinance, 2001, meaning 

thereby  that  according  to  section  40  of  the  Trademark  Ordinance, 

the defendant ought to physically use the trade mark of the plaintiff 

in  the  course  of  trade  for  constituting  any  infringement.  In  the 

instant  case,  the  situation  seems  to  be  entirely  different  because 

the  trade  mark  partially  owned  by  the  plaintiff  has  not  been  used, 

as  yet,  therefore,  there  is  no  question  of  infringement  by  the 

defendants in the course of trade.  

10.  A  careful  examination  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  instant 

suit  has  been  filed  only  on  account  of  signing  of  an  agreement 

between defendant No.1 and defendant No.2 and the stage of use 

of the trade mark has not yet reached. According to the contents of 

the plaint, defendant No.1, who is the joint owner of the trade mark 

“Ranchers”  with the plaintiff  is assigning the registered trade mark 

to defendant No.2 through an agreement dated 01.04.2017 without 

seeking  the  approval  of  plaintiff  being  the  co-owner  of  the  trade 

mark,  in  violation  of  Section  24  (5)  of  the  Trade  Mark  Ordinance, 

2001.  The  plaintiff  while  considering  this  action  of  defendant  No.1 

as an infringement of his registered trade mark has filed the instant 

suit.  Thus  the  actual  dispute  is  between  co-owners  of  the  trade 

mark  and  the  plaintiff  has  filed  the  instant  suit  to  restrain  his  co-

owner i.e. defendant No.1 from entering into a franchise agreement 

of the trademark with defendant No.2. This Court has failed to find 

any express provision in the Trade Mark Ordinance, which prohibits 

 
 
 
 
 
6 

“F.A.O No. 57/ 2020” 
(Multazim Raza Khan V. M.Ayub Khan etc.) 

a  co-owner  of  a  trade  mark  to  enter  into  an  agreement  qua  the 

subject trade mark with anyone else. Similarly, there is no provision 

in  the  Ordinance,  ibid,  which  empowers  a  co-owner  to  file  a  suit 

against the other co-owner qua the issue of infringement. Similarly, 

there  is  no  denial  of  the  fact  that  any  violation  of  Section  24  (5) 

read  with  Section  69  of  the  Trade  Mark  Ordinance  falls  within  the 

jurisdiction of a District Court under Section 117 of the Trade Mark 

Ordinance  and,  as  such,  the  Tribunal  cannot  adjudicate  upon  a 

controversy between the co-owners of the trade mark. 

11.  The  next  proposition,  which  boils  down  for  determination  is 

whether a dispute of partnership between the co-owners of a trade 

mark can be settled by the Tribunal while exercising its jurisdiction 

within  the  meaning  of  Section  18  of  the  IPO  Act.  This  court  has 

carefully  attended  this  aspect  of  the  matter.  Prior  to  the  IPO  Act 

2012  all  civil  suits/proceedings  regarding  protection  of  intellectual 

property  rights  were  filed  before  the  District  Judge  under  Section 

117  of  the  Trade  Mark  Ordinance,  2001.  The  relevant  Section  of 

the  Trade  Mark  Ordinance,  2001  is  reproduced  hereunder  in 

verbatim:- 

“Suits  for  infringement  to  be  instituted  before  District 
Court.  No  suit  for  the  infringement  of  a  trade  mark  or 
otherwise  relating  to  any  right  in  a  trade  mark  shall  be 
instituted  in  any  court  inferior  to  a  District  Court  having 
jurisdiction to try the suit” 

12. 

It is a matter of common knowledge that by enactment of IPO 

Act  2012  Intellectual  Property  Tribunals  were  established  under 

Section 16 of the Act, ibid, and under Section 17 (6) of the Act, the 

cases  pertaining  to  intellectual  property  rights  were  transferred  to 

the  Tribunals.  Section  17  (4)  &  6  of  the  Act,  ibid,  are  reproduced 

hereunder :- 

“Powers of the Tribunals (4) Subject to subsection  (5) no 
court  other  than  a  Tribunal  shall  have  or  exercise  any 
jurisdiction  with  respect  to  any  matter  to  which  the 
jurisdiction of the tribunal extends under this Act. 

(6)  All  suits  and  proceedings  pending  in  any  court 
instituted  under  intellectual  property  laws  shall  stand 
transferred  to,  and  be  heard  and  disposed  of  by  ,the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

“F.A.O No. 57/ 2020” 
(Multazim Raza Khan V. M.Ayub Khan etc.) 

Tribunal having jurisdiction under this Act., On transfer of 
proceedings  under  this  sub-section  the  parties  shall 
appear  before  the  tribunal  concerned  on  the  date 
previously fixed” 

13.  From  the  perusal  of  the  record,  it  is  established  that  there 

was  no  physical  infringement  as  such,  as  the  trademark  of  the 

plaintiff  has  not  been  physically  used  by  defendant  No.2  in  the 

course  of  trade,  therefore,  within  the  meaning  of  Section  40  read 

with  Section  46  (1)  &(2)  of  the  Trade  mark  Ordinance,  2001,  the 

instant suit before the Tribunal was not maintainable.  

14.  Admittedly,  there  is  a  dispute  between  the  plaintiff  and  the 

defendant No.1 being joint owners of the trade mark and therefore, 

any violation of Section 24 (5) of the Trade mark Ordinance, 2001 

read with Section 69 of the Trade Mark Ordinance, 2001 cannot be 

agitated before the learned Tribunal and in terms of Section 117 of 

the Trade Mark Ordinance, 2001, Court of learned District Judge is 

the relevant forum. 

15.  For the aforesaid reasons, the impugned order does not call 

for any interference at this end, hence the appeal is devoid of any 

substance, therefore, the same is dismissed. 

(GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on this 26th day of February, 2021. 

M.Ift 

 JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
