ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO.1951 OF 2019 

Usman Ali Shah  VS Bint-e-Fatima 

WRIT PETITION NO.2225 OF 2019  

Mst. Bint-e-Fatima VS Usman Ali Shah 

Petitioner by 

:  Mr. Ikhlaq Ahamd, Advocate. 

(for  Petitioner  in  the  instant  Petition  and  for  Respondent 
No.1 in W.P.No.2225/2019) 

Respondent by 

:  M/s Abdul Haseeb Khan Afridi and Aman 

Ullah Kayani, Advocates. 
(for  Respondent  No.1  in  the  instant  Petition  and  for  the 
Petitioner in W.P.No.2225/2019) 

Date of hearing   

: 

17.03.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:- 

Through the instant judgment, I propose to 

decide  Writ  Petitions  Nos.  1951  and  2225  of  2019  as  they  involve  the  same 

parties and arise from the same judgments and decrees.   

2. 

The case history of the matter is that the  Petitioner [Usman Ali Shah] in 

W.P. No.1951/2019 (hereinafter referred to as the “Petitioner”) filed a petition 

against  the  Respondent  No.  1  [Bint-e-Fatima]  under  Section  25  read  with 

Section 12 of Guardian and Wards Act 1890 for the joint custody of  his minor 

son, Ameer Hamza whereas the Respondent No. 1 [Bint-e-Fatima] in such case 

filed  W.P.  No.2225/2019  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Respondent  No.  1”) 

against  the  Petitioner    for  appointment  of  guardian  of  the  minor.  The  learned 

Family  Court  consolidated  both  the  petitions  and  passed  the  Impugned 

Judgment and Decree dated 27.10.2018 (“Impugned Judgment and Decree I”) 

and  dismissed  both  the  petitions  while  chalking  out  a  detailed  schedule  of 

visitation for the Petitioner.  

3. 

Feeling  aggrieved  by  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I,  the 

Respondent No. 1 filed an appeal before the learned Appellate Court who vide 

Judgement  and  Decree  dated  05.04.2019  (“Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P.No. 1951 & 2225 of 2019 

II”) upheld the Impugned Judgment and Decree I to the extent of the matter of 

appointment of guardian as it was rightly held that Petitioenr being father of the 

minor  is  the  natural  guardian,  however,  with  regard  to  custody  the  learned 

Appellate Court modified the Impugned Judgment and Decree I as follows: 

“For what has been discussed above, the visitation schedule of the minor in 
the  impugned  consolidated  judgment  is  hereby  modified  only  to  the  extent 
that the respondent will not be entitled to take the minor out of territorial 
jurisdiction of the court and he will also submit his personal surety bonds 
(as he is a public  servant) amounting to Rs.20,00,000/-  with undertaking 
that  he  will  not  take  the minor  out  of  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the  court 
and will also return the minor to the appellant as per schedule given by the 
learned trial court vide impugned consolidated judgment. Only to this extent 
the appeal in hand is hereby accepted.”  [Emphasis added]. 

Hence, the instant Writ Petitions filed by both the parties before this Court.  

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the 

Impugned Judgment and Decree I has been passed in complete disregard of the 

fact  that  the  Petitioner  is  the  natural  guardian  of  the  minor;  that  the 

Petitioner/Father is paying maintenance on time and there is no delay; that the 

Respondent No.1/mother admits that it is in the welfare of the minor that he gets 

acquainted with his paternal family; that the order of surety bond for visitation 

of minor within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court is unjustified and against 

settled law; that the Impugned Judgment and Decree I of the Family Court was 

appropriate  and  justified  and  the  modification  made  vide  the  Impugned 

Judgment and Decree II is uncalled for, unjustified and contrary to the facts and 

record of the case; that the imposition of surety bond is a requirement for taking 

the  minor  out  of  territorial  jurisdiction  of  Court  and  to  that  extent  the 

Petitioner/father is willing to submit  surety bond.  The learned counsel  prayed 

that the Writ Petition No.1951/2019 may kindly be accepted and the Impugned 

Judgment  and  Decree  II  dated  05.04.2019  may  kindly  be  set-aside  and  the 

Petitioner/Father  may  kindly  be  allowed  to  take  the  minor  to  his  residence  in 

Abbottabad or Peshawar.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  in  W.P.  No.2225/2019  and  for 

Respondent  No.1  in  W.P.  No.1951/2019  contended  that  the  learned  Courts 

below while deciding the visitation schedule have ignored the various material 

aspects of the case i.e. the age of the minor, education, affiliation of the minor; 

that both the Courts below have erred while allowing the overnight stay of the 

 
3 

W.P.No. 1951 & 2225 of 2019 

minor with the father on weekends; that the minor is of tender age and is unable 

to perform his personal chores without the assistance of mother; that the father 

has  never  been  in  touch  with  the  minor  since  last  five  years  therefore,  if  the 

overnight  custody  is  granted  to  the  father  the  minor  will  get  psychologically 

disturbed; that the mother has no objection if the minor meets his father during 

the court timings within the court premises; that the father of the minor has till 

date never concerned himself with the affairs and education of the minor  as is 

evident  from  the  cross  examination  of  the  father;  that  the  Respondent  No.1  / 

father resides in Abbotabad whereas Minor Petitioner resides in Islamabad with 

mother  who  therefore,  needs  guardianship,  which    facts  have  been  ignored 

altogether by the Courts below while deciding the guardianship petition. 

9. 

6. 

Arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  have 

been heard and record perused with their able assistance.  

W.P. No.1951/2019 

7. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Petitioner  (Father)  had  initially  file  petition  for 

joint custody of the minor, however, as recorded in the Impugned Judgment and 

Decree  I,  during  the  course  of  arguments  before  the  Family  Court  it  was 

submitted  that  the  Petitioner  does  not  wish  to  press  the  request  for  permanent 

custody  provided  that  his  visitation  schedule  with  the  minor  is  ordered.  The 

Impugned  Judgment and Decree I further records that the Petitioner submitted 

that he is ready to submit a written commitment in the court to the effect that the 

custody  of  the  minor  shall  not  be  removed  from  the  mother  by  him  if  she  is 

adheres to the visitation schedule. Perhaps this was the reason why the learned 

Family Court did not impose the requirement of surety upon the Petitioner when 

granting visitation rights. On the other hand, the learned Appellate Court has not 

provided  any  reason  for  such  imposition  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 

case and as such is a non-speaking order in respect of visitation rights. In view 

of  the  foregoing,  I  am  not  convinced  that  requirement  of  surety  for  visitation 

with the minor within the territorial jurisdiction of this court is necessary. 

8. 

It is settled law which does not require belaboring that the best interest of 

the  minor  is  of  paramount  consideration  for  the  Court  in  custody  matters. 

Keeping the same in view, it is noted that the minor was six years old at the time 

of filing of these petitions, at which age he should be spending more time with 

 
4 

W.P.No. 1951 & 2225 of 2019 

the  father  than  would  have  been  permissible  at  an  earlier  age.  It  goes  without 

saying that the love and affection of both the parents is of utmost important for 

the healthy development of any individual. It would be a travesty to deprive a 

child of the love and affection of his father when such father is alive and eager 

to be a part of his child’s life.  

9. 

In so far as the Respondent No. 1’s submission is concerned that she has 

no objection if the minor meets with the father within the court premises, in my 

opinion,  meeting  with  the  minor  in  court  premises  does  not  provide  an 

opportunity to spend quality time with the father. The Respondent No.1 has not 

identified  any  reason  which  would  persuade  me  to  modify  the  visitation 

schedule fixed by the learned Family Court. It is also important that the minor 

should  be  acquainted  that  the  paternal  side  of  his  family  who  are  residing  in 

Abbottabad/Peshawar.  This  fact  was  also  admitted  by  the  Respondent  No.1  in 

her  cross-examination.  The  Petitioner  father  has  already  expressed  his 

willingness  to  submit  surety bond  for  taking out  the  minor  from  the  territorial 

jurisdiction of this Court. Therefore, in my opinion the Impugned Judgment and 

Decree I does not merit modification as per Impugned Judgment and Decree II. 

 W.P. No.2225/2019 

10.  With  regard  to  Writ  Petition  No.2225/2019,  both  the  lower  courts  have 

correctly  come  to  the  conclusion  that  under  Section  19  of  the  Guardian  and 

Wards  Act,  1890  the  court  is  not  authorized  to  appoint  a  guardian  in  place  of 

father  when  the  father  is  alive  and  not  unfit  to  be  the  guardian.  Reliance  is 

placed  upon  on  the  judgment  reported  as  Ms.  Shazia  Akbar  Ghalzai  VS 

Additional District Judge, Islamabad (East), 2021 MLD 817 (Islamabad).  The 

learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.  1  drew  our  attention  to  the  cross-

examination  of  the  Petitioner  to  emphasis  that  the  Petitioner  has  not  been 

participating  in  the  minor’s  upbringing  and  has  neglected  important  fatherly 

duties to assert that the Petitioner is unfit to be guarding.  On the other hand, the 

Petitioner  submitted  in  his  Affidavit-in-Evidence  that  the  Respondent  No.  1 

deliberately  kept  the  minor  away  from  him.  In  any  event,  the  concurrent 

findings of the Courts below is that the  Respondent No.1 was unable to prove 

that the Petitioner is unfit to be guardian of his minor son.   

 
5 

W.P.No. 1951 & 2225 of 2019 

11.  A High Court in exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction does not act like a 

Court  of  appeal.  It  neither  reappraises  evidence  nor  does  it  substitute  the 

concurrent  findings  of  fact  recorded  by  the  Family  Court  and  upheld  by  the 

Appellate  Court  with  its  own  findings  solely  on  the  ground  that  another  view 

was possible on the same evidence. A party approaching the High Court under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  has  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  a  gross 

misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  or  jurisdictional  error  or  such  legal 

infirmity that has caused miscarriage of justice. However, the Petitioner has not 

pointed out any such illegality, defect or illegality in the Impugned Judgments.  

In  any  event  none  of  the  reason  cited  are  sufficient  to  conclude  to  that  the 

Petitioner is unfit to be guardian. 

12. 

In view of the foregoing, Writ Petition No.1951/2019 is partly allowed 

and  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree-I  is  modified  to  the  extent  that  the 

Petitioner  is  entitled  to  take  the  minor  out  of  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  this 

court provided that he submits surety bond as directed by the learned Appellate 

Court  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II.  Whereas,  Writ  Petition 

No.2225/2019 is dismissed.  

Announced in the open Court on 24th of May, 2022. 

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

JUNAID 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
