ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Appeal No.83 of 2017 

Muhammad Ehsan Shah 
VS
The State, etc. 

Appellant by: 

M/s  Sardar  Muhammad  Hafeez  Khan 
and Zofishan Sadique, Advocates. 

Respondent No.2 by: 

Sheikh  Khizer 
Ms.Shahina Shahab-ud-Din, Advocates. 

-ur-  Rasheed 

and 

State by: 

Mr.  Zohaib  Hassan  Gondal,  Advocate 
alongwith Gulfaraz, Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

22.10. 2020. 

Ghulam 

  Azam 

  Qambrani,  J.:-  Through 

this  single 

judgment, I intend to dispose of Criminal Appeal No.83/2017 filed by 

convict/  appellant,  Muhammad  Ehsan  Shah,  for  his  acquittal  and 

Criminal  Revision  No.108/  2017,  filed  by  Raja  Muhammad  Hanif/ 

complainant for enhancement of sentence of convict/ appellant from 

life imprisonment to death penalty. 

2. 

Succinct facts of the case are that on 03.06.2015 complainant 

Raja Muhammad Hanif filed a complaint before S.H.O Sihala Police 

Station,  Islamabad,  stating  that  last  night,  he  alongwith  his  wife, 

went  to  the  house  of  their  daughter  (Javeria)  to  settle  her  family 

disputes with her in-laws. After settlement of the disputes, they came 

back to their house; that next morning, he, four times, called his son-

in-law on his cell phone, but he disconnected his calls. On the next 

call,  the  appellant  asked  the  complainant  to  come  to  the  Fauji 

Foundation  Hospital  as  his  daughter  Javeria  was  in  a  serious 

condition.  He,  alongwith  his  wife,  went  to  the  Fauji  Foundation 

Hospital  and  found  that  their  daughter  had  already  died.  He 

requested for conducting her postmortem examination. According to 

the complainant, earlier there had been altercations between Javeria 

and  her  in-laws  and  she  had  also  written  a  stamp  paper  stating 

therein  that  she  had  threat  to  her  life  at  the  hands  of  her  husband 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

and  in-laws.  He  expressed  suspicion  that  her  husband,  his  two 

brothers and their wives had killed his daughter. 

3. 

On  submission  of  the  complaint,  F.I.R  No.154/  2015  dated 

03.06.2015  was  registered  with  Police  Station  Sihala,  Islamabad, 

under  Sections  302  &  34  P.P.C.  During  course  of  investigation 

prosecution  found  the  convict/  appellant  Muhammad  Ehsan  Shah 

responsible for committing the Qatl-e-Amd of his wife and submitted 

Challan  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C  against  him  before  the  learned 

trial Court. 

4.      The record deciphers that the deceased had sworn an affidavit 

on 17.01.2015, wherein she expressed apprehension of her death at 

the hands of convict/ appellant and his two brothers i.e. Muhammad 

Imran  Shah,  Muhammad  Nouman  Shah  and  his  wife  Mst.  Saleha 

Nouman,  owing  to  which  the  complainant  also  expressed  his 

suspicion  and  nominated 

them 

in 

the  F.I.R.  However,  no 

incriminating material came on record qua Muhammad Imran Shah, 

Muhammad  Nouman  Shah  and  his  wife  Mst.  Saleha  Nouman,  as 

such,  their  names  were placed  in  Column No.2 and  supplementary 

challan  was  submitted.  Later  on,  the  learned  trial  Court  vide  order 

dated 17.01.2017 discharged these three accused persons from the 

case. 

5. 

After  completion  of  all  codal  formalities  by  the  learned  trial 

Court,  charge  was  framed  on  07.01.2016  under  Sections  302  &  34 

P.P.C  against  the  convict/  appellant  to  which  he  pleaded  not  guilty 

and  claimed  trial.  In  order  to  prove  the  guilt  against  convict/ 

appellant,  prosecution  examined  as  many  as  eight  witnesses.  On 

closure of the prosecution evidence, statement of appellant/ convict 

under Section 342 Cr.P.C was recorded wherein all the incriminating 

evidence recorded in his presence was put to him, which he denied 

and  claimed  innocence.  He  neither  produced  any  witness  in  his 

defence  nor  opted  to  give  statement  on  oath  as  envisaged  under 

Section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. 

6. 

After  recording  evidence  and  hearing  arguments  of  learned 

counsel  for  the  parties,  learned  trial  court  convicted  and  sentenced 

 
 
 
 
3 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

the  appellant  vide  impugned  judgment  dated  23.5.2017  to  undergo 

R.I  for  life  under  Section  302-(b)  P.P.C  and  also  ordered  to  pay 

compensation  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  under  Section  544-A  Cr.P.C  or  in 

default to suffer S.I for six months. Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C 

was also extended to him. Feeling dissatisfied with the same, he has 

preferred the instant appeal. 

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  (Muhammad  Ehsan  Shah) 

contended that deceased Ms. Javeria had contracted love marriage 

with  appellant  without  the  consent  and  permission  of  her  parents; 

that  there  were  no  disputes  or  differences  between  them  and  they 

had  been  living  a  very  happy  matrimonial  life;  that  the  deceased 

wanted to separate her portion of residence from that of the brothers 

of appellant by raising a partition wall in the house; that the appellant 

and parents of the deceased forbade her to do so, due to which, she 

was very angry and used to remain under stress; that on the night of 

incident there was no dispute between them and the parents of the 

deceased  had  not  come  to  their  house  for  any  settlement;  that  as 

the deceased was unhappy with the non-construction of the partition 

wall,  therefore,  probably  due  to  anguish  and  tension,  she  had 

decided to put an end to her life and committed suicide by hanging 

with the hook of the ceiling fan. Further contended that the appellant 

is  innocent  and  is  not  involved  in  the  commission  of  offence;  that 

rather on coming to know about the suicide, he immediately  shifted 

her 

to  Fauji  Foundation  Hospital 

for  medical 

treatment,  but 

unfortunately she could not survive; that the entire prosecution story 

has been fabricated by the parents of the deceased, as they wanted 

to  take  revenge  from  him  of  their  love  marriage;  that  F.I.R  was 

lodged  with  an  inordinate  and  un-explained  delay;  that  prosecution 

has  not  brought  on  record  any  proof  of  the  call  record  allegedly 

made by complainant to the accused on the day of occurrence. Next 

contended  that  on  08.06.2015,  complainant  produced  an  affidavit 

(Ex.PF) claiming to have been executed by the deceased, however, 

the report of hand writing expert shows that the thumb impression of 

the deceased, available on the record of NADRA, did not match with 

her  thumb  impression  as  available  on  the  stamp  paper,  allegedly 

executed  by  the  deceased  regarding  apprehension  to  her  life. 

 
4 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

Further  contended  that  the  police  has  also  registered  an  F.I.R 

No.79/  2018  against  Raja  Muhammad  Hanif  with  Police  Station 

Sihala,  as  such,  Muhammad  Hanif/  complainant  has  lost  its 

credibility  and  his  statement  cannot  be  relied  upon  for  passing  any 

conviction or sentence against the appellant. Further submitted that 

it  has  also  created  a  serious  doubt  in  the  prosecution  case  and  its 

benefit  goes  to  the  appellant.  He  also  argued  that  no  motive  has 

been  proved  against  the  appellant  for  commission  of  the  alleged 

offence;  that  prosecution  failed  to  prove  its  case  warranting 

conviction  or  sentence  to  the  appellant;  that  the  entire  prosecution 

story is false and fabricated and on the basis thereof, no conviction/ 

sentence  can  be  passed  against  the  appellant.  Further  argued  that 

learned  trial  Court  has  not  appreciated  the  material  available  on 

record  in  its  true  perspective  and  has  passed  the  impugned 

judgment in a slip shod manner, due to which, grave miscarriage of 

justice  has  been  caused  to  the  appellant,  as  such,  the  findings 

recorded  by  the  learned  trial  Court  cannot  be  sustained.  Lastly, 

prayed  for  setting  aside  of  the  impugned  judgment  and  acquittal  of 

the appellant.  

8. 

On the other hand, learned  counsel for the State  assisted by 

learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently  opposed  the 

arguments  advanced  by 

learned  counsel 

for 

the  appellant 

contending  that  the  appellant  and  his  two  brothers  live  in  their 

ancestral house; that there were serious family disputes between the 

deceased,  appellant  and  his  other  family  members,  as  such,  the 

deceased wanted to save her house and to separate her portion by 

raising a partition wall in the house, while the appellant did not agree 

with  her;  that  on  the  last  night  of  the  occurrence,  parents  of  the 

deceased  had  gone  to  their  house  for  amicable  settlement  of  the 

disputes.  After  their  departure,  appellant  killed  the  deceased  after 

perpetrating  severe  torture  on  her;  that  the  report  of  postmortem 

sufficiently  proves  that  deceased  has  been  killed  by  torture  and 

strangulation; 

that  unnatural  death  of 

the  deceased 

is  also 

corroborated  by  the  circumstantial  evidence  like  recovery  of  knife, 

azar-band (shalwar string) and pictures of the deceased, taken from 

the  room  of  the  appellant.  Next  contended  that  the  appellant  has 

 
5 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

committed  Qatl-e-Amd  of  the  deceased  and  the  prosecution  has 

proved  its  case  against  him  beyond  all  reasonable  shadows  of 

doubt; that there is sufficient evidence on record for enhancement of 

the sentence from life imprisonment to that of death penalty.  

9. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

parties and carefully gone through the available record. 

10.  Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  Raja  Muhammad  Hanif, 

father  of  the  deceased  is  the  complainant  of  this  case.  He  has 

specifically  nominated  the  convict/  appellant  in  the  commission  of 

the  offence.  According  to  him,  there  were  family  disputes  between 

deceased and the convict/ appellant over partition of the house. On 

the  last  night  of  the  occurrence,  the  complainant  and  his  wife  had 

gone  to  the  house  of  their  daughter  to  settle  the  dispute  but  next 

morning,  he  called  by  phone  to  the  appellant  four  times  but  he  did 

not  attend  his  calls  and  on  the  next  call  he  told  the  appellant  that 

condition  of  the  deceased  was  not  good  and  asked  him  to  reach 

Fauji Foundation Hospital, but his daughter had already died before 

his arrival at the said hospital.  

11.  Dr.  Saima  Najeeb,  Medical  Officer,  Federal  Government 

Services  Hospital  Islamabad,  who  conducted  postmortem  of  the 

deceased,  appeared  before  the  Court  as  PW.2  and  stated  that  on 

31.05.2015  at  about  03:30  p.m.,  the  dead  body  of  deceased  was 

brought to the hospital by Muhammad Gulfraz, Sub-inspector, Police 

Station  Shehzad  Town,  she  conducted  her  postmortem  on 

01.6.2015 at about 10.00 p.m., and observed following injuries:- 

i.  Ligature mark on the middle & left side of neck  traversely 
in its middle 1/3rd area deeply seted creating the contusion 
collar measuring 14 cm x 1 cm diameter of whole neck=38 
cm;  

ii.  Lacerated wound on the vertex about 1x1.5 cm in size and 
bone  exposed  &  actively  bleeding  +  bruise  mark  inside 
scalp when opened; 

iii.  Bruise  mark  on  the  front  lower  1/3rd  of  right  thigh  18  cm 

above the right knee joint 3x2 cm in size; 

iv.  Bruise mark about 1.5x2  cm on the lateral aspect of right 

lower thigh above right knee joint; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

v.  Bruise  mark  on  the  medial  aspect  of  left  thigh  2x3  cm  in 

size 14 cm above left knee joint; 

vi.  Bite  mark  about  0.25cm  x  0.25cm  on  the  inner surface  of 

lower lip (bruise) 

  On dissection of Neck:- 

Skin  &  sub  ataneoes  tissue  of  the  ligature  mark  area 
injured,  compressed  &  contused,  hyoid  bone 
intact, 
tracheal rings intact, lumen contained blood. 

vii.  There are 03 nail marks present 02 just below the inferior 
angle  of  chin  &  over  the  upper  1/3rdof  medial  aspect  of 
right side of neck.  

Internal examination  

left 

Pleurae  healthy  &  slightly  congested,  larynx  and  tracheae 
healthy  but  tracheae  cavity contained  blood  stained  fluid, 
walls,  ribs  &  cartilages  healthy,  right  & 
lungs 
congested,  pericardium  &  heart,  blood  vessers,  walls, 
peritoneum,  mouth  pharynx  &  Oesophagus,  diaphragm, 
liver,  spleen,  kidneys  are  healthy,  stomach  &  its  contents 
healthy  &  some  semi  digested  food  particles  present, 
pancreas  healthy,  small  intestine  &  their contents healthy 
but  some  semi  digested  food  particles  present,  large 
intestines  &  their  contents  healthy  some  fecal  matter 
present,  bladder  healthy  &  empty  and  organs  of 
generation external & internal healthy, uterus healthy.  

OPINION 

In  my  opinion  deceased  sustained  ligature  mark  on  the 
middle  front  & 
left  side  of  the  neck  which  caused 
obstruction of the upper respiratory tract creating hypoxia 
firstly  &  later  on  anoxia  leading  to  death.  All  injuries  are 
ante-mortem  in  nature  and  sufficient  to  cause  death  in 
ordinary course of life.  

Time between injury and death  

3-4 minutes.  

Time between death and postmortem  

24 hours approximately. 

12.  Dr.  Saima  Najeeb  also  filled-in  postmortem  report  alongwith 

pictorial diagram/ Skia-gram as Ex.PB and Inquest Report as Ex.PC. 

During cross-examination, while answering to a question, she stated 

that it is correct that if the ligature mark is not round the neck, eyes 

are  closed,  ribs  are  not  fractured  and  hands  are  not  clenched  then 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

the  case  will  be  one  of  suicide  and  that  in  case  of  strangulation, 

chances of damage to tracheae and larynx are there.  

13.  PW.1,  Malik  Aamir  Shahzad,  Draftsman  visited  the  place  of 

incident  on  06.6.2015  in  the  company  of  Muhammad  Gulfraz,  Sub-

Inspector,  and  on  the  pointation  of  Muhammad  Hanif,  about  the 

place of incident prepared site plan, Ex.PA. 

14.  PW.3,  Saqib  Zareen  A.S.I,  posted  as  Moharrar  Malkhana  at 

Police  Station  Sihala,  received  a  sealed  parcel  containing  blood 

stained  cotton  from  one  Gulfraz  Sub-Inspector,  which  he  kept  in 

Malkhana.  On  30.6.2015,  he  handed  over  the  same  to  Naveed 

Ahmed  7672/LHC  for  its  further  transmission  to  Punjab  Forensic 

Science  Agency,  Lahore,  vide  Road  Certificate  No.204/  15,  Ex.PE, 

who  delivered  the  said  parcel  at  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency, 

Lahore,  returned  on  same  day  and  handed  over  a  receipt  to  Saqib 

Zareen, which he pasted in Register No.21, maintained for the said 

purpose.  Defence  could  not  shake  his  testimony  during  cross-

examination. 

15.  PW.4, Ehsan Ahmed Qureshi is the Stamp Vendor. According 

to him, the deceased had bought a stamp paper from him in the year 

2015  for  executing  an  affidavit  (Ex.PF).  She  was  having  some 

dispute with her husband and in-laws and was apprehending threat 

to  her  life.  On  her  instruction,  he  prepared  an  affidavit  and  she 

inscribed her signatures and put her thumb impression on it. He also 

identified his signatures on the Ex.PF. During cross-examination, he 

denied  the  suggestion  that  he  had  made  improvements  in  his 

examination-in-chief to strengthen the case of prosecution. 

16.  Raja  Muhammad  Hanif, complainant/  father  of  the  deceased, 

got recorded his statement as PW.5. He has narrated the same facts 

as  mentioned  in  his  complaint  (Ex.PG);  that  in  his  presence 

Muhammad Gulfraz SI/ IO recovered the baton/ danda (Ex.PH) used 

in  the  commission  of  offence  at  the  pointation  of  appellant,  lying 

underneath  the  double  bed  of  the  room,  where  the  incident  had 

taken place; that PW.1 Malik Aamir Shahzad prepared the site plan 

Ex.PA,  in  his  presence.  Lengthy  cross-examination  was  conducted 

 
 
 
 
8 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

upon the complainant by the defence but could not bring  on record 

anything  favourable  to  its  stance.  The  complainant  denied  the 

suggestion  that  during  verification  of  the  thumb  impression  of 

deceased  on  the  Ex.PF,  it  did  not  match  and  was  found  fake.  He 

also  denied  the  suggestion  that  the  deceased  had  committed 

suicide, as she was angry because he (complainant) had instructed 

her  not  to  insist  for  partition  of  their  house  by  construction  of  a 

partition wall. 

17.  PW.6,  Haris  Ali  is  the  brother  of  deceased.  He  alongwith 

Naveed  Ahmed,  Constable  and  Investigation  Officer,  visited  the 

crime  spot  and  in  their  presence,  the  Investigation  Officer  took  the 

blood stained cotton from the dead body of deceased Ex.PK and last 

worn  clothes of the  deceased  vide Ex.PL. In his presence,  pictures 

were  taken  from  the  place  of  occurrence,  which  are  Ex.P2  to 

Ex.P20,  Azar  band  Ex.P21,  Dupatta  in  cut  form  in  two  pieces 

Ex.P22, a knife Ex.P23, one Pent Belt as Ex.P 24, one Moorra/ stool 

Ex.P 25 and one glass bangle Ex.P 26 vide recovery memo Ex.PM. 

He  was  subjected  to  lengthy  cross-examination  by  the  learned 

defence  counsel,  but  nothing  favourable  could  be  extracted  from 

him. He also denied the suggestion that he was got appointed on the 

job by the appellant. He also denied the suggestion that at the time 

of recovery of above articles, from the place of incident, his parents 

were  also  present.  He  also  denied  that  his  sister  had  committed 

suicide,  as  she  was  annoyed  over  the  issue  of  construction  of 

partition wall. 

18.  PW.7, Muhammad Amin, Assistant Sub-Inspector, was posted 

as  Moharrar  at  Police  Station  Sihala.  In  his  presence  the  appellant 

identified the Azar Band (Ex.P21) and dopatta (Ex.P22) lying in the 

Malkhana.  He  is  also  marginal  witness  of  the  recovery  memo 

(Ex.PH) of these two articles. He alongwith Naveed Ahmed/LHC, are 

the  witnesses  to  the  recovery  memo  (Ex.PH).  He  was  also  cross-

examined by the learned counsel for the appellant, but he denied the 

suggestion  that  the  accused  did  not  identify  anything  in  the 

Malkhana and that he was deposing falsely. 

 
 
 
9 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

19.  PW.8,  Muhammad  Gulfraz  Sub-Inspector  is  the  Investigation 

Officer  of  the  case,  who  deposed  that  he  was  posted  at  Police 

Station  Sihala  when  on  31.05.2015,  on  receiving  information  about 

the arrival of dead body in the Poly Clinic Hospital, he reached there. 

At  that  time,  CMO  was  available,  therefore,  he  examined  the  dead 

body  through  a  lady  doctor.  He  moved  an  application  (Ex.PN)  for 

keeping the dead body in the mortuary and prepared Inquest Report 

(Ex.PC). He prepared site plan, without scale (Ex.PD). He examined 

the  room  where  the  incident  took place  and  recovered  “Azar-Band” 

attached  with  a  hook  affixed  in  the  roof,  one  cut  piece  of  Dopatta 

(Ex.P/  22)  lying  on  the  floor  was,  taken  into  possession  through 

recovery  memo  Ex.PM  in  presence  of  witnesses.  Iron  stand  and 

knife  Ex.P23  were  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo 

(Ex.PM).  No person  from  the locality  came  up to provide any  detail 

about  the  incident.  He  prepared  memo  of  identification  of  the  dead 

body  (Ex.PI).  On  01.06.2015,  after  conducting  the  post-mortem,  he 

handed  over  the  dead  body  to  Haris  Hanif  and  Malik  Bazaib  Ayaz. 

After  the  postmortem,  CMO  handed  over  the  last  worn  clothes  of 

deceased  to  him  vide  recovery  memo  (Ex.PL).  He  also  recorded 

statements  of  witnesses  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  He  took 

photographs  of  the  deceased  and  the  place  of  incident  (Ex.P/  2  to 

Ex.P/  20)  through  his  mobile  phone  and  filed  them  with  the  report 

under Section 173 Cr.P.C. He also took PW.1 Aamir Shahzad to the 

place  of  incident  on  06.6.2015.  On  08.06.2015,  complainant/ 

M.Hanif  gave him  a  supplementary  statement in  the  Police  Station. 

He  produced  affidavit  of  Mst.  Javeria  Ex.PF  and  also  nominated 

three  accused  namely,  Muhammad  Nouman  Shah,  Syed  Imran 

Shah  and  Mst.  Saleha  Nouman.  He  arrested  appellant  Muhammad 

Ehsan Shah on 09.6.2015. 

20.  He  further  deposed  that  during  investigation,  the  appellant 

disclosed  about  the  commission  of  offence.  On  his  pointation,  he 

recovered the danda through which, he inflicted injury on the head of 

deceased. He also recorded statements of witnesses. Accused was 

shifted  to  judicial  custody  on  14.6.2015;  that  on  23.06.2015,  he 

arrested  the  accused  Muhammad  Nouman  Shah  and  Muhammad 

Imran  Shah.  During  investigation,  no  incriminating  evidence  could 

 
10 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

come  on  record  against  the  brothers  of  the  appellant.  He  further 

deposed  that  at  the  conclusion  of  investigation,  he  found  the 

appellant  guilty  for  committing  Qatl-e-Amd  of  deceased,  therefore, 

his  name  was  placed  in  Column  No.3  and  the  names  of  other 

accused were placed in Column No.2, as such, report under Section 

173 Cr.P.C was submitted before the competent court for trial. 

21.  During  cross-examination,  PW.8,  Muhammad  Gulfraz  Sub-

Inspector  explained  the  nature  of  the  incident  and  different  steps 

taken  by  him  during  investigation.  He  remained  firm  during  cross-

examination  and  no  contradiction  or  anything  favourable  to  the 

defence  could  be  brought  on  record  during 

lengthy  cross-

examination. 

22.  First of all coming to the motive for commission of the alleged 

offence, it may be seen that the appellant alongwith deceased were 

living in a house where his other brothers alongwith their wives (two 

bhabees)  were  also  residing.  According  to  the  complainant,  the 

deceased wanted to separate her portion by raising a partition wall, 

but  appellant  did  not  agree  the  proposal.  On  the  night  of  incident, 

parents of the deceased had gone to the house of their daughter to 

settle 

the  differences.  Therefore,  motive  according 

to 

the 

complainant  was  dispute  on  construction  of  a  partition  wall. 

Appellant  did  not  deny  the  existence  of  a  dispute  over  construction 

of a partition wall, but has also admitted. He, however, took a stance 

that she had committed suicide in anger. Therefore, it is proved that 

the  motive  for  the  murder  was  a  dispute  over  construction  of  a 

partition wall. 

23.  Scrutiny of the site plan reflects that the iron stand is not lying 

direct beneath the ceiling fan hook affixed in the roof. It was lying at 

a  distance  of  about  01  to  1-1/2  feet  aside.  It  seems  to  be  hardly 

possible for the deceased to first of all fasten knot of the dopatta with 

the hook of the ceiling fan to enable it to bear the burden of her body 

for hanging. For doing so, firstly her hands should reach comfortably 

to the roof level, which does not seem to be possible for a person of 

about 5ft-4 inch in height (as the deceased was) specially when the 

iron  stool/  moorra  was  placed  right  beneath  the  hook  of  the  ceiling 

 
 
 
11 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

fan. Picture of the stool/ moorra (Ex.PM.9) also shows that it was in 

a  good  condition.  It  is  made  up  of  delicate  sticks  and  it  does  not 

seem to be too strong to bear the weight of standing up of a person 

of 5ft-4 inch in height. Even its upper cover is not pressed or torn. Its 

upper cover also did not show any compression. Therefore, the site 

map  lends  no  support  to  the  version  advanced  by  the  defence  that 

the deceased had committed suicide by  hanging her from the hook 

of  the  ceiling  fan  through  a  ligature/noose  by  standing  on  the 

Stool/Moorra.  

24. 

In  the  instant  case,  injury  No.1  describes  that  the  mark  of 

ligature was present on the middle & left side of neck traversely in its 
middle  1/3rd  area  deeply  seted  creating  the  contusion  collar 

measuring 14 cm  x  1 cm  diameter  of whole neck=38cm.  According 

to  the  postmortem  report,  there  are  signs  of  strangulation  on  the 

body of deceased.  

25.  According to MODI, medical jurisprudence and toxicology, the 

sure  signs  of  hanging  are  that  the  neck  is  found  stretched  and 

elongated  and  the  head  is  always  in-clined  to  the  side  opposite  to 

the knot. The tongue drawn in or caught between the teeth. Bloody 

forth is  sometimes  seems at  the mouth  and nostrils. Saliva is  often 

found  dribbling  out  of  an  angle  of  the  mouth  down  on  the  chin  and 

chest.  Ligature  mark/  Ovlique  non-continues  placed  high-up  in  the 

neck between the chin and the larynx, the base of groove are furrow 

being  hard,  yellow  and  parchment 

like  while, 

in  case  of 

strangulation,  the  ligature  mark  horizontal  or  transverse  continues, 

round the neck, low down in the neck below the thyroid, the base of 

the groove or furrow being soft and radish. It is sufficient to establish 

that  as  per  the  contents  of  postmortem  report  Ex.PB  and  in  the 

opinion  of  doctor,  this  is  not  a  case  of  suicide,  but  a  case  of 

homicide, i.e. she was killed by some other person. 

26.  There  were  seven  injuries  on  her  body.  The  opinion  of  the 

doctor also confirms that all the injuries were ante-mortem in nature 

(caused  before  death)  and  sufficient  to  cause  death  in  ordinary 

course  of  life.  Appellant  has  not  put  up  any  defence  regarding  the 

ante-mortem injuries, present on the person of deceased. 

 
 
 
12 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

27.  The  occurrence  took  place  in  the  house  of  the  convict-

accused.  If  the  deceased  had  committed  suicide, then  the  accused 

ought  to  have  reported  this  fact  immediately  to  the  Police  and  his 

failure  to  do  so  depict  unnatural  conduct  on  his  part.  No  plausible 

explanation  has  been  offered  by  him  in  this  behalf.  Instead  the 

matter  was  reported  by  father  of  the  deceased  to  the  police.  The 

accused-appellant has taken a bald defence that the deceased has 

committed suicide. Article 122 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 

stipulates that if a particular fact was especially within the knowledge 

of any person the burden of proving that fact was upon him.  

Illustrations:- 

than 

 (a) When  a  person  does  an  act  with  some  intention 
other 
character  and 
circumstances  of  the  act  suggest  the  burden  of 
proving that intention is upon him. 

that  which 

the 

(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a 
ticket. The burden of proving that he had a ticket is on 
him." 

Since,  the  accused-appellant  has  taken  a  particular  plea  that  the 

deceased  committed  suicide,  therefore,  he  was  bound  to  prove  his 

this plea  but  except  his bald  narrative of  commission  of  suicide, he 

failed 

to  adduce  any  convincing  evidence  of  unimpeachable 

character  to  prove  his  stance.  He  has  also  not  opted  to  make 

statement  on  oath  under  Section  340  (2)  Cr.P.C  to  disprove  the 

allegation against him. All these facts go a long way to establish the 

guilt of the accused-appellant.  

28.  Admittedly,  the  deceased  and  appellant  lived  in  the  same 

room.  There  were  other  3/4  family  members  living  in  the  same 

house.  The  incident  has  taken  place  during  the  night  when  the 

appellant  was  also  present  in  the  room.  The  appellant  has  not 

denied  his  presence  in  the  room.  It  does  not  appeal  to  a  prudent 

mind  that  the  deceased  would  make  arrangement  for  her  hanging 

with the hook in the roof when her husband was also present in the 

same  room  and  he  did  not  try  to  restrain  her  from  committing 

suicide,  according  to  the  defence  point  of  view.  None  of  the  family 

members  of  the  deceased  has  come  before  the  court  to  give 

 
 
 
 
 
13 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

statement to that effect. There are two injuries on the head (vertex) 

of the deceased, which are also ante-mortem in nature. Danda used 

in  inflicting  injuries  on  the  head  of  deceased  has  also  been 

recovered.  Azar  band,  used  as  noose  to  strangulate  her,  has  also 

been  recovered  from  the  place  of  incident.  Injuries  No.3,  4  &  5 

available on the legs are also ante-mortem in nature. Reliance in this 

regard  is  placed  upon  the  judgment  of  august  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan  reported  as  “Muhammad  Akram  V.  State”  (2003  SCMR 

855) wherein it has been held as under:- 

"The petitioner has neither denied his presence at his 
house  on  the  fateful  day  nor  offered  any  explanation 
that  how  and  under  what  circumstances  Mst.  Salma 
while  sleeping  with  him  in  a  room  of  his  house 
sustained  injuries  with  the  sharp-edged  weapon  on 
the  sensitive  part  of  her  body.  The  bare denial  of  the 
petitioner of knowledge of occurrence and not offering 
any  explanation  that  how  Mst.  Salma  sustained 
injuries would be a strong corroborative circumstance 
provided to the eye-witness account to prove the guilt 
of the petitioner." 

In  another  case  reported  as  “Arshad  Mehmood  v.  State”  (2005 

SCMR  1524),  the  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  held  as 

under:-  

 "It  may  be  noted  that  dead  body  of  deceased  was 
recovered from the house of the petitioner where Mst. 
Safia  was  living  with  him  as  his  wife.  Therefore,  it  is 
not possible to disbelieve the story of the prosecution. 
Besides  it  medical  evidence,  fully  corroborates  to  the 
statement of Mst. Zainab Bibi mother of deceased." 

29.  Another important aspect of the case is that no malafide or ill-

will  has  been  attributed  by  the  appellant  to  the  complainant  or  the 

prosecution  for  his  false  involvement  in  the  case,  which  also 

strengthens the case of prosecution against appellant.  

30.  From  the  facts,  circumstances  and  medical  certificate  shows 

that before the death of Mst. Javeria, she was mercilessly beaten by 

the appellant with danda, due to which, she received injuries on her 

head and legs, and the same injuries were found ante-mortem. This 

fact  is  also  proved  from  the  medical  certificate,  wherein,  nature  of 

injuries  are  stated  ante-mortem  on  the  person  of  deceased,  which 

fact was further proved after recovery of danda and Azar-Band from 

 
14 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

the  place  of  incident  and  it  further  shows  that  thereafter,  she  was 

throttled  to  death  by  applying  Azar-Band  around  her  neck  by  the 

appellant.  Even  otherwise,  the  appellant  has  not  denied  his 

presence  in  the  said  room  during  the  whole  trial.  He  was  failed  to 

explain  whether  he  made  effort  to  prevent  the  deceased  from 

hanging  particularly  during  night  time.  The  onus  lies  upon  the 

shoulder  of  appellant  to  explain  how  his  wife  met  with  unnatural 

death specially,  when there are ante-mortem injuries on the person 

of deceased.  

31. 

It  has  also  come  on  record  that  Muhammad  Hanif  submitted 

complaint  (Ex.PG)  on  31.5.2015,  i.e.  on  the  day  of  incident,  while 

F.I.R  was registered  on  03.06.2015,  after  three days  of submission 

of  complaint  in  the  Police  Station.  The  said  information  was 

incorporated  in  the  daily  diary.  There  is  an  un-explained  delay  of 

three  days  in  registration  of  the  F.I.R.  In  my  opinion,  this  delay 

cannot  be  attributed  to  the  complainant,  as  he  had  performed  his 

duty by submitting the complaint promptly with the police. Therefore, 

it would be unfair and unjust, if due to the lapse on the part of police 

any  undue  advantage  is  extended  to  the  convict/  appellant  when 

sufficient  incriminating  evidence  in  the  form  of  ocular,  medical  and 

circumstantial  evidence  has  come  on  record,  coupled  with  the  fact 

that  no  specific  malafide  or  ill-will  either  to  the  complainant  or 

prosecution  has  been  attributed  by  the  appellant  for  his  false 

involvement  in  the  offence.  So  far  as  the  arguments  of  the  learned 

counsel  for  appellant  that  the  thumb  impression  of  deceased  on 

affidavit  on  Ex.PF  did not match  with  the  NADRA  record.  Appellant 

failed to produce any such report in his defence in this regard.  

32.  Although  in  the  case  in  hand,  murder  of  the  deceased 

Mst.Javeria  is  an  unseen  incident  and  only  circumstantial  evidence 

is  available  against the appellant but it  is  by  now  a  well  settled law 

that  an  accused  can  be  convicted/  sentenced  on  the  basis  of 

circumstantial  evidence,  even  if  the  incident  is  unseen.  The  ocular, 

Medical and circumstantial evidence leads this Court to hold that the 

offence  of  Qatl-e-Amd  has  been  proved  against  the  appellant 

beyond  any  reasonable  shadow  of  doubt.  The  august  Supreme 

 
 
15 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

Court in case titled „Talib Hussain vs The State’ (1995 SCMR 1538), 

has held that in cases where there is no direct evidence to show in 

what  manner  the  offence  had  been  committed,  the  Courts  must 

examine  the  probabilities  in  the  light  of  indirect  evidence  of  the 

injuries  on  the  deceased,  the  nature  and  condition  of  the  place, 

where the incident had taken-place, the articles secured found there, 

the  motive  for  the  crime  and  the  other  surrounding  circumstances 

proved. Mere occurrence of circumstances unless based on proved 

facts  is  not  enough  to  draw  inference.  The  august  Supreme  Court 

has  held  that  the  coincidence  should  be  un-designed  and  not 

maneuvered or planted. Reliance is placed on „Talib Hussain VS The 

State‟  (1995  SCMR  1538).  It  has  also  been  held  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court 

that  capital  punishment  can  be  awarded, 

if 

circumstantial evidence is strong enough to persuade the Court that 

the  person  charged  with  the  offence  has  committed  the  same.  The 

circumstantial  evidence,  however,  must  be  so  clear,  cogent  and 

convincing  that  the  facts  could  not  be  accounted  for  or  any  other 

rational  hypothesis  could  be  arrived  at  other  than  the  guilt  of  the 

accused. It has also been held that if the place of incident is a place 

where no witness was available and the accused had the exclusive 

knowledge  about  the  incident,  mere  denial  on  the  part  of  the 

accused will not be sufficient to nullify the circumstantial evidence of 

the  nature,  which  directly  connects  him  with  commission  of  the 

offence  charged.  Reliance  is  placed  on  “Muhammad  Latif  VS  The 

State”  (PLD  2008  SC  503)  „Akbar  Ali  VS  The  State‟  (2007  SCMR 

486), „Khurshid  VS  The State’  (PLD  1996 SC  305), „Khuda  Bukhsh 

VS The State’ (2004 SCMR 331) „Talib Hussain VS The State‟ (1995 

SCMR 1538) and Saeed Ahmed v. The State (2015 SCMR 710).  

33.  From  bare  reading  of  all 

the  above  said 

facts  and 

circumstances  of  the  case,  no  material  contradictions  are  found  in 

the statements of the prosecution witnesses. Careful examination of 

the  prosecution  evidence  reveals  that  the  witnesses  have  fully 

proved  the  prosecution  case,  supported  by  the  medical  evidence, 

which has confirmed that the death of the deceased was not natural. 

The witnesses remained consistent  and firm  on  material  aspects of 

the  case.  All  the  prosecution  witnesses  are  reliable  and  nothing 

 
16 

Criminal Appeal No.83/2017, and 
Criminal Revision No.108/2017. 

favourable  could  be  extracted 

from 

them  during 

the  cross-

examination in favour of the defence.  

34. 

In view of the above, it is established that the prosecution has 

succeeded  to  prove  its  case  against  the  appellant  through  reliable 

and  trustworthy  evidence.  Involvement  of  the  appellant/  convict  in 

the commission of the offence has been proved beyond any shadow 

of  doubt  and  the  learned  trial  Court  has  rightly  appreciated  the 

prosecution  evidence in its  true perspective and  correctly  convicted 

the  appellant  to  which  no  exception  could  be  drawn  by  this  Court. 

Having  scanned  the  entire  prosecution  evidence,  prosecution  has 

successfully proved the charge of homicidal death of Mst.Javeria at 

the hands of the appellant. All these facts and circumstances, ruled 

out  the  possibility  of  fabrication  and  consultation  prior  to  the 

registration  of  the  crime  report.  The  complainant  and  the  other 

eyewitness  remained  firm  and  consistent  on  all  material  particulars 

of  the  incident  including  the  role  of  the  appellant,  which  is  fully 

supported by the medical evidence.  

35.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  failed  to  point  out 

any illegality, irregularity, mis-reading, non-reading or any infirmity or 

defect in the impugned judgment passed by the learned trial  Court, 

calling for interference by this Court. The convictions and sentences 

awarded  to  the  appellant  by  the  learned  trial  Court  are,  therefore, 

upheld.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  in  criminal  revision  has 

failed  to  point  out  any  justification  for  enhancement  of  sentence, 

recorded by the learned trial Court, against the appellant. 

36.  For  the  foregoing  discussion,  the  above  mentioned  criminal 

appeal and the criminal revision are dismissed. 

(GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on this 27th day of January, 2021. 

Rana.M.Ift 

Approved for reporting. 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
