ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

Writ Petition No. 867 of 2020 
Muhammad  Shakir  
VS
Additional District Judge, Islamabad-West, etc. 

Petitioner by:         

Ch.  Muhammad  Javed  Gujjar, 
Advocate 

Respondents 3 to 6 by:  Malik  Muhammad 

Haseeb, 

Date of Hearing: 

Advocate 
28.09.2020. 

FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM  JANDRAN,  J.-  Through 

the  instant  writ  petition,  petitioner  impugns  judgment  and 

decree  dated  09.07.2019  and  21.12.2019  passed  by  the 

learned  Senior  Civil  Judge-III/Guardian  Judge,  Islamabad-

West  and  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad-

West,  whereby  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance 

filed by the respondents was partially decreed while appeal 

filed by the petitioner was dismissed. 

2. 

    Facts,  relevant  for  the  disposal  of  instant  writ 

petition  are  that  respondents  3  to  6  have  filed  a  suit  for 

recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  against  the  petitioner 

whereby respondent No.3 sought maintenance for herself at 

the rate of Rs.5000/- per month w.e.f. April 2011 while  for 

the respondents 4 to 6 at the rate of Rs.10,000/- per month 

w.e.f.  June  2013  till  their  majority  besides  Rs.2,68,350/- 

school fee of respondent No.4 and Rs.71,600/- the amount 

paid  by  her  parents  as  educational  fee  of  the  petitioner. 

Besides  the  said  suit,  respondent  No.3  also  filed  a  suit  for 

 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 2 – 

recovery  of  dower  amount  to  the  tune  of  Rs.1  Million  and 

twenty tolas gold ornaments.  

3. 

    The  petitioner  contested  the  suit  by  filing  written 

statement he controverted the stance of the respondents by 

asserting  that  he  was  living  in  the  house  of  parents  of 

respondent No.3; that he was expelled out of the house in 

June 2016 and that he had been paying all the school fee of 

the respondents 4 to 6 from his own pocket till June 2016. 

4. 

    The  learned  trial  Court  out  of  divergent  pleadings 

of  the  parties,  framed  necessary  issues  and  recorded 

evidence of the parties.  Respondent No.3 appeared as PW-

1, tendered affidavit P1, Nikah Nama  P2, Form B Mark PA, 

birth  certificates  of  minors  Mark  A2  to  Mark  A4,  marriage 

registration  certificate  Mark  A5,  fee  challans  Mark  A6/1  to 

Mark  A6/19.  On  the  other  hand,  petitioner’s 

father 

Muhammad Younas appeared as DW-1 and tendered power 

of attorney and affidavit Ex.D1 and Ex.D2 respectively. The 

learned  trial Court after hearing the parties, dismissed the 

second  suit  of    respondent  No.3  for  recovery  of  dower 

amount and gold  ornaments while partially decreed the suit 

of  the  respondents  for  recovery  of  maintenance  in  terms 

that  respondents  4  to  6  were  held  entitled  to  recovery 

maintenance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.10,000/-  per  month  each 

from  July  2016  till  their  legal  entitlement  with  5%  annual 

increase while claim of the respondent No.3 for  recovery of 

maintenance  allowance  was  dismissed.  Hence,  the  instant 

writ petition.  

5. 

    Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  the 

evidence  on  record  establishes  the  fact  that  the  petitioner 

since  day  one  of  the  marriage  had   been  living  in  parental 

house of respondent No.3; that petitioner has no legitimate 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 3 – 

source  of  income  at  present  while  on  the  other  hand, 

respondent  No.3  is  a  working  lady  having  permanent  job 

and  source  of  income  while  it  is  also  established  from  the 

evidence  that  the petitioner  had been  contributing  towards 

payment of maintenance, therefore, in absence of sufficient 

financial  means, 

the 

impugned  maintenance 

is 

too 

excessive, therefore, impugned judgment and decree to this 

extent are liable to be modified. 

6. 

    On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the 

respondents  3  to  6  argued  that  from  the  statement  of 

witness  of  petitioner,  it  is  evident  that  the  petitioner  hails 

from  a  well-off  family  and  living  with  his  parents  while  the 

maintenance  fixed,  in  the  present  days  of  inflation,  in  no 

way can be termed excessive, therefore, petition is liable to 

be dismissed.  

7. 

    Heard  the  learned  counsels  for  the  parties  and 

perused the record with their able assistance.  

8. 

    The  pivotal  point  in  the  case  is  that  whether  the 

course  adopted  by  the  learned  Family  Judge  and  affirmed 

by the learned Appellate Court qua fixation of maintenance, 

to be paid by the petitioner/father is in accordance with the 

evidence on record besides the law on the subject. 

9. 

    The  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  in  case  law  reported  as 

“Muhammad Asim v. Mst.Samro Begum” (PLD 2018 SC 

819), has held that:-  

“Where a husband was required to maintain his 
wife  or  children  and  was  required  to  pay 
maintenance,  including  the  arrears  of 
maintenance, his present and past earnings must 
be disclosed by him, because his financial status 
would determine the amount of maintenance that 
should be awarded. The family court should 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 4 – 

try to ascertain the salary and earnings of 
husband/father, who was required to pay 
maintenance.” [Emphasis added]  

10. 

The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in 

another  judgment  reported  as  “Humayun  Hassan  v. 

Arslan Humayun and another“  (PLD  2013  SC  557) 

expounded the law in the following terms:- 

“4. Heard. There can be no cavil with the 
proposition that the maintenance issue(s), in 
relation to Muslim relatives shall be governed 
and regulated by the principles/injunctions of 
Islam i.e. as per the personal law of the parties. 
In this context, according to section 369 of the 
Muhammadan Law by D.F. Mullah, maintenance 
means and includes food, raiment and lodging. 
However, it may be observed that from the very 
language of the above section, such definition is 
neither conclusive nor exhaustive, and in our 
view it undoubtedly has a wider connotation and 
should be given an extended meaning, for the 
purposes  of  meeting  and  catering  for  the 
present days social, physical, mental growth, 
upbringing and well-being of the minor, keeping 
in mind the status of the family, the norms of 
the society and his educational requirement, 
which has now attained utmost importance but 
obviously corresponding to and commensurating 
with the means and the capacity of the father to 
pay. Anyhow, the same jurist in section 370 of 
the book has elucidated the liability of the father 
to  pay  the  maintenance  to  his  children  as 
follows:--  

"370.  Maintenance  of  children  and 
grandchildren.---(1) A father is bound to 
maintain his sons until they have attained 
the age of puberty. He is also bound to 
maintain  his  daughters  until  they  are 
married. But he is not bound to maintain 
his adult sons unless they are disabled by 
infirmity or disease. The fact that the 
children are in the custody of their mother 
during their infancy (section 352) does not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 5 – 

relieve the father from the obligation of 
maintaining them. But the father is not 
bound to maintain a child who is capable 
of being maintained out of his or her own 
property.  

(2) If the father is poor, and in capable of 
earning by his own labour, the mother, if she is 
in easy circumstances, is bound to maintain her 
children as the father would be.  
(3) If the father is poor and infirm, and the 
mother also is poor, the obligation to maintain 
the children lies on the grandfather, provided he 
is in easy circumstances." 

And at the end an additional note on the compendia of the 

principal  of  Muslim  Personal  Law  was  also  made  in  the 

following terms:- 

“When a court of law is to adjudicate upon 
parental or filial obligations of a Muslim it is only 
the  legal  principles  concomitant  to  such 
obligations which are relevant and not the social 
or moral principles. A father, or any of the 
parents in a given case, may be under a social 
or moral expectation, compulsion or obligation 
to maintain a minor offspring for as long as the 
offspring does not attain the requisite physical, 
mental,  intellectual  and  financial  capacity  to 
survive and sustain on his own but the case in 
hand before the learned trial court was only in 
respect of maintenance of a minor son by his 
father which issue, on the legal plane, could not 
have been stretched by the learned executing 
court and the learned Judge-in-Chamber of the 
Lahore High Court, Lahore to a stage beyond 
the sons's minority by blurring the distinction 
between social and moral obligations and legal 
obligations  under  the  principles  of  Muslim 
personal law. 

11. 

In another judgment, Hon’ble Supreme Court of 

Pakistan  in “Khadija Bibi and another v. Abdul Rahim 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 6 – 

and another” (2012  SCMR  671)  by  remanding  matter  to 

the learned Family Court held as under:- 

“3.  The other question as to automatic annual 
increase  in  the  maintenance  for  the  minor 
children has been dealt with by the High Court 
in para 7 of the impugned judgment. At present, 
there appears to be no factual basis brought on 
record  to  justify  such  annual  increase.  The 
learned counsel for the petitioner, however, 
states that he will be in a position to lead 
evidence  in  the  form  of  financial  statistics 
including the Sensitive Price Index (“SPI”) to 
persuade the trial Court to grant annual increase 
in line with such statistical data. 

4.  In  the  foregoing  circumstances,  the 
appellate judgment dated 23.02.2010 and the 
impugned judgment dated 04.08.2011 are set 
aside. The matter is remanded to the Trial Court 
which shall proceed to frame specific issues 
relating  to  the  dowry  articles  as  well  as 
enhancement of maintenance awarded to the 
minor children and shall thereafter allow the 
parties to lead evidence before deciding the 
case afresh. During this period, maintenance at 
the rate of 2,000 per month shall continue to be 
deposited by the respondent No.1/Grandfather.” 

12.  The Hon’ble Lahore High Court in the case of “Nazia 

Bibi  and  others  v.  Additional  District  Judge 

Ferozewala  and  others”  (PLD  2018  Lahore  916)  held 

that:- 

“9.  Quantum  of  maintenance  requires  due 
consideration of all factors on the basis of which 
the court can determine the actual need of the 
minor. In this regard, it is important for the court 
to first determine the expenses incurred or likely 
to be incurred on the minors. For this purpose the 
court must look into the living conditions of the 
minor and the manner and means by which the 
mother  is  maintaining  the  minors  which  will 
include factors like where they reside, whether the 
mother is dependent upon her family, if so what is 

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 7 – 

the income on the basis of which the minor is also 
being  cared  whether  she  has  a  job  and 
whether she has any source of independent 
income. Special needs of the minor which will 
include  medical  or  physical  needs  or  special 
educational needs should also be seen. Special 
needs will vary from case to case, if relevant, as it 
is unique to the situation and individual. Yet for 
the purpose of maintenance it is the obligation of 
the father to fulfill these special needs. In the case 
of enhancement, the court must also determine as 
to what extent the maintenance already fixed 
meets the requirement and expenses of the minor 
and for what purpose, further enhancement is 
required. At the same time the court must 
determine the income of the father either 
through proper documentary evidence or on 
the basis of the social status and earning 
capacity of the father. In order to ensure that 
proper information is before the court, it may 
always require the father to produce documents 
such as his salary slips or any bank statement or 
property document on the basis of which he is 
able to show his monthly income or earning or his 
financial status. In this regard, the assets owned 
by the father are relevant as it contributes towards 
establishing the financial status of the father that 
has to be probed into by the court and based on 
attending circumstances the court can conclusively 
establish the means through which the father will 
be able to maintain the minors. It is also important 
to  take  into  consideration  any  liability  of  the 
father, that is whether he is paying any bank loan 
or debt, whether he has remarried or has other 
children or whether his parents are dependent on 
him. In this way the court can determine the 
manner in which the income of the father is spent 
and balance the income and capacity with the 
reasonable requirements of the minors seeking 
maintenance. [Emphasis added] 

13. 

    The Hon’ble Lahore High Court in case reported as 

“Khalid  Mahmood  v.  Naseem  Akhtar”  (2019  MLD  820 

Lahore) held that Section 17-A (4) of the Family Court Act, 

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 8 – 

1964 provided that paramount duty of the Family Court is to 

keep in mind the financial status of the father before fixing 

the  quantum  of  maintenance.  Likewise,  in  case  laws 

reported  as  2004  MLD  1325  Peshawar  and  2009  CLC 

1819 Lahore, same principle was reiterated.  

14. 

That  evidence  of  PW-1  (respondent  No.3)  is 

available  on  record,  wherein,  in  her  cross-examination  she 

stated as under:- 

 محکمہ بجا یمیر کہ ہے 

سرد یہ ۔ںہو تیکر بجا یرکاسر میں کہ ہے 

سرد یہ

 ہے 

سرد یہ۔تھے نہیں ملا

ش

 بھی 

بحصا لداو ےمیر میں حنکا ےمیر کہ ہے 

سرد یہ

۔ہے میں 

(PWD)

۔تھیں ملا

ش میں حنکا ےمیر ہلداو

یمیر کہ

۔تھی یدا

ش کی

love

 یدا

ش یرہما

۔تھی نہ بجا ئیکو سکیا تھا تعلیم 

 یز حنکا 

قبو علیہ عامد کہ ہے 

سرد یہ

۔تھا یتاد مجھے چار

خ سا لیمعمو  سے میں نمدٓا پنیا

یدا

ببٓا نارود علیہ عامد کہ ہے 

سرد یہ

 میں

BPS-11

 میں با  کہ کہا  ہرا

ببود  ۔ںہو  تیکر بجا میں

 میںBPS-9 

 ہاتنخو /یسیلر ساگر یمیر ۔ 

UDC 
 یئیواپر بھی ہوعلا کے مزملا یرکاسر میں کہ ہے 

 ںہو تیکر بجا

 کا 

پر رطو 

 ںہو ہیر لے ہاتنخو 

 پےور

30,000/- 

 نہہاما سے بجا 

 ربطو میں۔ ںہو تیکر بجا

سرد یہ۔ہے پےور

27,000/- 
 یئیواپر پنیا میں ۔ںہو ہیر کر بجا
 یئیواپر یمیر کہ کہا دخو زا

 ب بجا 

۔ہے ئما

ب ٹرا

 لسکو ہکرمتذ کہ ہے 

سرد یہ ۔ہے دجومو لسکو یرکاسر بھی رندا کے نیلوکا یرہما کہ ہے 

سرد یہ

۔ہے قعاو پر فتمسا لپید

بکر رنحصاا پر ینلداو پنےا میں سلسلہ کے تجاار

خا پنےا علیہ عامد کہ ہے

 نہ علم مجھے

۔ہے ہار لتااڈ حصہ میں ئیگیادا کی فیس کی ںبچو علیہ عامد یدا

ببٓا نارود

۔ہے 

15. 

The above referred testimony of the respondent 

No.3 when considered in light with the other pleadings then 

it  transpires  that  judgments  of  the  two  courts  below  is 

lacking regarding determination of quantum of maintenance 

 
 
 
 
 
ت
ت
  
ت
ت
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ر
ت
ت
ت
 
ت
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ٹ
ت
 
ٹ
 
ٹ
ٹ
 
ت
ت
 
 
ا
ت
 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 9 – 

for  the  private  respondents,  in  the  light  of  above  referred 

case laws. 

16. 

It is incumbent upon all courts of the country to 

adhere  legal  pronunciation  by  the  Apex  court  of  the  land 

and to seek guidance while deciding the matter before them 

which  has  not  been  considered  in  the  present  case  by  the 

lower forum.  

17. 

    The  principle  ibid,  guides  to  hold  that  before 

determination  of  the  quantum  of  the  maintenance,  the 

learned  Family  Court,  is  under  obligation  to  determine  the 

financial  capability  of  the  father  vis-a-vis  the  amount 

claimed in that respect. The test provided for the purpose is 

that 

there  should  be  some 

tangible,  concrete  and 

confidence  inspiring  material  preferably  in  the  shape  of 

documents  and  thereafter  proper  maintenance  is  to  be 

fixed. 

18. 

    Now it is to be seen that whether the maintenance 

fixed  and  affirmed  by 

the 

two 

learned  Courts 

is 

inconsonance  with  income  of  the  petitioner  and  for 

ascertaining the same, evidence has been gone through.   

19. 

     The  statement  of  respondent  No.3/PW-1  is  very 

material in this respect and as a matter of fact, reflects the 

true  story.  She  in  cross-examination  admitted  that  she  is 

doing  government  job  in  PWD;  that  no  rent  is  being 

deducted  from  them  for  the  residence  wherein  they  are 

residing;  that  no  member  from  the  family  of  petitioner 

attended the Nikah ceremony; that even her father had not 

participated in the Nikah; that it was  a love marriage; that 

at the time of Nikah, petitioner had been studying and was 

jobless.  

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 10 – 

20. 

    The  witness  admitted  that  during  cohabitation, 

petitioner had been contributing to some extent in terms of 

maintenance out of his  income; that she is serving in BPS-

11 with monthly salary of Rs.27,000/-; that she is also doing 

private job and earning Rs.30,000/- per month; that she has 

no  knowledge  as  to  whether  the  petitioner  is  currently 

jobless; that at the time of Nikah her Rukhsti had not taken 

place and that petitioner had been contributing for payment 

of school fees of the minors during the Abadi.  

21. 

    The  careful  analysis  of  the  statement  of  the 

respondent No.3 lead to draw conclusion that it was a love 

marriage,  petitioner  had  been  studying  at  that  time,  while 

they  after  the  marriage,  lived  in  the  parental  house  of  the 

respondent No.3, which is an official accommodation. It also 

borne out from the evidence that the petitioner, as admitted 

by  the  respondent  No.3  highlighted  above,  had  been 

contributing in terms of maintenance and payment of school 

fee  of  the  children  at  par  with  his  financial  capability.  The 

respondent No.3 in her statement has not given the details 

or  even  remote  hint  whereby  the  financial  status  of  the 

petitioner  could  be  ascertained  while  on  the  other  hand  a 

suggestion was also put to her that the petitioner is jobless. 

In  such  an  eventuality,  when  the  legitimate  source  of 

income  of  the  petitioner  is  shrouded  in  mystery  and  it  is 

established  that  respondent  No.3,  is  a  working  lady,  had 

been  contributing  towards  maintenance  parallel  to  the 

petitioner, 

the  awarded  maintenance  appears 

to  be 

excessive and in contravention of the financial  capability of 

the  petitioner  particularly,  when  there  is  nothing on  record 

regarding his financial capability. The amount so fixed thus 

warrants modification.  

 
 
 
 
Writ Petitions 867-2020. 
                                                            - 11 – 

22. 

    The  sequel  of  above  discussion  is that  while  fixing 

maintenance,  both  the  learned  courts  have  overlooked  the 

important aspects highlighted in para-14 (supra), which are 

essential  to  determine  the  financial  capability  of  the  father 

vis-à-vis  independent  source  of  income  of  the  respondent 

No.3/mother.  It  was 

incumbent  upon  the  courts  to 

determine  the  income  of  the  father  for  which  recourse  in 

terms  of  sub-section  4  of  section  17  (A)  of  the  West 

Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  can  be  adopted  which  is 

meant  to  facilitate  the  court  to  determine  the  financial 

position of the father.  

23. 

     Consequently,  impugned  judgments  and  decrees 

dated  09.07.2019  and  21.12.2019  are  set-aside  and  the 

matter  is  remanded  to  the  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge-III/ 

Guardian  Judge,  Islamabad-West  for  decision  afresh  within 

a  period  of  one  month  from  the  receipt  of  this  judgment 

after  giving  due  opportunity  to  both  the  parties  to  lead 

evidence,  if  so  desire.  The  petitioner  shall  continue  paying 

maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.3500/- per month 

per child, which he is already paying, till the final disposal of 

the suit. There shall be no orders as to costs. 

Imran 

Announced in open Court on 20.11.2020. 

(FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN)  

     JUDGE 

Approved for reporting. 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
