        Form No: HCJD/C-121.     

ORDER SHEET

       IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

 W.P. No. 2839 of 2018. 

Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif.      

VS 

The State through Chairman, National Accountability Bureau, etc.    

        DATE OF HEARINGS :        10-09-2018, 11-09-2018, 12-09-2018,  
13-09-2018, 17-09-2018, 18-09-2018  
& 19-09-2018.      

        PETITIONERS BY 

:       Khawaja Haris Ahmad, Ms Ayesha  

Hamid, Mr Muhammad Amjad  
Pervaiz, Mr Muhammad Zubair  
Khalid, Mr Muhammad  
Aurangzeb, Mr Sher Afghan  
Asadi, Mr Abraheem Haroon and  
Mr Munawar Iqbal Duggal,  
Advocates for the petitioners in  
their respective  petitions.  

        RESPONDENTS  BY  :         Mr Muhammad Akram Qureshi,  

Special Prosecutor, NAB. 
Mr  Jehanzaib  Rahim  Bharwana, 
Additional, PGA, NAB. 
Sardar  Muzaffar  Ahmad  Khan, 
DPGA, NAB. 
Mr  Imran  Shafiq,  Mr  Asghar 
Awan, Mr Irfan Ahmad Boola and 
Mr  Zain  Akram,  Advocates  / 
Special Prosecutors NAB.    

ATHAR MINALLAH, J;-  This single order shall dispose 

of the instant constitutional petition as well as W.P. No.  2841 of 

2018  (Maryam  Nawaz  Sharif VSNational Accountability 

Bureau,  etc)  and  W.P.  No.  2841  of  2018  (Capt.  Retd. 

Muhammad Safdar VSNational Accountability Bureau, etc).  

    
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

2 

2.   

Through  these  petitions  the  petitioners  have  invoked 

the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of this Court under Article 199 of 

the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Constitution”),  seeking 

suspension  of  their  respective  sentences  handed  down  by  the 

learned  Accountability  Court  No.1  vide  judgment,  dated 

06.07.2018 (hereinafter referred to as the “Judgment”).  

BRIEF BACKGROUND: 

3.   

Briefly,  the  facts  leading  to  the  conviction  and 

sentences  of  the  petitioners,  namely,  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz 

Sharif, son of Mian Muhammad Sharif (hereinafter referred to as 

the  “Petitioner  No.1”),  Maryam  Nawaz  (Maryam  Safdar) 

daughter of Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif (hereinafter referred 

to  as  the  “Petitioner No.2”)  and  Captain  Retd.  Muhammad 

Safdar,  son  of Muhammad Ishaq (hereinafter referred to as the 

“Petitioner No.3”),  (they  shall  be  referred  to  collectively  as 

the  “Petitioners”)  are  that  in  April  2016  the  International 

Consortium of Investigative Journalists had released information 

relating to leaked documents of a private law firm, namely, M/S 

Mossack Fonseca, which is stated to be based in Panama. Some 

of  these  leaked  documents  had  reference  to  one  of  the 

petitioners.  The  documents  disclosed  details  of  offshore 

companies  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the  British  Virgin 

Islands.  The  reference  in  the  documents  to  one  of  the 

petitioners was regarding two offshore companies, namely, M/S 

Nescoll  Limited  and  Nielson  Enterprises  Limited.  The  titles  of 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

3 

apartments  no.  16,  16  A,  17  and  17 A, Avenfield House,  Park 

Lane,  London  UK  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  “Avenfield 

Apartments")  were 

transferred 

in 

the  name  of 

the 

aforementioned  companies  on  01.06.1993,  23.07.1996,  and 

31.07.1995  respectively.  Petitions  were  filed  before  the  august 

Supreme Court, which were entertained under Article 184(3) of 

the  Constitution.  By  a  majority  of  three  to  two Hon’ble Judges 

of  the  apex  Court,  a  Joint  Investigation  Team  (hereinafter 

referred to as the “JIT”) was constituted to carry out thorough 

investigations. Two Hon’ble Judges had declared Petitioner no.1 

to  be  disqualified  to  hold  public  office.  The  Judgment  of  the 

august Supreme Court is reported as “Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi 

v.  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif,  Prime  Minister  of 

Pakistan/Member National Assembly, Prime Minister’s House, 

Islamabad  and  9  others”  [PLD  2017  S.C.  265].  The  JIT 

concluded  its  investigations  and  thereafter submitted a detailed 

report.  The  august  Supreme  Court,  after  examining  the  JIT 

report and other material which was placed on record, observed 

that  a 

  prima  facie 

  case,  triable  under  the  National 

Accountability  Ordinance,  1999  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

“Ordinance of 1999”),  was  made  out.  Simultaneously,  the 

august  Supreme  Court  declared  Petitioner  No.1 

to  be 

disqualified  to  hold  the  public  office  to  which  he  was  elected. 

The august Supreme Court gave directions and the judgment is 

reported  as  “Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi VS Mian Muhammad 

Nawaz  Sharif” [PLD 2017 S.C. 692].  Pursuant  to  the  said 

judgment,  the  National  Accountability  Bureau  (hereinafter 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

4 

referred  to  as  the “Bureau”)  filed  an interim Reference No.20 

of  2017  on  07.09.2017,  alleging  the  commission  of  offences 

defined  under  section  9(a)(iv)(v)  and  (xii),  punishable  under 

section 10 of the Ordinance of 1999, read with serial no.2 and 3 

of the Schedule thereto. Besides the Petitioners, Hussain Nawaz 

and  Hassan  Nawaz  Sharif,  both  sons  of  Mohammad  Nawaz 

Sharif,  were  also  arrayed  as  accused.  The  latter  two  were 

proclaimed as absconders after fulfilling the legal requirements. 

The 

learned  trial  Court  framed  the  charge  against  the 

Petitioners on 19.10.2017  for offences under section 9(a)(iv)(v) 

and (xii) punishable under section 10 of the Ordinance of 1999 

read  with  serial  nos.2  and  3(a)  of  the  Schedule  thereto.  Serial 

no.  3(a)  of  the  Schedule  was  included  in  the  charge,  dated 

19.10.2017,  in  respect  of  the  Trust  Deed,  dated  02.02.2006 

(Ex.PW.14/2), which was alleged to be false and fabricated. The 

learned Accountability Court, vide order dated 08.11.2017, held 

that  section  30  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  had  prescribed  the 

mechanism  for taking cognizance of offences in respect of false 

and  fabricated  evidence.  It  was  also  observed  that  the  offence 

under  serial no.3 (a) of the Schedule was not mentioned in the 

Reference  filed  by  the  Bureau.  The  learned  trial  Court, 

therefore, deleted section 3(a) of the Schedule of the Ordinance 

of  1999  and,  thereafter, framed a fresh charge on 08.11.2017, 

whereby  serial  no.  3(a)  of  the  Schedule  of  the  Ordinance  of 

1999  stood  deleted.  The  Bureau  filed  a  supplementary 

Reference  on  22.01.2018.  The  Petitioners  pleaded  not  guilty. 

The  prosecution  produced  eighteen  (18)  witnesses,  while  the 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

5 

Petitioners  preferred  not  to  be  examined  on  oath  and, 

therefore,  their  respective  statements  were  recorded  under 

section 342 of the Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred 

to  as  the  “Cr.P.C”).  The  learned  Accountability  Court,  after 

affording an opportunity of hearing to the parties, rendered the 

Judgment.  The  Petitioners  were  acquitted  in  the  case  of  the 

offence  under  section  9(a)(iv)  while  they  were  convicted,  inter 

alia, under section 9(a)(v) of the Ordinance of 1999. They were 

convicted and sentenced  in the following terms;  

“The guilt of the accused Mian Muhammad Nawaz 

Sharif u/s 9(a)(v) NAO, 1999 read with Serial No.2 of the 

schedule attached with the said Ordinance punishable u/s 

10 of NAO, 1999/said Serial No.2 of schedule. Therefore, 

he/accused Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif is hereby 

convicted and sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for a 

term of ten years with fine 08 million pounds. He is also 

convicted and sentenced under offence cited at Serial 

No.2  for  one  year.  Both  the  sentences  shall  run 

concurrently.” 

“The  trust  deeds  produced  by  the  accused 

Maryam  Nawaz were also found bogus. She/accused 

Maryam Nawaz was instrumental in concealment of the 

properties of his father accused Mian Muhammad Nawaz 

Sharif.  This  accused Maryam  Nawaz  aided,  assisted, 

abetted, attempted and acted in conspiracy with her 

father accused Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif who was 

holder  of  Public  Office.  Therefore,  prosecution  has 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

6 

succeeded to establish her guilt within the meaning of 

Section 9(a)(v)(Xii) NAO, 1999 read with Serial No.2 of 

the  schedule  and  punishable  u/s  10  and  schedule 

attached therewith. In view of the role of this accused 

Mst. Maryam Nawaz, she is convicted and sentenced to 

Rigorous Imprisonment for seven years with fine of two 

million  pounds  under  section  u/s  9(a)(v)(xii)  NAO, 

1999/read with section 10 of NAO 1999 and simple 

imprisonment for one year under Serial No.2 of the 

schedule. Both the sentences shall run concurrently.” 

“The accused Muhammad Safdar had signed the 

trust deeds as witness, he also aided, assisted, abetted, 

attempted and acted in conspiracy with the accused Mian 

Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and Maryam Safdar within the 

meaning of Section u/s 9(a)(v)(xii) NAO, 1999 read with 

section 10 of NAO 1999 and Serial No.2 of the schedule 

and  he  is  convicted  and  sentenced  to  rigorous 

imprisonment for one year u/s 9(a)(v)(xii) NAO, 1999 

read with section 10 of NAO 1999 and one year Serial 

No.2 of schedule attached with NAO, 1999.” 

4.   

The  Petitioners preferred appeals under section 32 of 

the Ordinance of 1999, assailing the Judgment. It is noted that, 

pursuant  to  the  directions  of  the  august  Supreme  Court,  two 

other  References  were  also  filed  which are pending trial before 

the learned Accountability Court. The trial is being conducted on 

a  day  today  basis  so  that  they  could  be  concluded  within  the 

time  frame  prescribed  by  the  august  Supreme  Court.  The 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

7 

appeals  were  filed and fixed before a learned Division Bench of 

this  Court  which  directed  fixation  thereof  after  the  summer 

vacations.  The  Petitioners  had  simultaneously  filed  these 

constitutional  petitions  and  the  learned  Division  Bench,  vide 

order  dated  17.07.2018,  admitted  the  same  and  directed 

issuance  of  notices  to  the  respondents.  Further  direction  was 

also  given  for  fixation  of  the  petitions  in  the last week of July, 

2018 before an available Bench. After a preliminary hearing and 

with  the  consent  of  the  learned  counsels,  the  petitions  were 

adjourned  to  13.08.2018.  On  13.08.2018,  the  petitions  were 

fixed  and  arguments  were  also  heard.  However,  during  the 

course  of  the  arguments  it  was  brought  to  our  notice  that  the 

appeals  had  been  directed  to  be  fixed  for  hearing  after  the 

summer  vacations.  We,  therefore,  deemed  it  appropriate  to 

keep the petitions pending and vide order, dated 20.08.2018, it 

was  observed  that  they  could  be  pressed  in  case  of  delay  in 

deciding  the  appeals.  It  is  noted  that  a  time  frame  has  been 

prescribed under section 32 of the Ordinance of 1999 to decide 

the appeals. On behalf of the Petitioners, C.M. No. 3485 of 2018 

was  filed,  wherein  it  was  prayed  that  these  constitutional 

petitions be taken up and decided since it would not be possible 

to advance arguments in the appeals on the grounds mentioned 

therein.  We  were  satisfied  that  in  the  peculiar  facts  and 

circumstances of this case, the grounds raised in the application 

were  cogent,  forceful  and  reasonable. We were also mindful of 

the  fact  that  any  conclusive  decision  in  the  appeals  may 

prejudice 

the  case  of  either  party  before 

the 

learned 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

8 

Accountability  Court  in  the pending trials. In  order to meet the 

ends  of  justice, C.M. No. 3485 of 2018 was allowed vide order 

dated  10.09.2018.  With  the  consent  of  the  learned counsels, a 

schedule  was  prescribed  so  as  to  give  them  reasonable 

opportunity  to  advance  arguments  in  these  petitions.  The 

appeals  were,  therefore,  adjourned  and directed to be fixed on 

their turn.   

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR 

PETITIONER NO.1: 

5.   

Petitioner  No.1  was  represented  by  Khawaja  Haris 

Ahmed, Senior A.S.C., who has argued that; the conviction and 

sentences  recorded  by  the  learned  trial  Court  are,  prima  facie, 

not  sustainable in the eyes of law; the obvious legal defect and 

lacuna  floats  on  the surface of the Judgment and is identifiable 

on the basis of tentative assessment of evidence recorded in the 

case;  a  plain  reading  of  the Judgment shows that, prima facie, 

no  conviction  could  have  been  recorded  nor  sentence  passed 

against  Petitioner  No.1;  the  latter  has  been  held  guilty  of  the 

offence  of  having  acquired  assets  disproportionate  to  known 

sources  of  his  income;  the  essential  ingredients  which  were 

required  to  be  established  by  the  prosecution  have  not  been 

fulfilled; the price at which the assets i.e. ‘Avenfield Apartments’ 

were  allegedly  acquired  at  the  relevant  time  i.e. between 1993 

to 1996 had not been determined; without determination of the 

price  at  the  relevant  time,  which  was  a  condition  precedent so 

that  it  could  be  compared  with  the  known  sources  of  income, 

the mandatory obligation on the part of the prosecution was not 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

9 

discharged; it is settled law that in order to prove the offence of 

acquiring  assets  disproportionate  to  known  sources  of  income, 

the  onus  is  on  the  prosecution  to  prove  'quite  objectively'  that 

such  assets  were  acquired  and  that  they  were disproportionate 

to the known sources of income; the prosecution failed to bring 

on record positive evidence to prove, on the one hand, the price 

at  which  the  assets  were  acquired  and,  correspondingly,  the 

known sources of income of the accused at the relevant time; it 

is  a  mandatory  obligation  of  the  prosecution  to  quantify  both 

the  price  of  the  assets  as well as the known sources of income 

for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  offence  and  only  then  the 

onus shifts to the accused; the prosecution has led no evidence 

whatsoever  to  even  remotely  indicate  the  price  at  which 

Avenfield  Apartments  were  alleged  to  have  been  acquired  by 

the  Petitioner  No.1;  in this regard, during cross examination, a 

specific  question  was  put  to  PW.16  but  he  was unable to refer 

to  any  document  showing  the  price  at  which  the  apartments 

had  been  purchased  at  the  relevant time; no other prosecution 

witness  had  deposed  during  the  trial  regarding  the  price  and, 

therefore,  no  comparison  with  known  sources  of income could 

have  been  made;  the  Reference,  Charge  and  the  Judgment do 

not  refer  to  the  price  nor  reflects  that  the  known  sources  of 

income  had  been  quantified;  the  Judgment,  therefore,  prima 

facie,  suffers  from  an  obvious  legal  error  and  lacuna;  the 

ingredients  which  are  required  to  be  established  by  the 

prosecution  for  the  purposes  of  evidence  under section 9(a)(v) 

of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  have  been highlighted by the august 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

10 

Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  titled  “Khalid Aziz VSState” 

[2011 SCMR 136], “Ghani-ur-Rehman VSNAB, etc” [PLD 

2011 S.C.1144] and “Pir Mazharul Haq VSState, etc” [PLD 

2005 S.C. 63]. 

6.   

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  a  purported 

chart  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  Petitioner No.1 (Ex.P.W.18/13) 

was  tendered  in  evidence  by  Mr  Imran  Dogar,  Investigating 

Officer  of  the  Bureau;  an  objection  was  promptly  raised  and 

recorded  by  the  learned  trial  Court;  the  objection  was  to  the 

effect  that  Mr  Wajid  Zia  (PW.16),  who  had appeared on behalf 

of  the  JIT,  had  not  stated  that  such  a document was prepared 

during  the  investigations;  the  said  document  was  also  not 

produced  or  exhibited  during  his  deposition;  Mr  Imran  Dogar, 

the  Investigating  Officer  who  had  tendered  the  document  in 

evidence,  had  admitted  during  cross  examination,  inter  alia, 

that  he  had  no  concern  with  the  preparation  thereof  nor knew 

when it was prepared and by whom; despite the legal objection 

regarding admissibility of the chart  i.e. Ex.P.W.18/13, the same 

was  not  decided  and  the  learned  trial  Court  had  explicitly 

recorded  that  a  decision  thereon  shall  be  taken  later;  without 

deciding  the  crucial  objection  raised  regarding  admissibility  of 

the  document  Ex.P.W.18/13,  the  learned  trial  Court  placed 

reliance  thereon;  the  Judgment,  therefore,  suffers  from  an 

obvious  error;  a  specific  charge  was  framed  against  Petitioner 

No.1  under  section  9(a)(iv)  of  the  Ordinance  of 1999, alleging 

that  Avenfield  Apartments  were  acquired  by corrupt, dishonest 

or illegal means. 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

11 

7.   

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  no  shred  of 

evidence  could  be  brought  on  record  to  even  remotely  prove 

that Avenfield Apartments had been acquired by Petitioner No.1 

through corrupt, dishonest or illegal means for himself or for his 

dependents  and,  therefore,  the  learned  trial  Court  acquitted 

Petitioner no.1 and other Petitioners relating  to the said specific 

offence;  in  the  face  of  this  finding,  Petitioner  No.1  could  not 

have  been  convicted  under  section  9(a)(v)  of  the  Ordinance of 

1999  and  in  this  regard  the  learned  counsel  has  referred  to 

paragraph  8  of  the Judgment rendered by the august Supreme 

Court  in  Ghani-ur-Rehman  case,  supra;  section  9(a)(v)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  is  an  offence  through  fiction  of  law  and, 

therefore,  once  the  learned  trial  Court,  on  the  basis  of 

appreciation  of  evidence,  had  acquitted  the  Petitioners  in  the 

context  of  the  offence  under  section  9(a)(iv),  then  conviction 

and  sentence  under  section  9(a)(v)  was  not  warranted  nor 

sustainable;  the  charge  framed  by  the  learned  trial  Court  had 

attributed  ownership  to  all  the  three  Petitioners  while  the 

Judgment has held Petitioner no.1 to be the owner and thus he 

was  convicted  under  section  9(a)(v);  this  finding  is  based  on 

mere  presumption  since  the  Judgment  does  not  refer  to  any 

oral  or  documentary  evidence  which  would  even  remotely 

establish  a  connection  between  Petitioner  No.1  and  the 

ownership  of  Avenfield  Apartments;  Mr Wajid Zia (PW.16) and 

Mr  Imran  Dogar  (PW.18),  had  both  admitted  during  their 

respective cross examinations that no such oral or documentary 

evidence could be collected during investigations. 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

12 

8.   

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  it  was  the 

stance  of  Petitioner  no.1  before  the  JIT  that  he had absolutely 

no concern with the acquiring of or with any transaction leading 

to  the  purchase  of  the  Avenfield  Apartments;  the  learned  trial 

Court, on mere assumptions, has concluded that the children at 

the  relevant  time  were  the  dependents  of  Petitioner  no.1;  the 

observations  made  in  the  Judgment,  which  draws  inference 

regarding  financial  dependency,  are  without  any  basis  and  on 

unsupported presumptions; it is on record and it was conceded 

by  Mr  Wajid Zia (PW.16) that there was absolutely no evidence 

to  the  effect  that  the  children  of  Petitioner  No.1  were  his 

dependents;  during  recording  of  his  deposition,  Mr  Wajid  Zia 

(PW.16) had deposed that Petitioner No.1 had, inter alia, stated 

before  the  JIT  that  all  the  expenses  relating  to  the  stay  of 

Hassan  Nawaz  and  Hussain  Nawaz  in  London  were  met  by  

money  sent  by  their  grandfather,  namely,  Mian  Muhammad 

Sharif; Mr Wajid Zia (PW.16) had also admitted during his cross 

examination  that  family  members  had  given  statements  and 

referred  to  the  manner  and conduct of Mian Muhammad Sharif 

and he had further stated before the JIT that during his life time 

Mian Mohammad Sharif used to apportion shares in his business 

to  all  his  children  and  grandchildren  and  that  he  even  used  to 

determine  their  pocket  money;  the  witness,  namely  Mr  Wajid 

Zia  (PW.16),  had  unambiguously  admitted  that no witness  had 

appeared  before  the  JIT  to  state  that  Maryam  Nawaz,  Hassan 

Nawaz  and  Hussain  Nawaz  were  dependent  on  Mian 

Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif  for  their  business  or  livelihood;  the 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

13 

said  deposition  was  neither  considered  nor  discussed  by  the 

learned  trial  Court  in  the  Judgment;  while  recording  his 

statement under section 342 of the Cr.P.C., Petitioner No.1 was 

never asked whether the children were his dependents, rather it 

was  suggested  to  him  that  they  were  benamidars;  dependents 

and  benamidars  have  been  separately  mentioned  in  section 

9(a)(v);  the  definition  of  benamidars  under  the  Ordinance  of 

1999 does not show that it includes dependents; the conviction 

recorded  against  Petitioner  No.1  under  section  9(a)(v)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999, based on the presumption that his children 

were  financially  dependent  upon  him  is,  prima  facie,  not 

sustainable;  this  assumption  is  the  incriminating  piece  of 

evidence  on  the  basis  of  which  conviction  has  been  recorded 

against Petitioner No.1 and no such question was put to him so 

as  to  illicit  his  explanation;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  the 

cases  titled    “Abdul Lateef Brohi VSNAB” [2014 P.Cr.L.J. 

334] and “Muhammad Shah VSState” [2010 SCMR 1009]; 

the  only  witness  who  had  stated,  while  deposing,  that  the 

children  were  benamidars  of  Petitioner  No.1  was  PW.18, 

namely, Mr Imran Dogar, but he too had unequivocally admitted 

during  cross  examination  that  no  witness  had  appeared before 

him in support of the said claim. 

9.   

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  the  offence 

under  serial no.2 of the Schedule is not attracted in the case of 

Petitioner  No.1;  the  call  up  notices  did  not  require  Petitioner 

no.1  to  provide  information,  therefore,  refusal  thereof  has  no 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

14 

relevance; the call up notices, also, did not mention that in case 

of  refusal  to  give specific information, proceedings under serial 

no.2  of  the  Schedule would be initiated; the practice of putting 

an  addressee  to  notice  regarding  penal action was admitted by 

the  Investigating  Officer,  namely,  Mr  Imran  Dogar  (PW.18); 

reply  was  sent  by  Petitioner  No.1  and  there  was  no  further 

communication  or  follow  up  by  the  Bureau;  an  offence  under 

serial  No.2  of  the  Schedule  to  the  Ordinance  of  1999  was, 

therefore,  not  made  out  and  conviction  thereunder  is  not 

sustainable;  the  bar  contained  under  section  9(b)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  has  by  now  been interpreted by the august 

Supreme  Court  in  a  chain  of  judgments;  the  august  Supreme 

Court  has  consistently  held  that  despite  the  ouster  clause  i.e. 

9(b) of the Ordinance of 1999, in an appropriate case relief can 

be  granted  by  exercising  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  the  cases  titled 

“Muhammad Saeed Mehdi VSState” [2002 SCMR 282], 

“Abdul Aziz Khan Niazi VSState” [PLD 2003 S.C. 668], Olas 

Khan VSChairman NAB” [PLD 2018 S.C. 40] and “Peer 

Mukaram ul Haq VSNAB” [2006 SCMR 1225]; the principle 

and law relating to section 426 of the Cr.P.C. has been recently 

highlighted  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled 

“Soba Khan VSState” [2016 SCMR 1325]; reliance has also 

been  placed  on  the  case  titled  “Abdul Rehman VSState” 

[2008 SCMR 1381]; the august Supreme Court, in Soba Khan’s 

case,  supra,  has  held  that  if  a  case  is  made  out,  then  release 

should  not  be  withheld  because,  if  ultimately  the  appeals  are 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

15 

allowed,  then  the  accused  cannot  be  compensated,  while  if  he 

is  released  and  subsequently  the  appeals  are  dismissed,  then 

obviously  he  would  have  to  serve  his  or  her  sentence  and  in 

such  an  eventuality  the  State  and  the  complainant  will  stand 

compensated;  the  august  Supreme  Court,  therefore,  has  taken 

a liberal view. 

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR 

PETITIONERS NO.2 and 3: 

10.  

Mr  Muhammad  Amjad  Pervaiz,  A.S.C., while arguing 

on  behalf  of  Petitioners  No.2  and  3  has contended that; in the 

absence  of  proof  of  ownership  of  Avenfield Apartments by the 

principal  accused  i.e.  Petitioner No.1, the question of abetment 

does not arise; Petitioner No.2, namely, Maryam Nawaz, has not 

been  convicted  nor  could  have  been  convicted  for  allegedly 

submitting  forged  or fabricated documents because the learned 

trial  Court  had  deleted  the  offence  under  serial  no.3(a)  of  the 

Schedule  of the Ordinance of 1999; no case is made out under 

section  9(a)(v);  it  is  the  case  of  the  prosecution  that  the 

Avenfield  Apartments  were  acquired  between  1993  to  1996, 

while  Petitioners  No.2  and  3  have  been  convicted  and 

sentenced on the basis of a document, dated 02.02.2006; there 

is no evidence on record to show that Petitioner No.2 had in any 

manner abetted / assisted in acquiring the Avenfield Apartments 

between  1993  and  1996;  the  findings  recorded  by  the learned 

trial  Court  relating  to assisting and abetting Petitioner No.1 are 

based on conjectures; the Trust Deed, dated 02.02.2006, could 

only have been conclusively held to be forged or fabricated after 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

16 

holding  a  summary  trial  under  section  30  of  the  Ordinance  of 

1999,  which  has  not  been  done;  the  learned  trial  Court  has 

recorded  the  finding  that  Petitioner  No.2  had  become  a  

beneficial  owner  of  the  Avenfield  Apartments  in  2006;  the 

learned  trial  Court,  on  the  basis  of  an  assumption,  has 

mentioned  in  the  Judgment  that  some  documents  show  the 

ownership  prior  to  2006  but  has  not  referred  to  any  such 

document;  no  such  document  exists;  the  time  of  the  alleged 

occurrence  is  between  1993  to  1996  and,  therefore,  on  the 

basis  of  the  Trust  Deed,  dated  02.02.2006  it  could  not  be 

inferred that Petitioners No.2 and 3 had aided or abetted in any 

manner  in  the  acquiring  of  the  Avenfield  Apartments;  several 

reservations  and  objections  were  raised  but  the  learned  trial 

Court,  without  deciding  the  same,  has recorded findings which 

are  not  sustainable  in  law;  the  learned  trial  Court  has also not 

properly  appreciated  the  deposition  of  PW.14,  namely,  Robert 

William  Radley;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  the  cases  titled 

“Muhammad Nawaz v. The State” [1996 P.Cr.L.J. 1250], “Allah 

Din and others v. Special Judge, Anti-Terrorism Court No.1, 

Lahore and others” [PLD 2008 Lahore 74] and “Raja Shamshad 

Hussain v. Gulraiz Akhtar and others” [PLD 2007 S.C. 564]. 

CONTENTIONS OF THE LEARNED COUNSELS FOR THE 

BUREAU:  

11.  

The  Bureau  was  represented  by  most  able  and 

competent  counsels  which  included  Mr  Muhammad  Akram 

Qureshi,  Special  Prosecutor,  NAB,  Mr  Jehanzaib  Bhurwana, 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

17 

Additional  PGA ,  NAB  and  Sardar  Muhammad  Muzaffar  Khan, 

DPGA,  NAB.  The  gist  of  their  arguments  is  that;  the  petition 

under  section  561-A  of  the  Cr.P.C.  was  not  competent;  the 

order, dated 20.08.2018, could not have been reviewed and the 

appeals  ought  to  have  been  heard;  section  9(b)  of  the 

Ordinance of 1999 starts with a non-obstante clause and places 

a  bar,  inter  alia,  in  respect  of  exercising  powers  under  section 

426  of  the  Cr.P.C.;  the  said  provision    has  been  explicitly 

ousted;  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act  1997  also  contains  a  similar 

ouster provision; on behalf of the Petitioners, merits have been 

agitated;  disputed  questions  of  fact  cannot  be  raised  while 

exercising  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution; 

delay  in  deciding  the  appeals  is  attributed  to  the  Petitioners 

and,  therefore,  the  petitions  seeking  suspension  of  sentences 

are  not  maintainable;  the  accused  to  whom  delay  is  attributed 

cannot  take benefit of his/her acts; reliance has been placed on 

the  case  titled “Shahbaz v. The State” [1992 SCMR 1903];  the 

learned  trial  Court  was  vested  with  jurisdiction  to  presume 

certain  facts  and  in  this  regard  reference  has  been  made  to 

Articles  129,  125  and  122  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order, 

1984;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  the  cases  titled  “Mian 

Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others v. The State and others” 

[PLD  2002  Karachi  152],  “Abdul  Karim  Nausherwani  and 

another v. The State through Chief Ehtesab Commissioner” 

[2015 SCMR 397] and “Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. Mian 

Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, Prime Minister of Pakistan/Member 

National Assembly, Prime Minister’s House, Islamabad and 9 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

18 

others” [PLD 2017 S.C. 265];  the  law laid down by the august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of Khalid Aziz, supra and Ghani-ur-

Rehman,  supra are distinguishable in the instant case; the facts 

and  circumstances  of  the  instant  case  are  altogether  different; 

the  Petitioners  had  avoided  appearing  before  the  learned  trial 

Court  and  they  had  failed  to  bring  on  record  any  material  in 

their  defence;  they  had  also  avoided  to  depose  under  oath; 

reliance  has  been  placed  on  the  case  titled  “Hashim Babar v. 

The State” [2010 SCMR 1697]; the Bureau had established that 

Avenfield  Apartments  were  in  the  possession of the Petitioners 

and  therefore  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the  latter  to    show 

their  known  sources  of  income  and  the  factum  that  they  were 

not  disproportionate  thereto;  in  1993  the children of Petitioner 

No.1  had  no source of income; the father is a natural guardian 

of  his  children;  the  stance  taken by the accused that they were 

dependents of their grandfather could not be substantiated; the 

onus  was  on  the  accused  to  establish  that  they  were  not 

dependents  of  their  father;  Avenfield  Apartments  are  not 

situated  in  Pakistan  and,  therefore, Khalid Aziz case, supra and 

Ghani-ur-Rehman case, supra are distinguishable; the Avenfield 

Apartments  were  acquired  on  01.06.1993,  23.07.1996  and 

31.07.1995,  respectively  through  offshore  companies,  namely, 

Nescoll  Limited  and  Nielsen  Enterprises;  the  purchase  of  the 

said  properties  and  possession  thereof  by  the  children  of 

Petitioner No.1 coincide. 

12.  

Learned  counsel  has  placed  reliance  on  “Imran 

Ahmad Khan Niazi v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, Prime 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

19 

Minister of Pakistan/Member National Assembly, Prime Minister’s 

House, Islamabad and 9 others”  [PLD 2017 SC 265];  it  was 

argued  that  the  burden  that  the  flats  were  in  question,  which 

were in possession of the accused and were owned by him was 

on  his  shoulders;    the  children  were  dependents  of  Petitioner 

No.1 and they had no source of income; there is no explanation 

to  the  effect that the said properties could be treated as having 

come  in  their  possession  through  inheritance; the statement of 

PW.16,  namely,  Mr  Wajid  Zia,  despite 

lengthy  cross 

examination,  remained  unshaken;  section  19  of  the  Ordinance 

of  1999  makes  it  mandatory  for  the  accused  to  provide  any 

information  sought  by  the  Bureau;  the  Petitioners  and  the 

absconding  accused  did  not  give  any  explanation;  the  analysis 

chart  was  prepared  on  the  basis  of  tax  returns  of  the 

Petitioners; the Petitioners kept changing their stance regarding 

the  source  of  acquiring  Avenfield  Apartments;  they  had 

misstated  facts  before  the  august  Supreme  Court;  the  role  of 

Petitioner No.2, namely, Maryam Safdar became obvious on the 

basis  of  Ex.P.W.16/74  and  Ex.P.W.16/75, which were obtained 

by  the  JIT  pursuant  to  Mutual  Legal  Assistance;  it  shows  that 

Petitioner  No.2  was 

the  beneficial  owner  of  Avenfield 

Apartments in 2012; Petitioner No.2, without having any source 

of  income,  had  become  a  beneficial  owner  of  Avenfield 

Apartments;  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  trace  ownership  in  the 

case  of  offshore  Companies;  the  relevant  law  was  amended  in 

2006  and,  thereafter,  Petitioner  No.2  got  the  bearer  share 

certificates  registered  in  her  name;  the  Trust  Deed,  dated 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

20 

02.02.2006  has  been  proved  to  be  fabricated  and  false  and  in 

this regard the learned trial Court has rightly placed reliance on 

the  evidence  of  PW.14;  it  is  a  settled  principle  of  law  that  a 

person who is found guilty of aiding, abetting or assisting in the 

commission  of  an  offence  is  liable  to  the  same  punishment  as 

that  of  the  main  accused; reliance has been placed on the case 

titled “Wajid Ali v. Mumtaz Ali Khan” [2000 MLD 1172].  

13.  

The  learned  counsels  appearing  on  behalf  of  the 

Bureau  have  placed  reliance  on an unreported judgment of the 

august Supreme Court rendered in C.P. No. 1305 of 2014 titled 

“Muhammad Arshad VSTassaduq Hussain alias Mittu and 

others”  in  support  of  their  contention  that  when  a  special  law 

provides  for  an  ouster  clause  such  as  9(b) of the Ordinance of 

1999,  then  an  accused  can  be  released  on  bail when the latter 

is able to show to the satisfaction of the Court that denying the 

relief would tantamount to extreme hardship.  

14.  

All 

the 

learned  counsels  were  also  given  an 

opportunity  to  submit  the  respective  written  synopsis  of  their 

arguments.  Each  learned  counsel  has  duly  placed  on  record 

their written submissions / synopses.  

15.  

The learned counsels have been heard and the record 

perused with their able assistance.   

16.  

Through  these  petitions,  the  Petitioners  are  seeking 

suspension  of  their  respective  sentences  handed  down  by  the 

learned  Accountability  Court  vide  the  Judgment.  It  is  an 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

21 

admitted  position  that  the  Bureau  has  not  preferred  appeals 

against  the  acquittal  of  the  Petitioners  for  an  offence  under 

section  9(a)(iv)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  nor  has  it  sought 

enhancement  of  the  sentences,  despite  the  fact  that  the 

maximum  punishment  prescribed  under  the  law  has  not  been 

awarded. The learned Accountability Court in the Judgment has 

also  not  recorded  reasons  for  handing  down  lesser  sentences. 

At  the  very  outset  we  had  asked  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Bureau  as  to  why  no  appeal  had  been  preferred  against  the 

acquittal of the Petitioners for the specific offence under section 

9(a)(iv)  relating  to  Avenfield  Apartments  and  in  response  he 

stated  that  the  Bureau  was  satisfied  with  the  convictions  and 

sentences  awarded under a distinct offence i.e. section 9(a)(v).    

OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  MAINTAINABILITY  OF  THE 

PETITIONS:    

17.  

The  learned  counsels  for  the  Bureau  have  raised  an 

objection  regarding  maintainability  of  the  petitions  on  the 

ground  that  a  case  of  hardship  is  not  made  out.  They  have 

placed  reliance  on  an  unreported  judgment  of  the  august 

Supreme  Court,  dated  28.11.2014  titled  “Muhammad Arshad 

VSTassaduq Hussain alias Mittu and others” passed in C.P. 

No.  1305  of  2014  in  support  of  their contention that existence 

of  extreme  hardship  is a condition precedent for granting relief 

by  way  of  suspension  of  sentences  in  accordance  with  the 

guidelines  provided  under  section  426  of  the  Cr.P.C.,  since 

section  9  (b)  is in the nature of a statutory ouster clause. They 

have  argued  that  merely  on  the  basis  of  tentative  assessment, 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

22 

relief under section 426 of the Cr.P.C. cannot be granted in the 

absence  of  extreme  hardship.  It  is  noted  that  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  said  case  has  interpreted  the  statutory 

ouster clause provided under the Anti-Terrorism Act 1997. The 

said  statute  prescribes  a  maximum  sentence  of  death  while  in 

the  case  of  the Ordinance of 1999, the offences are punishable 

as  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to 

fourteen (14) years and a fine. By now the law in the context of 

section 9(b) of the Ordinance of 1999 is well settled. The august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Khan Asfandyar Wali and 

others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Cabinet Division, 

Islamabad and others”  [PLD 2001 S.C. 607],  after  examining 

the  vires  of  the  Ordinance of 1999 and its provisions, has held 

in the context of section 9(b) that it is well settled that superior 

Courts  have  the  power  to  grant  bail  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  independent  of  any statutory source of jurisdiction 

such  as  section  497  of  the  Cr.P.C.  and  had  further  held  that 

section  9(b)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999,  to  the  extent  of 

excluding  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  a  High  Court,  was  ultra 

vires  of  the  Constitution.  The  august  Supreme  Court  has 

consistently reaffirmed the said principles and law and reference 

in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the  cases  titled  “Muhammad 

Mehdi v. The State and 2 others”[2002 SCMR 282], “Abdul Aziz 

Khan Niazi v. The State through Chairman, NAB, Islamabad” 

[PLD 2003 S.C. 668], “Olas Khan and others v. Chairman, NAB 

through  Chairman  and  others” [PLD 2018 S.C. 40], “Peer 

Mukaram Ul Haq v. National Accountability Bureau through 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

23 

Chairman NAB and others” [2006 SCMR 1225], “Dr. Abdul 

Quddus, Deputy Director, Pakistan Agriculture Research Council 

(PARC), Rawalpindi v. The State” [2002 YLR 3996] and “Abdul 

Lateef Brohi v. National Accountability Bureau through Director 

General”  [2014  P.Cr.L.J.  334].  In  a  recent  judgment,  the 

principles  and  law  relating  to  exercising  powers  in  relation  to 

section  426  of  the  Cr.P.C.  have  been  elaborated  in  the  case 

tilted “Soba Khan v. The State and another” [2016 SCMR 1325]. 

Reference  may  also  be  made  to  the  cases  titled  “Muhammad 

Arif Muhammad Hussaini v. Amanullah and others” [2008 SCMR 

1381] and “Peer Mukaram Ul Haq v. National Accountability 

Bureau  (NAB)  through  Chairman  and others” [2006 SCMR 

1225].  It  is  not  the  case  of the Bureau that this Court is bereft 

of jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution to release an 

accused  by  suspending  sentence  while  seeking  guidance  from 

the  principles  and  law  relating  to  section  426  of  the  Cr.P.C. 

despite  there  being  a  statutory  ouster  clause  such  as  section 

9(b)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999.  It  is  the  case  of  the  learned 

counsels  for the Bureau that such exercise of jurisdiction would 

be justified only if a case  of hardship is made out. The principles 

and  law  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case 

titled “Soba Khan v. The State and another” [2016 SCMR 1325] 

would  be  crucial  and  taken  into  consideration  while  deciding 

these  petitions.  Whether  or  not  a case of hardship is made out 

can  also  be  answered  after  a  tentative  assessment  has  been 

made.  Suffice  it  to  mention  at  this  stage  that  a  High  Court, 

while  exercising 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of 

the 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

24 

Constitution,  is  not  bereft  of jurisdiction to suspend a sentence 

handed down under the Ordinance of 1999.     

PRINCIPLES GOVERNING APPLICABILITY OF SECTION 

426 CR.P.C. FOR SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE:          

18.  

It would also be relevant to discuss the principles and 

law  relating  to  section  426  of  the  Cr.P.C  because  they  would 

guide  us  in  deciding  these  petitions.  It  is  by  now  settled  law 

that  deeper  appreciation  of  evidence  cannot  be  undertaken 

while  considering  suspension  of  a  sentence  in  the  context  of 

section  426  of  the  Cr.P.C.  A  Court  of  appeal  is  empowered to 

suspend  the  sentence  if,  on  a  bare  perusal  of  the judgment, it 

reflects  that  the  appreciation  of  evidence  made  by  the  learned 

trial  Court  was  against  the  law  declared.  The  Court  of  appeal 

has to confine itself to the infirmities in the judgment which are 

apparent  and,  prima  facie,  indicate  that  the  conviction  and 

sentence  may  ultimately  not  be  sustainable.  In  a  recent 

judgment  rendered  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case 

titled “Soba Khan v. The State and another” [2016 SCMR 1325], 

the  law  and  principles  in  the  context  of  section  426  of  the 

Cr.P.C.  have  been  highlighted.  The  august  Supreme  Court has 

held  that  the  powers  of  the  appellate  Court  in  granting  bail  at 

post  conviction stage shall be guided by the criteria / principles 

provided  under  section  497  of  the  Cr.P.C.  It  has  been  further 

held that a Court of appeal or a High Court, as the case may be, 

shall  not  conclusively  decide  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  the 

accused  by  entering  upon  reappraisal  of  evidence  during 

pendency  of  an  appeal.  However,  the  august  Supreme  Court 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

25 

has  emphasized  the  importance  of  the  liberty  of  a  person  and 

has  held  that  the  relief  by  way  of  suspension  of  sentence 

cannot  be  granted  in  a  vacuum  and,  rather,  a  tentative 

assessment  of  the  evidence  is  required  to  be  made.  The 

provisions  of  section  426  of  the  Cr.P.C.  have  been  held  to  be 

analogous  to  those  of  section  497  of  the  Cr.P.C.  It  has  been 

noted  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  that,  after  conviction,  the 

initial  presumption  of  innocence  in  favor  of  the  accused 

disappears  and  that  this  will  have  little  bearing  while  the 

appellate Court considers the case in the context of section 426 

of  the  Cr.P.C.,  because  an  appeal  is  construed  to  be  a 

continuation  of  the  same proceedings and that a fair balance is 

to  be  struck between two extreme views so that justice is done 

in  all  circumstances.  It  has  been  further  highlighted  by  the 

august Supreme Court that a person cannot be denied relief on 

the  basis  of  technicalities  emanating  from  procedural  law 

because,  in  such  a  case,  the  latter  cannot  be  compensated  for 

his  or  her  incarceration.  In  this  regard,  the  august  Supreme 

Court  has  referred  to  sub-section  (3)  of  section  426  of  the 

Cr.P.C.  which  provides  that,  while  computing  the  sentence  of 

the  convict,  the  period  during  which  his  sentence  was 

suspended  and  he  was  released  on bail shall be excluded from 

the  total  period  of  sentence  he  had  to  undergo.  It  is  on  this 

basis  that  the  august  Supreme  Court  has  held  that  ultimately 

the State or the complainant can be compensated while no such 

relief  has  been  provided  under  the  law  if  the  convict  remains 

incarcerated.  It  has  been  emphasized  by  the  august  Supreme 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

26 

Court  in  the  said  judgment  that  a  High  Court  ought  to  take 

extra-ordinary  caution  and  care  so  as  not  to  leave  a convict to 

rot  in  jail  by  undergoing  sentence  even  if  it  is  of  life 

imprisonment  and  that  in  appropriate  cases  through  tentative 

assessment  of  the  evidence  on  record,  if  the  case  of  any 

convicted person is found fit for grant of bail then denial of the 

same  would  tantamount  to  patent  injustice.  The  august 

Supreme  Court  has  also  explained  the  scope  of  tentative 

assessment  of  evidence  /  materials  and  in  this  regard  has 

reaffirmed the earlier view taken in the case titled “Khalid Javed 

Gillan v. State” [PLD 1978 S.C. 256]. The august Supreme Court 

has  also  held  that  the  Court  of  appeal  can  slightly  touch  upon 

the merits of the case without recording conclusive findings.  

19.  

It  was  in  the  light  of  the  above  principles  and  law 

enunciated  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  that  the  learned 

counsels were explicitly asked to confine their arguments to the 

Judgment  itself  and  to  satisfy  us  within  the  parameters  laid 

down therein whether or not a case is made out for suspension 

of the sentences  in the petitions before us.    

PRINCIPLES  ENUNCIATED  BY  THE  APEX  COURT 

REGARDING SECTION 9(a)(v) AND SECTION 14(c) OF 

THE ORDINANCE OF 1999 AND THEIR APPLICATION TO 

THE INSTANT CASE:  

20.  

The  learned  counsels  for  the  Bureau  have  taken  a 

novel  stance  that  the  law  and  principles  enunciated  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  of  Khalid Aziz,  supra  and 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

27 

Ghani-ur-Rehman,  supra  are  not  attracted  in  the  case  of  the 

Petitioners  and  that  they  are  thus  distinguishable.  They  have 

unambiguously  stated  at  the  Bar  and  also  in  the  written 

arguments  that,  since  the  possession  of  Avenfield  Apartments 

stood  established, the prosecution had discharged its burden in 

terms  of  section  14  (c)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  and  that the 

onus  had  then  shifted to the Petitioners. A plain reading of the 

Judgment shows that the learned Accountability Court itself was 

cognizant  that  the  principles  and  law expounded by the august 

Supreme Court in the above mentioned judgments was binding 

and  attracted  in  the  case  of  the  Petitioners.  It  is  an  admitted 

position  that  the  Petitioners  have  been  acquitted  in  respect  of 

the  offence  under  section  9 (a)(iv) and convicted under section 

9(a)(v)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999.  Section  14(c)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  contemplates  a  reverse onus as opposed to 

the  settled  law  that  in  criminal cases the onus is always on the 

prosecution  to  establish  its  case  beyond  reasonable  doubt. 

Section  14,  for  the  first  time,  was  interpreted  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Khan Asfandyar Wali and 

others v. Federation of Pakistan through the Cabinet Division, 

Islamabad and others”  [PLD 2001 S.C. 607]  and  it  was  held 

therein  that  the  prosecution  has  to  establish  the  preliminary 

facts  and,  after  that,  the  onus  shifts  and  the  defence  is  then 

required to disprove the presumption. For safer dispensation of 

justice  and  in  the  interest  of  good  governance  the  august 

Supreme  Court,  in  the  context  of  section  14(d),  observed  and 

held  that the prosecution shall first make out a reasonable case 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

28 

against  the  accused charged under section 9(a) (vi) and (vii) of 

the Ordinance of 1999 and in case the prosecution succeeded in 

making  out  a  reasonable  case  to the satisfaction of the learned 

Accountability  Court  only  then  it  would  have  deemed  to  have 

discharged  the  prima  facie  burden  of  proof  and,  in  such  an 

eventuality,  it  would  shift  to  the  accused  so  that  the  latter 

rebuts  the  presumption  of  guilt.  The  above  principles  and  law 

were reiterated by the august Supreme Court in the cases titled 

“Pir Mazhar Ul Haq and others v. The State through Chief 

Ehtesab Commission, Islamabad” [PLD 2005 S.C. 63], “Syed 

Qasim Shah v. The State” [2009 SCMR 790], “Muhammad 

Siddiqul Farooq v. The State” [2010 SCMR 198], “Hashim Babar 

v. The State” [2010 SCMR 1697] and “Khalid Aziz V. The State” 

[2011 SCMR 136]. In the latter case the apex Court affirmed the 

judgment  rendered  by  a  learned  Division  Bench  of  the  High 

Court  of  Sindh,  titled  “Hakim Ali Zardari v. State” [2007 MLD 

910],  wherein  in  the  context  of  the  offence  under  section 

9(a)(v),  read  with  section  14  (c),  it  was  held  that  the 

prosecution  is  required  to  prove  four  basic  ingredients; first, it 

must  establish  that  the  accused  was  the  holder  of  a  public 

office; second, the nature and extent of the pecuniary resources 

of  property  which  were  found  in  his  possession;  third,  it must 

be  proved  as  to  what  were  the  known  sources  income  of  the 

accused 

i.e.  known 

to 

the  prosecution  after 

thorough 

investigations  and,  lastly,  it  must  prove,  quite  objectively,  that 

such  resources  were  disproportionate  to  the  known  sources  of 

income.  The  august  Supreme  Court  held;  "Thus  it is clear that 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

29 

the  prosecution  has to establish the above four ingredients and 

then  the  burden  would  shift  upon  the  appellant  to  explain  his 

position as required under section 14 (c) of the Ordinance."  

21.  

The  august  Supreme  Court  has  eloquently  summed 

up the law and principles in the case titled “Ghani ur Rehman v. 

National Accountability Bureau and others”  [PLD 2011 S.C. 

1144],  relating  to  the  onus  which  is  required  to be discharged 

by  the  prosecution  before  it  is  shifted  to  the  accused.  The 

relevant portions are, therefore, reproduced as follows;-  

“The law now stands settled that in order to prove 

commission of an offence under section 9(a)(v) of the 

National Accountability Bureau, 1999 it has to be proved 

by the prosecution as to what were the known sources of 

income of the accused person at the relevant time and 

that the resources or property of the accused person 

were disproportionate to his known sources of income 

and it is after such proof has been led and the necessary 

details have been provide by the prosecution that the 

onus shifts to the accused person to account for such 

resource or property because mere possession of any 

pecuniary  resources  or  property  is  by  itself  not  an 

offence but it is failure to satisfactorily account for such 

possession of pecuniary resource or property that makes 

the possession objectionable and constitutes the relevant 

offence. In the case in hand the appellant’s sources of 

income had never been brought on the record by the 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

30 

prosecution and had never been quantified by it at any 

stage of this case and, therefore, it was not possible for 

the learned trial court to conclude or to hold that the 

appellant  or  his  dependants or so-called benamidars 

owned  or  possessed  assets  or  pecuniary  resources 

disproportionate  to  the  appellant’s  income.  It  is 

unfortunate that the investigating officer of this case as 

well as those responsible for prosecution of this case 

before the learned trial court had probably on account of 

their sheer incompetence, utterly failed to do the needful 

in this regard and it is regrettable that even the learned 

trial court as well as the learned appellate court had 

completely failed to advert to this critical aspect of the 

present case.”  

It was further observed and held; 

“The learned counsel for the appellant has also 

been found by us to be quite justified in maintaining that 

the Reference filed against the appellant as well as the 

Charge framed against him by the learned trial court had 

alleged that the appellant had accumulated the relevant 

assets and pecuniary resources by misusing his authority 

as Chairman of the District Council and as a Provincial 

Minister  but  the  prosecution  had  not  produced  any 

evidence worth its name before the learned trial court to 

establish any misuse of his authority by the appellant as 

Chairman or Provincial Minister so as to develop and 

establish any nexus between misuse of his authority and 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

31 

amassing of wealth or accumulation of assets by him. In 

the complete absence of any evidence brought on the 

record by the prosecution in the above mentioned regard 

it could not have been held by the learned courts below 

that the Charge, as framed against the appellant, stood 

established by the prosecution.”   

22.  

The above principles and law have been laid down 

specifically  in  the  context  of  an  offence  for  which  the 

Petitioners  have  been  convicted  and  sentenced  i.e.  section 

9(a)(v)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999.  The  learned counsels for 

the  Bureau  were  repeatedly  asked  whether  the  above 

expounded  principles  and  law  in  the  context  of  an  offence 

under section 9(a)(v) and section 14 (c) of the Ordinance of 

1999  was  revisited  or  overruled.  They  answered  in  the 

negative  but  took  the  stance  that  it  was  not  attracted  or, 

rather,  was  distinguishable  in the instant case. We were not 

able  to  fathom  this  proposition  because  the  above  law  and 

principles in the context of the offence under section 9(a)(v), 

read with section 14 (c), is binding and this acknowledgment 

by the learned Accountability Court is also obvious from the 

Judgment.  As  would  be  discussed  later,  this  stance  was 

adopted  by  the  learned counsels for the Bureau in response 

to  reliance  placed  by  the  learned  Accountability  Court  on  a 

document  tendered 

in  evidence  by  Mr  Imran  Dogar, 

Investigating  Officer,  who  had  entered  the  witness  box  as 

PW-18,  regarding  which  objection  had  been  raised  by  the 

defence.   

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

32 

WHETHER IN THE LIGHT OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED 

PRINCIPLES  A  CASE  FOR  SUSPENSION  OF 

SENTENCES IS MADE OUT:  

23.  

Finally  we  advert  to  the  Judgment  so  as  to 

consider  whether,  prima  facie,  it  suffers  from  an  obvious 

legal  infirmity  or  lacuna,  resulting  in  forming  a  tentative 

opinion  within  the  ambit  of  the  above  discussed  principles 

and  law  for  reaching  a conclusion as to whether a case  for 

suspension  of  the  sentences  of  the  Petitioners  is  made out. 

It is obvious from a plain reading of the Judgment that, inter 

alia,  a  specific  charge  was  framed  and  the  Petitioners  were 

tried  for  an  offence  under  section  9(a)(iv)  of the Ordinance 

of 1999. By charging the Petitioners for the said offence they 

were  alleged  to  have  acquired  Avenfield  Apartments  by 

corrupt,  dishonest  or 

illegal  means.  The 

learned 

Accountability  Court 

in 

the  Judgment  has  held  that 

"Prosecution have not brought evidence in respect of section 

9(a)(iv) NAO, 1999. So the accused are acquitted under that 

section  of  law”.  The  Bureau,  in  its  wisdom,  has  not 

challenged  the  said  acquittal.  There  is  no  cavil  to  the 

proposition that the offence under section 9(a)(v) is distinct. 

However,  there  is  force  in  the  argument  raised  by  the 

learned  counsel  for  Petitioner  No.  1  that,  having  been 

specifically  charged  under  section  9(a)(iv),  the  learned 

Accountability Court should have considered whether, on the 

same  evidence  and  relating  to  the  same  property,  a 

conviction  could  be  handed  down  under  section  9(a)(v)  by 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

33 

assuming, 

through  a 

fiction  of 

law, 

that  Avenfield 

Apartments  had  been  acquired  through  corruption  and 

corrupt  practices.  He  has  emphasised that this is a question 

of  first impression and that the learned Accountability Court 

should  have  considered  the  law  laid  down  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  enunciated  in  paragraph  8  of  the  judgment 

rendered  in  the  case  of  Ghani-ur-Rehman,  supra.  The 

learned  counsels  for  the  Bureau  were not able to show that 

the  said  question  and  the  law  referred  to  by  the  august 

Supreme Court was considered by the learned trial Court.                    

24.  

The  learned  Accountability  Court  has  rightly  held 

in  the  Judgment  that,  in  the  light  of  the  law  settled  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court,  the  prosecution  was  required  to 

discharge  its  obligation  by  establishing  the  four  ingredients 

of  the  offence  under  section  9(a)(v)  before  the  onus  could 

shift  to  the  accused.  The  learned  Accountability  Court  has 

held Petitioner No. 1 to have acquired Avenfield Apartments 

between  1993  and  1996  and  thus  convicted  and  sentenced 

him  for  the  offence  under  section  9(a)(v)  of  the  Ordinance 

1999. The Reference filed by the Bureau, the charge framed 

by  the  learned  trial  Court  and  the  Judgment  itself  do  not 

refer  to  Petitioner  No.  1's  exact  income,  the  sources  of  his 

income or the details of resources so that the same could be 

set  up  against  the  value  of  the  Avenfield  Apartments  for 

alleging  that  he  had  acquired  them  disproportionate  to  his 

known sources of income. Guidance in this regard is sought 

from  the  law  enunciated  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

34 

Ghani-ur-Rehman’s case, supra. The only document referred 

to in the Judgment in this context is 'analysis chart of assets 

and  liabilities  relating  to  Petitioner  No.  1’ i.e Ex 18/13. The 

said  document  was  tendered  in  evidence  by  Mr  Imran 

Masood,  Investigating  Officer,  NAB,  who  had  appeared  as 

PW-18.  The  objection  raised  was  not  decided  then  and  the 

same  has  been  reproduced  at  page  59  of  the  Judgment 

which is as follows; 

"Under objection that firstly that this document is 

not prepared by this witness, secondly Mr. Wajid Zia 

appeared as head of JIT as PW-16, and he never stated 

that this document was prepared by JIT, nor did he get 

this document exhibited nor produced this document 

during his deposition and, therefore, this document is not 

admissible in the statement of this witness" 

25.  

The  learned  trial  Court  however  has  recorded 

“overruled, reasoning is given herein discussion". It has not 

been  denied  before  us  that  the  witness  who  had  tendered 

this  crucial  document  had  admitted  during  his  cross 

examination  that  he  had  no  concern  therewith  nor  knew 

when  it  was  prepared  or  by whom. We have carefully gone 

through  the  Judgment  but  could  not  find  the  reasoning 

recorded by the learned Accountability Court for holding the 

document Ex PW.18/13 as admissible. The determination of 

the  evidentiary  value  of  this  document  was  crucial  after 

taking  the  recorded  evidence  into consideration, particularly 

the  deposition  of  PW.16  and  PW.18.  There  is  yet  another 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

35 

important  question  which  has  been  raised  by  the  learned 

counsel for Petitioner No. 1 to the effect that there has been 

no determination of the value of the Avenfield Apartments at 

the  time  when  they  were  alleged  to  have  been  acquired. 

There  is  no  mention  of  this  aspect  in  the  Judgment.  We 

asked  the  learned  counsels  for  the  Bureau  to  show  us  the 

relevant portion in the Judgment, or any document tendered 

in  evidence,  reflecting  the  value  of  the  apartments  when 

they  were  alleged  to  have  been  acquired i.e. between 1993 

and 1996, so as to meet the requirements highlighted by the 

august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Ghani-ur-Rehman, 

supra.  Rather  than  referring  to  the  Judgment  or  any 

document  from  the  record  they  stated  that  values  could  be 

obtained  through  "Google".  This  answer  was  not  expected 

from  learned  counsels  who  have  enviable  professional 

experience and competence, because after conclusion of trial 

no  document  other than those which have been brought on 

record  can  be  considered  or  the  appellate  Court  takes 

further  evidence  under  section  428  of  the  Cr.P.C.  They, 

however,  took  the  stance  that  the  principles  and  law 

expounded  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  of 

Khalid Aziz,  supra  and  Ghani-ur-Rehman,  supra  were  not 

attracted  and  were  distinguishable.  Nonetheless,  despite 

their  able  assistance  they  could  not  give  any  plausible 

explanation in this regard whereas Petitioner No. 1 has been 

held  to  have  acquired  the  Avenfield  Apartments  and  has 

been  convicted  under  the  offence  defined  under  section 

 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

36 

9(a)(v)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999.  Whether  or  not  the 

ingredients  of  the  offence  under  section  9(a)(v)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  have  been  established  could  be 

conclusively  determined  after  reappraisal  of  evidence  while 

hearing  the  appeals.  This  indeed  would  require  deeper 

appreciation  of  evidence.  At  this  stage,  while  confining 

ourselves  to  the  Judgment  and  tentative  assessment  of  the 

evidence,  we  are,  prima  facie,  of  the  opinion  that  it  could 

not  be  shown  to  us that the ingredients were established in 

accordance  with  the  principles  and  law  laid  down  by  the 

august Supreme Court in the cases of Khalid Aziz, supra and 

Ghani-ur-Rehman,  supra.  This  opinion  is  subject  to  deeper 

appreciation  of  evidence  which  would  obviously  be 

undertaken  at  the  time  of  hearing the appeals. This ground 

alone is sufficient at this stage to form a prima facie opinion 

that the convictions may not be ultimately sustainable unless 

through  deeper  appreciation  of  evidence  it  could  be  shown 

otherwise.                                                    

26.  

There is also force in the argument of the learned 

counsel  for  Petitioner  No.  1  that  a  plain  reading  of  the 

Judgment,  prima  facie,  shows  that  the  connection  of  the 

latter  has  been  made  with  acquiring  Avenfield  Apartments 

between  1993  to  1996  on  presumptions  and,  likewise, that 

the  children  were  his  dependents  at  the  relevant  time. 

According  to  the  learned  counsel,  these  findings, which are 

based  on  presumptions,  are  a  result  of  misreading  of 

evidence.  The  learned  counsels  for  the  Bureau have argued 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

37 

that  in  this  case  the  embedded  principles  enunciated  for 

ensuring safe administration of criminal justice do not apply, 

so  much  so  that  benefit  of  doubt  would  also  not  be 

attracted.  However,  they  could  not  give  any  plausible 

explanation as to how in a case of criminal conviction under 

the  Ordinance  of  1999  and  particularly  in  this  case  the 

settled  principles  stand  excluded.  The  conviction  of  the 

Petitioners for the offence under serial no. 2 of the Schedule 

is  also  not  supported  by  reasoning  based  on  proper 

appreciation  of  evidence.  The  call  up  notices  in  relation  to 

which  the  convictions  have  been  recorded  did  not  put  the 

Petitioners to notice that non compliance would attract penal 

consequences.  The  petitioners  had  admittedly  responded to 

the  call  up  notices  and  the  learned  trial  Court  has  not 

recorded  reasons  in  the  Judgment  which  would  show 

appreciation of evidence in this regard.                

27.  

Regarding  Petitioner  No.  2,  she  has  been 

convicted for aiding, assisting and conspiring with Petitioner 

No. 1 for concealing his ownership of Avenfield Apartments. 

She has been convicted under clause (xii) of section 9(a) on 

the  basis  of  a  document  which  is  dated  02-02-2006  and 

titled  as  'Trust  Deed'.  The  learned  Accountability  Court  has 

held the said document to be 'bogus'. However, she has not 

been  convicted  under  serial  3(a)  of  the  Schedule  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  because,  as  noted  above,  the  said 

offence  was  deleted  from  the  Charge  vide  order  dated 

08.11.2017  and  thereafter  a  fresh  Charge  was  framed  on 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

38 

the  said  date.  The  learned  counsel  for  Petitioner  No.  2  has 

rightly  stated  that  the  learned  Accountability  Court  could 

only have proceeded against Petitioner No. 2 pursuant to the 

order  dated  08.11.2017  for  the  alleged  offence  of  giving 

false  or  fabricated  evidence  in the manner prescribed under 

section  30  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999. It is the prosecution’s 

case  that  the  Avenfield  Apartments  were  acquired  by 

Petitioner No. 1 between 1993 to 1996. It is also the case of 

the  prosecution  that  at  that  time  Petitioner  No.  2  was  his 

dependent.  In  the  Judgment  the  learned  Accountability 

Court has not referred to any evidence which would connect 

Petitioner  No.  2  to  have  aided,  assisted  or  conspired  with 

Petitioner No. 1 at the time when Avenfield Apartments were 

said  to  have  been  acquired  between  1993  and  1996. 

Whether  or  not  the  Trust  Deed,  dated  02.02.2006,  would 

attract  the  offence  under  clause  (xii)  of  section  9(a)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999 requires deeper appreciation of evidence 

which  can  only  be  undertaken  when  the  appeals are heard. 

Petitioner No. 3 has been convicted for witnessing the Trust 

Deed,  dated  02.02.2006.  Moreover,  the  convictions  of both 

these  Petitioners  depend  on  whether  the  conviction  handed 

down to Petitioner No. 1 would remain sustainable under the 

Ordinance of 1999.                                 

28.  

In  the  light  of  the  above  obvious  and  glaring 

defects  and  infirmities  in  the  Judgment  we  have  formed  a 

prima  facie,  tentative  opinion  that  the  convictions  and 

sentences  handed  down  to  the  Petitioners  may  not  be 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

39 

ultimately  sustainable.  This  view  formed  by  us  is  tentative 

and  solely  confined  to  the  defects  and  infirmities  which are 

obvious  from  a plain reading of the Judgment and tentative 

assessment of evidence permissible while considering a case 

for  suspension  of  sentence  in  terms  of  section  426  of  the 

Cr.P.C. We have not recorded any conclusive finding and our 

assessment or any observation made herein shall not in any 

manner  prejudice  the  case  of either party when the appeals 

will  be  heard.  The  appeals  could  not  be  decided  within the 

time  prescribed  under  section  32  of  the  Ordinance  of 1999 

nor  is  their  fixation  in  sight,  particularly  when  two  other 

trials  are  pending  before  the  learned  Accountability  Court 

against Petitioner No. 1. After forming a tentative opinion, as 

discussed  above,  it  would  lead  to  causing  hardship  to  the 

Petitioners  if  the relief by way of suspension of sentences is 

withheld.  We  are  also  guided  by  the principles and law laid 

down  by  the  august  Supreme Court in the case titled “Soba 

Khan VSState” [2016 SCMR 1325]. We, therefore, allow 

these  petitions  in  terms  of  the  short  order  passed  on 

19.09.2018.             

29.  

The  learned  counsels  for  the  Bureau  have  placed 

heavy  reliance  during  the  course  of  their  arguments  on the 

judgment  reported  as  “Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi v. Mian 

Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif,  Prime  Minister  of 

Pakistan/Member National Assembly, Prime Minister’s House, 

Islamabad and 9 others” [PLD 2017 S.C. 265]. This reliance 

does  not  appear  to  us  to be in consonance with the explicit 

 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

40 

observations  recorded  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the 

case  titled  “Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others VS 

Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi and others” [PLD 2018 S.C. 1] and 

the relevant portion is as follows;   

“The  argument  that  this  direction  implies 

unambiguous approval of the material collected by the 

JIT whose probative worth is yet to be established is also 

misconceived as none of our observations projects any 

such impression. The trial court in any case would be at 

liberty  to  appraise  evidence  including  the  material 

collected by the JIT according to the principles of the law 

of  evidence without being influenced by any of our 

observations. Even otherwise, all the observations made 

in the judgment, being tentative, would not bind nor 

would  restrain  the trial court from drawing its own 

conclusions  from  the  evidence  recorded before it in 

accordance with the principles and provisions of the law 

of evidence. The argument that the direction to the trial 

court for deciding the Reference within 6 months from 

the date of filing them also tends to prejudice the fair 

trial of the petitioner is also misconceived as the purpose 

behind such direction is not to prejudice the trial but to 

ensure expeditious conclusion of the case which more 

often than not has been extended even in the past by 

this Court, if the trial was delayed by any hardship or 

anything imponderable.”   

 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2839 of 2018.    

41 

30. 

The  above  are  the  detailed  reasoning  for  our  short 

order dated 19.09.2018, which is reproduced as follows;- 

“For detailed reasons to be recorded, the 

instant petition i.e. W.P. no. 2839 of 2018 (Mian 

Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif  VS National 

Accountability Bureau, etc), W.P. no, 2841 of 2018 

(Maryam  Nawaz  Sharif  VS National 

Accountability Bureau, etc) and W.P. No. 2841 of 

2018  (Cap.  Retd.  Muhammad  Safdar  VS

National Accountability Bureau, etc), are allowed. 

The  respective  sentences  awarded  to  the 

petitioners  by  the  Accountability  Court  No.1, 

Islamabad, shall remain suspended till the final 

adjudication of the appeals filed by the petitioners. 

The petitioners shall be released on bail, subject 

to  furnishing  bail  bonds  in  the  sum  of 

Rs.5,00,000/-  (Rupees  five  hundred  thousand) 

each with one surety each in the like amount to 

the satisfaction of Deputy Registrar (Judicial) of 

this Court.” 

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB)  

  (ATHAR MINALLAH)             

 JUDGE 

JUDGE 

Asad K/*  

Approved for reporting.  

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain  Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
