HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO.3061/2014 

Dr. Mumtaz Ahmed, etc. 
VERSUS 
Federation of Pakistan, ETC. 

Petitioners by  

: 

Raja Saif-ur-Rehman, Advocate. 

                                                                        Mr. Adnan Saboor Rohila, Advocate in W.P. No.2156/14. 

Respondents by   

Date of Hearing   

: 

: 

Malik Qamar Afzal Advocate for respondent No.4. 
Malik Faisal Rafiq, Deputy Attorney General. 
16-12-2014. 

ATHAR MINALLAH, J.-  Through  this  consolidated  judgment 

I shall decide the instant petition along with W.P. No.2156/2014.  

2. 

 The petitioners are bright young citizens of Pakistan. They hold 

qualifications in the field of medicine, after graduating from medical institutions 

in the Republic of Cuba. Their claim is that after the earthquake of 2005, the 

Government  of  the  Republic  of  Cuba  offered  scholarships  to  the  citizens  of 

Pakistan for the study of medicine. Pursuant to the offer, the Higher Education 

Commission of Pakistan undertook a transparent process for selection of students 

desiring to pursue their medical education in Cuba.  Applications for 1000 (one 

thousand)  scholarships  were  invited  through  advertisement,  dated  25-08-2006, 

published in various daily newspapers. The embassy of the Republic of Cuba in 

Islamabad informed the Higher Education Commission (hereinafter referred to as 

the “Commission”) through a letter dated 12-11-2007 , that the curriculum for 

studies of the medical program will be the same as the Latin American School of 

Medicine (hereinafter referred to as the “ELAM”). It was further informed that 

the  medical  degree  will  be  issued  after  completion  of  the  studies/course.  The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

Commission, after undertaking an extensive exercise, selected the petitioners for 

the award of scholarships to pursue their studies in the field of medicine in Cuba. 

The petitioners were informed vide letter dated 26-07-2008 regarding the details 

of  the  scholarship,  along  with  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  award.  As  a 

requirement,  the  petitioners  executed  respective  agreements  and  undertakings. 

The  petitioners,  after  complying  with  the  requirements  of  the  Commission, 

proceeded  to  Cuba  and  completed  their  five  years  studies,  culminating  in  the 

award of a qualification granted by the Medical Institution in Cuba. It is pertinent 

to mention that while they were pursuing their studies in Cuba, the Commission, 

vide letter dated 20-04-2012, requested the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to convey 

to  the  petitioners  that  after  their  return,  their  registration  under  the  Pakistan 

Medical  and  Dental  Council  Ordinance,  1962  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

"Ordinance") shall be subject to qualifying the examination held by the National 

Examination Board (hereinafter referred to as the “NEB examination”). It was 

further communicated that on account of completing their house job in Cuba, they 

shall be exempt from the requirement of completing the house job in Pakistan.  

3. 

The petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 

(hereinafter referred to as the "Constitution"), aggrieved by the requirement of 

taking  the  NEB  examination  as  a  condition  for  their  registration  under  the 

Ordinance.   

4. 

Raja  Saif-ur-Rehman,  learned  Advocate  High  Court,  contended 

that the offer of sending the petitioners on scholarship was a representation made 

by the Government of Pakistan and, therefore, the requirement of taking the NEB 

examination  is  not  justified;  the  scholarship  was  announced  and  the  selection 

made by the Commission after an extensive exercise undertaken for selecting the 

students on merit; the Commission is the competent authority, particularly in the 

field  of  Higher  Education  to  grant  equivalence;  the  provisions  of  the  Higher 

 
 
 
 
 
-3- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

Education  Commission  Ordinance,  2002  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the          

“HEC  Ordinance,  2002”),  shall  prevail  over  the  provisions  of  the  PMDC 

Ordinance; the Commission which had the power under the HEC Ordinance, and 

in exercise of the said powers representations were made to the petitioners that 

they  shall  be  treated  at  par  with  students  pursuing  their medical  education  in 

Pakistan;  the  petitioners  for  the  first  time  were  informed  regarding  the 

requirement of taking the NEB examination vide the Commission’s letter dated 

20-4-2012.  The  petitioners  were  never informed  by  the  Commission  that  they 

were  required  to  take  the  N.E.B  examination.  The  learned  counsel  placing 

reliance  on  PLD  2010  SC  1089,  contends  that  the  Commission  and  its  status 

places it in a position where the provisions of the PMDC Ordinance, shall give 

way to the provisions of the HEC Ordinance, 2002. 

5. 

Mr.  Adnan  Saboor  Rohaila,  learned  Advocate  High  Court, 

appeared for the petitioners in W.P. No.2156/2014. In addition to adopting the 

above arguments of the learned counsel, contends that; the petitioners have spent 

more than five years pursuing their studies and requiring them to take the N.E.B 

examination will further delay their registration for another two years; the HEC 

Ordinance 2002 shall prevail over the PMDC Ordinance and the selection made 

by  the  HEC  on  merit  and  sending  the  petitioners  for  education  to  Cuba  is  a 

sufficient ground to exempt them from taking the examination; the fundamental 

rights of the petitioners are being violated, inter alia, by delaying the registration 

under  the  Ordinance;  PMDC  has  extended  exemption  from  taking  the 

examination  to  others  while  the  same  is  being  denied  to  the  petitioners  and, 

therefore, it is a case of discrimination; the respondents particularly the PMDC 

could not have changed its policy by requiring the petitioners to take the N.E.B 

examination; the Registrar of the PMDC vide letter dated 08-11-2011, addressed 

to a medical institution in the Republic of China had communicated a decision of 

the PMDC, exempting such students from taking the NEB examination who had 

 
 
 
-4- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

been admitted in a medical institution abroad, prior to the amendment made in the 

PMDC Ordinance; the principles of locus poenitentiae and promissory estoppel 

are attracted in case of the petitioners.  

6. 

Malik Qammar Afzal, ASC, appearing on behalf of the PMDC has 

relied  on  the  judgment  of  this  Court,  passed  in  W.P.  No.  3944/2013;  it  is 

contended that the petitioners graduated in 2014 and, therefore, are required to 

take the NEB examination pursuant to Section 15 of the PMDC Ordinance; HEC 

Ordinance 2002, and the PMDC Ordinance have distinct objects and purposes and 

the question as to which statute would prevail is neither relevant nor arises in the 

present petitions; under Section 15 of the PMDC Ordinance, the petitioners are 

required to take the N.E.B examination; even before the insertion of Section 15 in 

the PMDC Ordinance, all graduates from medical institutions abroad, which were 

not notified in the 2nd Schedule were required to take the N.E.B examination.  

7. 

The learned counsels were heard at length, and after perusing the 

relevant record with their able assistance, the opinion of this Court is as follows.- 

8. 

Based on the propositions formulated by the learned counsels, the 

questions  which  require  consideration  by  this  Court  are,  firstly,  whether  any 

representation made by the HEC had induced the petitioners to study in Cuba, and 

if so, then whether the HEC Ordinance 2002 will prevail over or supersede the 

provisions  of  the  PMDC  Ordinance;  secondly,  whether  the  No  Objection 

Certificate (hereinafter referred to as the 'NOC') and the letter dated 08-10-2011, 

addressed to the President of the University in China by the Registrar, had created 

a right in favour of the beneficiaries including the petitioners to be registered as 

medical practitioners without qualifying the N.E.B examination, and whether the 

same can be extended to the petitioners;  thirdly, whether a right had been created 

in favour of the  petitioners to be registered under the PMDC Ordinance on the 

basis of their selection by the HEC, and the qualifications and the nature of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-5- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

course offered by the medical institution in Cuba; fourthly, whether the principles 

of locus poenitentiae and promissory estoppel are relevant and applicable in the 

present  case  ;  fifth,  whether  the  Amendment  Act,  particularly  Section  15  as 

inserted  in the  Ordinance,  will  have  a  prospective  or retrospective  effect;  and 

lastly,  whether  this  court,  exercising  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution,  may refuse or withhold the relief, if granting it will cause injustice 

or is likely to cause loss or damage to the public, who would be reposing their 

trust in these young medical graduates?. 

9. 

In  order  to  dilate  on  the  above  propositions,  it  is  important  to 

examine the scheme of the PMDC Ordinance, before and after the amendments 

through the Amendment Act. It is noted that the object and purpose of the PMDC 

Ordinance  in  regulating  the  medical  profession  is  to  promote  public  good, 

obviously the object of the regulation is to protect and safeguard those who would 

be reposing and relying on the knowledge and skill of medical practitioners, and 

thereby placing their health and lives in their hands. The public good is, therefore, 

of paramount consideration while interpreting the provisions of the Ordinance.       

The Ordinance before the amendments; 

As is evident from the preamble, the Ordinance was promulgated and notified on 

5th  June,  1962,  to  consolidate  the  law  relating  to  the  registration  of  medical 

practitioners and dentists, and to reconstitute the Council in order to establish a 

uniform  minimum  standard  of  basic  and  higher  qualifications in  medicine  and 

dentistry. The constitution of the Council was, and continues to be provided under 

section 3 of the Ordinance. Before the Amendment Act, there were five Schedules 

of  the  Ordinance.  The  recognized  medical  qualifications  granted  by  medical 

institutions in  Pakistan  were  notified  under  the  First  Schedule, the institutions 

outside  Pakistan  in  the  Second  Schedule.  The  Third  Schedule  related  to  the 

recognized additional medical qualifications; the Fourth Schedule for registerable 

 
 
 
 
 
-6- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

medical licences and diplomas, while the Fifth Schedule dealt with the recognized 

dental qualifications.  

Section  11  governed  the  recognition  of  medical  institutions  and  the  medical 

qualifications granted by medical institutions in Pakistan, while Section 12, 13 

and  14  dealt  with  recognition  of medical  qualifications  granted  by institutions 

outside  Pakistan.  It  is  also  important  to  note that  Section  15  provided  for  the 

powers  of  the  Council,  and  the  Federal  Government,  in  case  of  qualifications 

granted by medical institutions outside Pakistan, other than those notified in the 

Second  Schedule.  Section  23  provided  for  the  qualifications,  conditions  and 

procedure for registration of medical practitioners possessing qualifications which 

were recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of the Ordinance.  

The three provisos to section 23 laid down the conditions for registration. The 

registration was envisaged in two stages; initially, a person holding qualifications 

from a recognised medical institution was granted 'provisional registration', and 

after fulfilling certain conditions, was entitled to get 'full registration'. Section 2 

(i)  defined  "recognized  medical  qualification"  as  meaning  any  of  the  medical 

qualifications  included  in  the  First  and  Second  Schedule  or  recognized  under 

Sections 14 or 15, while Section 2 (l) defined "registered medical practitioner" as 

meaning  a medical  practitioner  registered  or  provisionally  registered  under  the 

Ordinance.  

It was not enough to hold a recognised medical qualification to be entitled to full 

registration  under  the  Ordinance.  Section  23 further  provided that  the  Council 

may, by Regulations, direct the necessary particulars to be entered in the register. 

Pursuant  to  its  powers,  particularly  under  Section  33  of  the  Ordinance,  the 

Council  framed  Regulations  titled  ‘The  Pakistan  Registration  of  Medical  and 

Dental  Practitioners  Regulations,  2008’  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Practitioners Regulations’). The Practitioners Regulations were notified in the 

 
 
 
 
-7- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

official gazette on 26-01-2009. These Regulations provide for an elaborate and 

comprehensive procedure for registration under the PMDC Ordinance. Part VII 

deals with foreign qualifications and the National Examination Board. The NEB 

examinations  are  prescribed  to  determine  the  professional  competence,  or 

otherwise,  of  a  Pakistani  citizen,  holding  basic  medical  qualifications  from  a 

foreign medical institution. The NEB examination was, therefore, introduced for 

the first time through the Practitioner Regulations in January, 2009.  

The plain reading of the language of Regulation 40 makes it obvious that merely 

graduating or holding medical qualifications from a foreign medical institution 

was not enough to be entitled as of right to registration. The Regulations further 

provide that every student obtaining admission in a foreign medical institution 

was  required  to  get  a  No  Objection  Certificate  before  joining  the  medical 

institution outside Pakistan. The object and purpose of the NEB examination was 

to  determine the  competence,  or  otherwise,  of  a  candidate  for  registration  and 

equivalence of the foreign basic or postgraduate medical or dental qualification, 

as defined in Regulations 2 (iv) and (xvii) respectively. It may be pointed out that 

Sub Regulation 1, of Regulation 59, related to those persons who had 'acquired' a 

foreign  basic  medical  or  dental  qualification from  such medical institutions  as 

were included in the Second Schedule or Fifth Schedule of the Ordinance. It is 

emphasised  that  the  entitlement  was  on  the  basis  of  'acquiring'  a  medical 

qualification and not 'admission' or enrolment. The said Regulation provided that 

they were not required to qualify the NEB examination for being provisionally 

registered under section 23 of the Ordinance. However, for applicants who had 

obtained qualifications from a medical institution abroad other than those notified 

under the Second or Fifth Schedule, NEB examination was mandatory.  

A combined reading of the provisions of the Ordinance, as they existed prior to 

the Amendment Act, read with the Practitioners Regulations, makes it obvious 

that the requirement to qualify the NEB examination , so as to be entitled to a 

 
 
 
-8- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

provisional or full registration under the PMDC Ordinance was mandatory, for 

those  who  held medical  qualifications  from  a  foreign  medical  institution  other 

than those notified under the Second Schedule. In case of institutions included in 

the Second Schedule, pre requisite for being entitled to be provisionally registered 

was  on  the  basis  of  'acquiring'  the  medical  qualification.  Mere  admission  or 

enrolment in a recognised foreign medical institution never created a vested right 

to  provisional  or  full  registration  as  a  medical  practitioner  under  the  PMDC 

Ordinance.  

After the Amendment Act 

The Amendment Act, which received the assent of the President on 10-08-2012, 

and was notified in the official gazette on 13-08-2012, made fundamental changes 

in the law. Sections 11 to Section 15 were omitted/substituted and instead new 

provisions  were  inserted,  which  incorporated  in  the  statute  the  concept  and 

procedure  for  registration  of  students  qualifying  from  educational  institutions 

outside Pakistan, hitherto provided in the Practitioners Regulations. The Second 

Schedule of the Ordinance was omitted and instead Section 15 has been inserted, 

which  deals  with  the  registration  and  recognition  of  qualifications  granted  by 

medical  institutions  outside  Pakistan.  Section  15  as  inserted  through  the 

Amendment Act is as follows.- 

“15.  Power  of  the  Council  to  certify certain  persons  to  be 
possessed of sufficient medical qualifications.— (1) If, after 
an  examination  by  a  board  constituted  by  the  Council,  the 
Council  is  satisfied  that  a  person  holding  a  qualification 
granted by a medical institution outside Pakistan, is possessed 
of  sufficient  knowledge  and  skill  to  be  registered  as  a 
practitioner  for  the  purpose  of  this  Ordinance,  it  may 
recommend to the Federal Government to issue a notification 
in favour of such person to register him and his qualification. 
Upon  such  notification,  the  Council  shall  register  the 
qualification possessed by the person without it being entered 

 
 
 
 
-9- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

in any of the Schedules of this Ordinance.  

(2)   The Council shall register the qualification granted by 
a medical institution outside Pakistan, possessed by the person 
by maintaining a separate list in the Register.” 

10. 

It is obvious from the above provision that the legislative intent is 

to ensure that a person, holding medical qualifications from a foreign institution, 

registered under the Ordinance, must possess sufficient "knowledge and skill", to 

the satisfaction of the Council. As discussed earlier, the position which existed 

prior to the Amendment Act also did not give any right for registration on the 

basis  of  enrolment  or  admission.  Whether  a  person,  holding  a  qualification 

granted by a medical institution outside Pakistan, possesses sufficient knowledge 

and  skill  to  be  registered  as  a  medical  practitioner  for  the  purposes  of  the 

Ordinance, is assessed pursuant to an examination by a Board constituted by the 

Council.  Based  on the  performance  of  such a  person  in the  examinations,  the 

Council  makes  recommendations  to  the  Federal  Government  to  issue  a 

notification in favour of such person to be registered under the Ordinance.  After 

the issuance of the notification, the Council registers the qualification possessed 

by entering the name of the notified person and his qualifications, in a register 

maintained  in  case  of  qualifications  granted  by  a  medical  institution  outside 

Pakistan.  

11. 

Holding a qualification from a medical institution outside Pakistan, 

qualifying the NEB examination so that the Council is satisfied that the person 

possesses sufficient "knowledge and skill" and issuance of a notification by the 

Federal Government are the mandatory pre requisites to be registered under the 

Ordinance.  

12. 

In  the  light  of  the  above,  the  argument  raised  by  the  learned 

counsel for the petitioners that the provisions of Section 15, as inserted by the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-10- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

Amendment  Act,  are  prospective  and  cannot  have  a  retrospective  operation  in 

case of the petitioners is without any force nor of any relevance. It is an admitted 

fact  that  at  the  time  when  the  amendments  came  into  effect  through  the 

Amendment Act, the petitioners had not acquired and did not hold or possess the 

qualifications granted by the foreign medical institution and merely on the basis 

of enrolment or admission, no right had accrued. The petitioners graduated and 

were  granted  qualifications  by  the  medical  institution  in  Cuba  after  the 

Amendment Act had come into force. Section 15 of the Ordinance, as it stands 

today, makes it mandatory for every person holding a qualification granted by a 

medical  institution  outside  Pakistan  to  take  the  examination  by  a  Board 

constituted by the Council, so that the latter is satisfied that he or she possesses 

sufficient knowledge and skill to be registered as a practitioner for the purposes of 

the  Ordinance.  The  petitioners,  therefore,  cannot  claim  registration  under  the 

Ordinance as no right was created either prior or after the promulgation of the 

Amendment Act.     

13. 

The next issue to consider is the effect of the NOC and the letter 

addressed by the Registrar of the Council to the President of the University in 

China,  dated  08-10-2011,  which  purportedly  was  issued  in  the  light  of  the 

decision taken by the Council in its 118th Meeting held on 03-04-2011. Firstly, it 

is pertinent to note that this meeting was held prior to the promulgation of the 

Amendment  Act,  and  after  the  framing  of  the  Practitioners  Regulations,  and 

secondly, it approved the minutes of the National Examination Board Committee 

meeting held on 14-03-2011, recorded as Item No.22 of the Minutes. The learned 

counsel for the petitioners have not been able to point out any decision taken by 

the NEB, or the Council, which approved the Minutes of the NEB in the 118th 

Meeting  dated  03-04-2011,  that  the  students  enrolled  or  who  had  sought 

admission  prior  to  03-04-2011  in  an  institution  outside  Pakistan  and  notified 

under  the  Second  Schedule,  were  exempt  from  taking  the  NEB  examination. 

 
 
 
-11- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

Moreover,  in the  135th  Session  held  on  11-09-2013,  the  Council  approved  the 

recommendations of the Executive Committee to the effect that all graduates, or 

persons having obtained medical qualifications from a medical institution outside 

Pakistan after July-2011, shall be required to take the NEB examinations. The 

letter,  dated  08-10-2011,  addressed  by  the  Registrar  to  the  President  of  the 

medical institution in China, was also withdrawn as not being in consonance with 

the decision taken by the Council in its 118th Meeting dated 03-04-2011.  

14. 

It may be noted that the Registrar, who is appointed under Section 

9 of the Ordinance, is not vested with any power of the Council or the Executive 

Committee, nor can he exercise such powers. The Registrar had acted on his own 

as there is no decision of the Council, let alone in the 118th Meeting dated 03-04-

2011, to grant exemption to students enrolled in a medical institution abroad from 

taking  the  NEB  examination  s.  The  Registrar’s  letter,  dated  08-10-2011  was, 

therefore, not a letter of the Council, and was issued by the Registrar without 

having authority or jurisdiction. Moreover, assuming that the Council had taken 

such a decision, it would have been in violation of the provisions of the Ordinance 

as admission or enrolment did not create any right. The letter, being void and 

without jurisdiction, cannot give rise to any right, nor could it have been relied 

upon  by  the  petitioners  for  building  a  case  on  the  principles  of  promissory 

estoppel or locus poenitentiae. As far as the NOC obtained by some students is 

concerned,  as  already  noted,  that  was  a  requirement  under  the  Practitioners 

Regulations for students desiring to seek admission in a medical institution other 

than included in the Second Schedule and regulation 46, particularly provided that 

issuance  of  such  NOC  did  not  create  any  right.  As  far  as  the  petitioners  are 

concerned, mere issuance of NOC in case of some other students did not give rise 

to a right to be registered.  It, however, is observed that the Council was negligent 

in allowing its Registrar to write a letter to  the medical institution in China by 

communicating a purported decision which was never taken in the 118th Meeting 

 
 
 
-12- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

of the Council held on 03-04-2011. There is nothing on record to show that the 

PMDC has granted exemption to any person or class of person from taking the 

NEB examination. 

15. 

 This  Court  has  not  been  able  to  persuade  itself  with  the 

proposition  raised  by  the  learned  counsels  for  the  petitioners  that  the  HEC 

Ordinance 2002 has an overriding effect, or will prevail over the provisions of the 

PMDC Ordinance. The object and purpose of the two statutes are distinct and 

separate, having no nexus with each other. Both are special laws dealing with 

different subjects altogether. The preamble of the HEC Ordinance, 2002, declares 

the  object  and  purpose  as  'improvement  and  promotion  of  higher  education, 

research and development and for providing for the establishment of the Higher 

Education  Commission  and  matters  connected  therewith  or incidental  thereto". 

Section  10  provides  for  the  powers  and  functions  of  the  Higher  Education 

Commission. The powers and functions of the Commission, nor the object and 

purpose  of  the  statute,  includes  regulation  of  the  medical  institutions  for  the 

purposes of its recognition or the registration of medical practitioners. As already 

noted,  the  Ordinance  was  promulgated  and  notified  on  5th  June,  1962,  to 

consolidate  the  law  relating  to  the  registration  of  medical  practitioners  and 

dentists, and  to  reconstitute the  Council i.e  the  PMDC,  in  order  to  establish  a 

uniform  minimum  standard  of  basic  and  higher  qualifications in  medicine  and 

dentistry. It is, therefore, obvious that as far as the regulation of recognition of 

medical  intuitions  and  registration  of  medical  practitioners  is  concerned,  the 

PMDC Ordinance will have an overriding effect over any other law, including the 

HEC Ordinance, 2002. Needless to mention that none of the provisions of the two 

statutes  overlaps,  contradicts  each  other  or  gives  rise  to  any  ambiguity  or 

inconsistency.  Even  otherwise,  there  is  nothing  on  record  to  even  remotely 

suggest that the Higher Education Commission had made any representation or 

commitment that the petitioners, by availing the scholarship to study in Cuba, will 

 
 
 
-13- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

be exempt from registration under the PMDC Ordinance. The Commission had no 

power  or  jurisdiction  under  the  HEC  Ordinance  2002  to  make  such  a 

representation. Assuming that the petitioners understood that their selection for 

grant of a scholarship to study for a medical degree in Cuba was in the nature of a 

representation, it would still not have created a right to be exempted from taking 

the  NEB  examination,  as  that  would  have  been  illegal  and  ultra  vires  the 

provisions of the PMDC Ordinance, 1962. It is also not the case of the petitioners 

that  the  medical  institution,  from  which  they  have  obtained  their  respective 

qualifications, was at any time notified under the Second or Fifth Schedule of the 

PMDC  Ordinance.  The  role  of  the  Higher  Education  Commission  was  to  the 

extent  of  facilitating  the  petitioners in  selection  on  merit  for  the  scholarships 

offered  by  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Cuba  to  study  in  a  medical 

institution. Such facilitation, by no stretch of the imagination, can create a right to 

be granted exemption from the NEB examination or to ignore section 15 of the 

PMDC Ordinance.                             

16. 

The reliance of the learned counsels on the principle of promissory 

estoppel is also misplaced and not relevant to the facts and circumstances of the 

present case. The reliance being placed on the purported representations made by 

the Council through the letter dated 08-10-2011, issued by the Registrar, has no 

force.  As  already  held  above,  the  letter  of  the  Registrar  was  without  lawful 

authority and jurisdiction. It was not a representation made by the Council, rather 

the Registrar had acted on his own, and without having jurisdiction, approached 

the medical institution in China and communicated a purported decision of the 

Council,  which  the  latter  had  not  taken.  In  any  case, the said  letter  cannot  be 

treated as a representation made to the petitioners.    

17. 

Promissory estoppel is an equitable doctrine with the object of pre-

empting the suffering of any loss arising out of a promise made, and is invoked so 

as  to  prevent  violation  of  and  to  safeguard  rights  accrued  pursuant  to  such  a 

 
 
 
 
 
-14- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

promise.  It  is  essential  that  the  promise  be  made  by  a  person  competent  to 

represent  the  authority,  on  behalf  of  which  a  promise  is  being  made,  and  the 

person  to  whom  the  representation  has  been made  changes  his  position  to  his 

detriment,  takes  a  decisive  step  and  enters  into  a  binding  contract  or  incurs  a 

liability. Simultaneously, it is settled law that there can be no estoppel against a 

Statute. In the present case, the Registrar, who had addressed the letter dated 08-

10-2011, had no authority or jurisdiction to make a representation on behalf of the 

Council, or to communicate a decision never taken. It was, therefore, neither a 

representation for the  purposes  of  raising  the  plea  of  promissory  estoppel,  nor 

could it give rise to a claim to any right. There is nothing on record to suggest that 

the letter had induced the petitioners to seek admissions in the medical institution 

in Cuba. In any case, after the insertion of Section 15, through the Amendment 

Act, the plea of promissory estoppel lost its validity, even if it is assumed that the 

Registrar had communicated a lawfully taken decision of the Council, as there can 

be no estoppel against the Statute. Reference in this regard may be made to cases 

titled  ‘Messrs  Gadoon  Textile  Mills  and  814  others  VS  WAPDA  and  others’ 

[1997  S.C.M.R.  641],  ‘Secretary  Economic  Affairs  Division,  Islamabad  and 

others  VS  Anwarul  Haq  Ahmed  and  others’  [2013  S.C.M.R.  1687],  ‘Dr. 

Muhammad Munir-Ul-Haq and others VS Dr. Muhammad Latif Chaudhry and 

others’  [1992  S.C.M.R.  2135],  ‘West  Punjab  Government  VS  Messers  Pindi-

Jhelum  Valley  Transport  Ltd.  Rawalpind  and  others’  [P.L.D.  1960  S.C.  88], 

‘Naseer Ahmed and another VS Asghar Ali’ [1992 S.C.M.R. 2300], ‘Jam Pari VS 

Muhammad Abdullah’ [1992 S.C.M.R. 786], ‘Mst. Sharif Bibi and another VS 

Syed  Muhammad  Nawaz  Shah  and  others’  [2008  S.C.M.R.  1702],  ‘Syed 

Muhammad Hussain Shah VS Abdul Qayyum and others’ [2011 S.C.M.R. 743], 

‘Mrs. Zohra Begum VS Pakistan Burmah Shell’ [1988 S.C.M.R. 756], ‘Ikram Bus 

Service and others VS Board of Revenue, West Pakistan’ [P.L.D. 1963 S.C. 564], 

‘Islamic Republic of Pakistan VS Israrul Haq and 23 others’ [P.L.D. 1981 S.C. 

531], ‘Pir Sabir Shah VS Shad Muhammad Khan, Member Provincial Assembly, 

 
-15- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

N.W.F.P.  and  another’   [P.L.D.  1995  S.C.  66],  ‘Pakistan  through Ministry  of 

Finance,  Economic  Affairs  and  others  VS  Fecto  Belarus  Tractors  Limited’ 

[P.L.D. 2002 S.C. 208], ‘Messrs Army Welfare Sugar Mills Ltd. and others VS 

Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others’  [1992  S.C.M.R.  1652],  ‘Messrs  M.Y. 

Electronics Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. through Manager and others VS Government of 

Pakistan 

through  Secretary  Finance, 

Islamabad  and  others’ 

[1998 

S.C.M.R.1404].  It  may  also  be  noted  that  the  Practitioners  Regulations  are 

unambiguous and clear. Obtaining a NOC and an eligibility certificate for taking 

the NEB examination was a requirement even before the insertion of section 15 

through the Amendment Act and did not create a right to be registered under the 

Ordinance.  Moreover,  petitioners  had  ‘acquired’  their  respective  medical 

qualifications after Section 15 came into force, pursuant to the Amendment Act. 

The Higher Education Commission also did not make any representation which 

may have induced the petitioners to apply for the scholarship, nor any assurance 

was given that they will be exempt from taking the NEB examination.  

18. 

I  now  take  up  the  next  argument  raised  by  the  counsels for  the 

petitioners i.e. placing reliance on the principle of locus poenitentiae. According 

to  the  principle  of  locus  poenitentiae,  once  an  order  has  taken  effect,  and  in 

pursuance thereof, certain rights have been created in favour of a person, then 

such an order cannot be withdrawn or rescinded to the detriment of the rights 

created.  

19. 

It is settled law and consistently held by the august Supreme Court 

that the  principle  of locus  poenitentiae  is  not  a  principle  of  law,  according  to 

which  an  order  once  passed  becomes  irrevocable,  and  a  past  and  closed 

transaction. An illegal order does not create a right, nor can perpetual rights be 

gained or claimed on the basis of such an illegal order. The principle of locus 

poenitentiae would be invoked only in respect of an order which is legal, and not 

in any respect an order which is contrary to and in contravention of any provision 

 
 
 
 
 
-16- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

of law, or the rules made there under. Similarly, the principle is applicable only in 

respect  of  an  order  passed  by  an  authority  which  was  competent  and  in 

accordance with law. When the basic order is without lawful authority, then no 

superstructure can be built thereon, and if that is the case, then such structure will 

also fall on the ground automatically. Reference in this regard may be made to 

cases titled ‘Muhammad Nadeem Arif and others VS Inspector-General of Police, 

Punjab,  Lahore  and  others’  [2011  S.C.M.R.  408],  ‘Executive  District  Officer 

(Edu). Rawalpindi VS Mst. Rizwana Kausar and 4 others’ [2011 S.C.M.R. 1581], 

‘Nazir Ahmed Panhwar VS Government of Sindh through Chief Secretary, Sindh 

and  others’  [2005  S.C.M.R.  1814],  ‘Executive  District  Officer  (Education), 

Rawalpindi VS Muhammad Younas’ [2007 S.C.M.R. 1835] and ‘The Engineer-

In-Chief  Branch  through  Ministry  of  Defence,  Rawalpindi  and  another  VS 

Jalaluddin’ [P.L.D. 1992 S.C. 207]. In the present case the principle is neither 

relevant nor attracted.  

20. 

In the present case the learned counsels for the petitioners have 

built the edifice of their arguments on the selection made by the Higher Education 

Commission for scholarships offered by the Government of the Republic of Cuba, 

the nature of courses offered by the medical institution in Cuba, letter dated 08-

10-2011, addressed by the Registrar of the Council to the a University in China. 

None of these grounds have any force. Moreover, after the insertion of Section 15 

in the Ordinance, through the Amendment Act, reliance on the principle of locus 

poenitentiae in any case is neither relevant nor of any effect.  

21. 

Lastly, there is another important aspect of the present case which 

cannot  be  ignored.  The  petitioners  have  indeed  graduated  from  the  medical 

institution in Cuba, and this is not disputed. They are seeking registration under 

the PMDC Ordinance so as to enter the noble profession of medicine, to become 

medical  practitioners,  and  as  a  consequence  be  allowed  to  handle  and  treat 

members of the general public. The petitioners are not the sole stakeholders in 

 
 
 
 
 
-17- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

being registered under the Ordinance, as the rights of others are also involved. 

Equally,  if  not more important,  are those members  of  the  general  public  who 

would  be  relying  on the  knowledge  and  skill  of  the  petitioners.  The  Supreme 

Court of Illinois, in Witherell v Weimer, 421 N.E.2d 869, has quoted section 95 

from 61 Am.Jur.2d Physicians and Surgeons, which aptly describes the nature of 

the relationship between a medical practitioner and a patient as follows; 

"The relation of physician and patient has its foundation on the 
theory that  the  former is  learned,  skilled,  and experienced in 
those subjects about which the latter ordinarily knows little or 
nothing, but which are of the most vital importance and interest 
to him, since upon them may depend the health, or even life, of 
himself  or  his  family;  therefore  the  patient  must  necessarily 
place  great  reliance,  faith  and  confidence  in  the  professional 
advice, and acts of the physician"   

22. 

This  relationship,  which  involves  reposing  trust,  makes  it  one 

involving a  duty  of  care,  known  as  "fiduciary".  The  patient  is  vulnerable  and 

dependent on the advice of the medical practitioner, in whose skill and knowledge 

the former has reposed trust. The interest, therefore, of the person who reposes 

trust and who is vulnerable, ought to be protected as well. On the one hand the 

petitioners are claiming a personal right, while on the other are those members of 

the  public,  not  before  this  Court,  whose  welfare  and  rights  are  also  at  stake. 

Though in the present case, the petitioners have not been able to make out a case 

for the grant of relief, nor that a right had accrued in their favour to be exempt 

from the NEB registration, but assuming that they were able to make out a case, 

would this Court have exercised its jurisdiction by allowing the relief? Would it 

have  been  just  and  equitable  to  turn  a  blind  eye  and  ignore  the  welfare  and 

interests of the patients? The medical profession is committed to preserve and 

protect the most precious creation, Life. A person may be holding qualifications 

from the most prestigious medical institution in the world, and yet not possess 

sufficient knowledge and skill to be trusted, by giving in his hands the lives of 

 
 
 
 
-18- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

members of the public who would be exposed to him/her in his capacity as a 

medical practitioner.  

23. 

This Court has been informed that the NEB examination is basic 

and  merely  tests  the  skill  and  knowledge  expected  from  a  person  holding 

qualifications  from  a  medical  institution.  Such  basic  tests/examinations  for 

assessing the knowledge and skill of persons holding qualifications from foreign 

institutions are taken in almost every country. In the United States it is known as 

USMLE  or  ECFMG  certification,  in  the  United  Kingdom  it  is  known  as  the 

Professional  Linguistic  and  Assessment  Board  ("PLAB")  and  in  India  as  the 

Foreign  Medical  Graduate  Examination  (''FMGE").  A  medical  practitioner, 

without having sufficient knowledge and skill, can play havoc with the lives of 

those who would repose their trust and confidence in him/her.  

24. 

The  PMDC  is  a  regulatory  authority,  consisting  of  medical 

professionals of repute, and it has the powers to regulate and check the standards 

of the medical institutions within Pakistan. The Council has no such powers as far 

as medical institutions outside Pakistan are concerned, particularly in a country 

where the language is also different. The legislature, while inserting Section 15 

and omitting the Second Schedule through the Amendment Act, most obviously 

intended to safeguard the rights and interests of the general public by requiring 

that the persons holding qualifications from medical institutions abroad, possess 

the necessary knowledge and skill so as to be eligible to be registered under the 

Ordinance. It may be noted that in such matters, which may have a bearing on or 

affect the welfare and rights of the general public, the Court, in appropriate cases, 

may withhold or refuse to grant relief if it would be inequitable or cause injustice, 

or the effect would be disastrous or have an adverse impact on the rights of the 

general public. As an illustration, reference may be made to the facts of  "Ram 

Sukh and others VSState of Rajasthan and others (AIR 1990 SC 592), the 

concern for the ‘tiny tots’, not before the Court, was of paramount consideration 

 
 
 
 
 
-19- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

rather than the untrained teachers. In the present case, even if the petitioners had 

succeeded  to  make  out  a  case  in  favour  of  exemption  from  taking  the  NEB 

examination,  this  Court  may  have  with  held  or  refused  to  exercise  its 

extraordinary  equitable jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  The 

hesitation on the part of the petitioners to take the examinations and expecting the 

Court  to  rescue  them  raises  concerns.  While  this  Court  may  sympathise  with 

them, it cannot allow even a single holder of medical qualifications obtained from 

a medical institution, who does not possess sufficient knowledge and skill, to be 

able to offer himself to be trusted by a vulnerable patient.  

25. 

It is high time that the Council takes measures and discharge its 

regulatory  obligations  so  as  to  ensure  acceptable  standards  in  the  medical 

profession,  and  to  safeguard  the  interests  and  rights  of  the  general  public. 

Determining the competence, knowledge and skill of even those who have already 

been registered as medical practitioners, ought to be a continuous process. The 

learned counsels have raised the argument of discrimination but have failed to 

place any material on record to show that others have been treated differently. 

Would  it  create  a  right in favour  of  the  petitioners  if  registrations  were  made  

prior  to  the  promulgation  of  the  Amendment  Act,  without  taking  the  NEB 

examination?. This argument is also misplaced. An illegality cannot be made a 

ground for perpetuating the same. Moreover, learned counsel for the Council has 

assured this Court that all others will be treated alike. Accepting the argument and 

allowing the petitioners to be registered under the Ordinance would amount to 

bypassing, and  making statutory  provisions,  particularly  section  15, redundant.  

No case of discrimination is made out. If there are such persons, the Council may 

take appropriate measures in ensuring that they possess sufficient knowledge and 

skill to be able to offer their services as medical practitioners.              

26. 

This Court expects that the petitioners will have no hesitation in 

taking the NEB examinations and demonstrating their knowledge and skill. Had 

 
 
 
 
-20- 

W.P. No.3061/2014 

the  petitioners  not  waited  for  the  outcome  of  this  petition,  they  would  have 

completed  the  stages  of  the  NEB  examination  by  now,  and  could  have  been 

notified under section 15 as registered medical practitioners.         

27. 

This Court, in the light of the above discussion, holds that there is 

no merit in the petitions and, therefore, they are dismissed. However, the Council 

may consider arranging refresher courses for the petitioners and to facilitate the 

petitioners  in  taking  the  NEB  examination.  Pursuant  to  the  statement  of  the 

learned counsel, made on behalf of the Council, half the fee prescribed for the 

NEB  examination  shall  be  charged  in  case  of  the  Petitioners.  This  Court  is 

confident that the petitioners will burn midnight oil and after qualifying the NEB 

examination, serve humanity besides earning a livelihood for themselves.    

   (ATHAR MINALLAH)             

   JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 16-01-2015. 

Approved for reporting. 

    JUDGE 

Asif Mughal/* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
