RFA No.281-2020 

1 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.  

: 

RFA NO.281-2020 

Hassan Aziz etc. 
VS    
Meraj-ud-Din etc. 

Appellants by        :  Mr. Babar Mumtaz, Advocate  
Respondents by     :  Malik  Naseem  Abbas  Nasir,  Advocate  for 
respondents No.1 to 12. 
Syed Zulfiqar Abbas Naqvi, Advocate and Mr. 
for 
Mudassir  Hussain  Malik,  Advocate 
respondent No.13.  
Mr.  Muhammad  Nazir  Jawad,  Advocate  for 
CDA/respondent No.14. 
05.01.2021 

Date of hearing     : 

AAMER FAROOQ J.  

The  appellants  and  respondents 

No.1  to  13  are  the  legal  heirs  of  Mrs.  Tameez-un-Nisa  w/o  Sheikh 

Muhammad  Azeem.  Respondents  No.1  to  3  are  sons  of  referred  Mrs. 

Tameez-un-Nisa; respondents No.4 & 5 are the daughters, whereas two 

sons of Mrs. Tameez-un-Nisa have predeceased her namely Sheikh Siraj-

ud-Din  and  Sheikh  Nawab-ud-Din.  In  this  behalf,  Sheikh  Siraj-ud-Din 

was survived by respondents No.6 & 7 as sons and respondents 8 & 9 as 

daughters;  Sheikh  Nawab-ud-Din  was  survived  by  respondent  No.10 

and 

father  of  appellants  namely  Aziz-ur-Rehman  as  sons  and 

respondents  No.11  &  12  as  daughters.  Appellants’  father  died  on 

07.12.2005,  whereas  their  grandfather  namely  Nawab-ud-Din  died  on 

09.04.1992.  Mrs.  Tameez-un-Nisa  was  the  owner  of  inter  alia  the 

property  bearing  House  No.27,  Street  No.26,  Sector  F-6/2,  Islamabad 

and  after her  demise,  the  heirs  sold  the  referred  property  to  respondent 

No.13  vide  sale  deed  dated  22.01.2020,  which  was  registered  with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RFA No.281-2020 

2 

respondent No.15. The appellants, who are great grandchildren of Mrs. 

Tameez-un-Nisa, 

filed  a  suit 

for  declaration  of  succession  and 

administration to the effect that they, being legal heirs of Mrs. Tameez-

un-Nisa,  are  entitled  to  the  share  in  afore-noted  property  sold  by 

respondents No.1 to 12 and that property has been sold at a lesser price 

hence deed be cancelled. The referred suit was dismissed by learned trial 

court vide judgment and decree dated 25.09.2020, hence the appeal.   

2. 

Learned counsel for the appellants  inter alia contended that under 

section  4  of  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961,  the  appellants  are 

entitled  to  share  the  inheritance  of Mrs.  Tameez-un-Nisa, who  was the 

great grandmother. In this behalf, it was contended that bare reading of 

section  4  ibid  shows  that  appellants  are  entitled  to  have  share  in  the 

property.  Reliance  was  placed  on  cases  reported  as  ‘Mst.  Zainab  VS 

Kamal  Khan  alias  Kamla’  (PLD  1990  Supreme  Court  1051),  ‘Mst. 

Saabran Bibi and 9-others VS Muhammad Ibrahim and 12-others’ (2005 

CLC 1160), ‘Jamroz Khan VS Aamir Khan and others’ (2013 CLC 542), 

‘Mst. Fazeelat Jan and others VS Sikandar through his Legal Heirs and 

others’ (PLD 2003 Supreme Court 475), ‘Mst. Bhaggay Bibi and others 

VS Mst. Razia Bibi and others’ (2005 SCMR 1595), ‘Kamal Khan alias 

Kamla VS Mst. Zainab’ (PLD 1983 Lahore 546) as well as Article titled 

‘Orphaned  Grandchildren  in  Islamic  Succession  of  Law’  by  Kemal 

Faruki.  Learned  counsel  also  placed  reliance  on  a  Report  of  the 

Commission on Marriage and Family Laws to substantiate that spirit of 

section  4  of  Muslim  Family Laws  Ordinance, 1961  is  that not only  the 

grandchildren  but  also  the  great  grandchildren  are  entitled  to  the 

proceeds of inheritance. Reliance was also placed on Ahkam-ul-Quran by 

 
RFA No.281-2020 

3 

Imam  Abu  Bakr  Ahmed  Bin  Ali  Jassas  Raazi  translated  by  Moulana 

Abdul Qayyum at pages 218 to 223 as well as Islamic Shariat Maqasid and 

Mutaliya by Yousaf Hamid-ul-Alam.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  inter  alia  contended  that 

section  4  of  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  is  an  exception,  as 

such,  to  the  general  rule  that  grandchildren  do  not  inherit  from 

grandfather.  It  was contended  that  under  the  Islamic  Fiqh,  the  children 

of  predeceased  sons  and  daughters  are  not  entitled  to  inherit  from 

grandfather.  It  was  contended  that  Hon’ble  Federal  Shariat  Court,  in 

case reported as ‘Allah Rakha and others VS Federation of Pakistan and 

others’ (PLD 2000 Federal Shariat Court 1), struck down section 4 ibid 

but  since  the  matter  is  pending  before  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan  hence  section  4  is  a  valid  piece  of  legislation  and  in  terms 

thereof,  only 

the  grandchildren  are  entitled 

to 

inherit 

from 

grandfather/grandmother.  

4.  Arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties have been 

heard  and  the  documents,  placed  on  record,  examined  with  their  able 

assistance.  

5. 

Section  4  of  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  entitles 

children  of  predeceased  sons  and/or  daughters  to 

inherit  from 

grandfather. The vires of section 4 of Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 

1961 came up for consideration before Hon’ble Federal Shariat Court in 

case reported as ‘Allah Rakha and others VS Federation of Pakistan and 

others’  (PLD 2000 Federal Shariat  Court 1).  The  Hon’ble Court,  while 

striking down section 4 ibid, placed reliance on various  Ayaats from the 

Holy Quran which are as follows: -   

RFA No.281-2020 

4 

38.  Before  we  analyse  the  submissions  made  by  the  opponents  and  supporters  of 
section 4 of the Ordinance as recapitulated above,  it would be  desirable to reproduce 
section 4 of the Ordinance hereinbelow for facility of reference: -- 

"Section 4. Succession: --In the event of the death of any son or daughter of the 
propositus  before  the  opening  of  succession,  the  children  of  such  son  or 
daughter, if any, living at the time the succession opens, shall per stripes receive 
a share equivalent to the share which such son or daughter, as the case may be, 
would have received, if alive. " 

We  would  also  like  to  reproduce  the  Verses  of  Holy  Qur'an  governing  the  subject 
alongwith  the  English  translation  for  the  immediate  facility  of  reference.  The  relevant 
Ayat-e-Qur'ani are: -- 

Sura Al-Nisa (S.IV.) 

(4:7)  

From what is left by parents 

And those nearest related 

There is a share for men 

And a share for women, 

Whether the property be small 

or large--a determinate share) 

(4:11)   Allah (thus) directs you 

As regards your children's 

(Inheritance): to the male 

A portion equal to that 

Of two females; if only 

Daughters, two or more, 

Their share is two-thirds 

Of the inheritance; 

If only one, her share 

Is a half 

For parents, a sixth share 

Of the inheritance to each, 

If the deceased left children; 

If no children, and the parents 

Are the (only) heirs, the mother 

Has a third; if the deceased 

Left brothers (or sisters), 

The mother has a sixth. 

(The distribution in all cases 

Is) after the payment 

Of legacies and debts. 

 
RFA No.281-2020 

5 

Ye know not whether 

Your parents or your children 

Are nearest to you 

In benefit. These are 

Settled portions ordained 

By Allah and Allah is 

4:12) 

 In what your wives leave, 

Your share is a half, 

If they leave no child: 

But if they leave a child, 

Ye. get a fourth; after payment 

Of legacies and debts. 

In what ye leave, 

Their share is a fourth, 

If ye leave no child; 

But if ye leave a child, 

They get an eighth; after payment 

Of legacies and debts. 

If the man or woman 

Whose inheritance is in question 

Has left neither ascendants nor descendants, 

But has left a brother 

Or a sister, each one of the two 

Gets a Sixth; but if more 

Than two, they share in a third 

After payment of legacies 

And debts; so that no loss 

Is caused (to anyone). 

Thus is it ordained by Allah, 

And Allah is All-knowing 

Most Forbearing 

(4:13)   Those are limits  

Set by Allah: those who  

Obey Allah and His Apostle  

Will be admitted to Gardens  

With rivers flowing beneath,  

RFA No.281-2020 

6 

To abide therein (for ever)  

And that will be  

The Supreme achievement. 

(4:14) 

 But those who disobey 

Allah and His Apostle 

And transgress His limits 

Will be admitted 

To a Fire, to abide therein 

and they shall have 

A humiliating punishment. 

(4:33) 

 To (benefit) everyone,  

We have appointed Shares and heirs 

To property left  

By parents and relatives.  

To those also, to whom  

Your right hand was pledged,  

Give their due portion:  

For truly Allah is witness  

To all things. 

(4:177)  They ask thee  

For a legal decision  

Say: Allah directs (thus)  

About those who leave  

No descendants or ascendants  

As heirs, If it is a man  

That dies, leaving a sister  

But no child, she shall  

Have half the inheritance;  

If (such a deceased was) 

A woman, who left no child  

Her brother takes her inheritance: 

If there are two sisters, 

They shall have two-thirds 

Of the inheritance 

(Between them): If there are 

Brothers and sisters, (they share), 

RFA No.281-2020 

7 

The male having twice 

The share of the female. 

Thus, doth Allah make clear 

To you (His law), lest 

Ye err. And Allah  

Hath knowledge of all things. 

39. The important Ahadith of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) as culled out from 
the  various  books  of  traditions  regarding  the  issue  under  discussion  may  also  be 
reproduced hereinbelow: -- 

Narrated Ibn-e-Abbas the Holy Prophet said: give the shares of the inheritance 
as  prescribed  in  the  Holy  Qur'an  to  those  who  are  entitled  to  receive  it,  than 
whatever remains, should be given to the closest male relative of the deceased. 
(Sahih Bukhari, Hadith No.724, Vol. 8, p. 477). 

The grandchildren are to be considered as one's children (in the distribution of 
inheritance)  in  case  none of  one's  own  children  are still  alive  a  grandson  is  as 
son, a granddaughter it as a daughter, inherit (their grandparents) property as 
their own parents would (where they are alive) and they prevent the sharing of 
the  inheritance  with  all  those  relatives  who  would  have  been  prevented  from 
the same, where their parents are alive. So, one's grandson does not share the 
inheritance with one's own son (if the son is alive)" (Sahih Bukhari, English, Vol. 
8, p.479). 

"Distribute the appointed portion to those entitled to them according to book of 
Allah.  Then  whatever  remains  is  for  the  nearest  male.  While  explaining  this 
tradition  Allama  Nuvvi  writes:  the  word  (  لُج َر  ی ٰلوَاِب)  as  appearing  in  the 
above-quoted tradition, means nearest male' and their is consensus of opinion 
among the jurists on it." (Sharh Sahih Muslim, Vol. 11, p.53). 

The  Shia'a  Ithna  Asharia  also  support  this  contention  on  the  authority  of  a  tradition 
reported by Abi Jafar al-Sadiq which is as follows: -- 

(While distributing the property of the deceased person) 

"Your real son shall be preferred over your grandson and your grandson shall be 
preferred over your brother". (Wasail-ul-Shai'a, Vol. 17, p.452, Print Beruit). 

40. Ayaat 7, 11 and 12 of Surah Nisa directly govern the law of inheritance of Muslims. 
From  these  Ayaat  the  salient  features  that  can  be  culled  out  may  be  enumerated  as 
under: -- 

(1) From the parents there is a share for men and a share for women. No matter 
the property may be small or large, determinate share. 

(2) By Ayat 11 the shares of all those who are to inherit in a given situation are 
succinctly prescribed. 

(3)  Similarly in Ayat 12 the inheritance from spouses and the shares devolving 
on the heirs have been prescribed. 

(4)  In  the  same  Ayah  12  the  inheritance  of  the  man  or  woman  who  has  left 
neither  ascendants  nor  descendants  but  has  left  other  relations  has  been 
described  and  the  shares  of  the  persons  who  are  to  inherit  shave  also  been 
given. 

(5) In all cases the inheritance is to devolve on the death of the propositus and 
the  distribution  is  to  take  place  after  payment  of  legacies  and  debts.  This  has 
been ordained to avoid any loss to anyone. 

 
 
RFA No.281-2020 

8 

(6) In Ayat 11 it is also very clearly ordained that the portions to be given to the 
heirs are settled by Allah Almighty and He is all knowing---all wise. 

(7)  Similarly  in  Ayat  12  the  mandate  is  that  the  prescribed  shares  and  the 
manner of devolution is ordained by Allah Almighty who is all knowing and most 
forbearing. 

41. In order to emphasize that the devolution of inheritance has to be carried out in the 
manner prescribed in the aforementioned Ayat of Surah Nisa, in Ayat 13 it has been very 
categorically stated that the limits prescribed for the purpose of inheritance are set by 
Allah  Almighty  and  those  who  obey  Allah  ands  his  Apostle  will  be  rewarded  by 
admittance to gardens with rivers flowing beneath to live therein forever and that will 
be the supreme achievement. 

42.  Again  in  Ayat  14  a  warning  to  those  who  disobey  Allah  and  his  Apostle  and 
transgress the limits prescribed by Him has been administered with the punishment to 
follow for the disobedience which is admittance to a fire and to abide therein and they 
shall have a humiliating punishment. 

43. Ayat 33 of Surah Nisa is also relevant to the subject to inheritance. It reiterates that 
Allah has appointed shares and heirs to property left by parents and relatives and also it 
is stated therein that Allah is witness to all things. 

44. In Ayat 177 of Surah Nisa, Prophet,  (s.a.w.)  has been addressed to, that when the 
faithful  ask  you  for  a  legal  decision  in  certain  situations  regarding  inheritance  and  as 
guidance for meeting such situations the heirs have been detailed with the shares to be 
allowed to them in the given situations. At the end of this Ayat it has been ordained that 
Allah has made the law clear so that none should err and He has knowledge of all things 

45.  Keeping  the  above  principles  governing  the  law  of  inheritance  which  give  the 
manner, mode and persons to inherit and their shares as well in background we have to 
now see whether any 'Ijtihad' was/is called for in this respect. The principle of 'Ijtehad' 
as acknowledged by all the schools of thought is that it is permissible only where there 
is  no  Qur'anic  Injunction  (حیرص صن)  and  if  there  is  any  ambiguity  to  be  cleared  or 
clarification needed then resort shall have to be made to Sunnah first. 
46. From the contents of Ayaat referred to above it is manifest that there is neither any 
ambiguity nor any clarification needed as regards devolution of inheritance and persons 
to inherit  as also about their sfikres. In the line of inheritance prescribed by Qur'an in 
the  presence  of  son,  the  children  of  the  predeceased  children  have  been  excluded  as 
heirs and this position has been aptly taken care of by .the Sunnah of our Holy Prophet 
Muhammad  (peace  be  upon  him)  in  the  above-quoted  Ahadith  in  which  the  precise 
position  of  the  j  grandchildren  has  been  elucidated  that  the  grandchildren  are  to  be 
considered as one's children in the distribution of inheritance in case none of one's own 
children are still alive and grandson has been excluded from inheritance simultaneously 
with  the  son of the  propositus.  This  Haidth  has  been  followed  by  all  schools  including 
Fiqa-e-Jafria. 

47. At this stage it might also be appropriate to observe that bringing of section 4 on the 
statute  book  viz.  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  was  the  result  of  the 
recommendations  of  the  Commission  on  Marriage  and  Family  Laws  appointed  by  the 
Government  of  Pakistan  in  1956  which  Commission  gave  its  report  referred  to  in  the 
earlier portion of this judgment. The recommendations of the Commission based on the 
"so-called  Ijtehad"  was  a  futile  exercise  which  has  caused  confusion  in  the  law  of 
inheritance envisaged for the Muslim Society by mandate of the Holy Qur' an. 

The Commission in this respect framed a question as under: -- 

"Is  there  any  sanction  in the  Holy  Qur'an or  any  authoritative  Hadith  whereby 
the  children  of  a  predeceased  son  or  daughter  are  excluded  from  inheriting 
property?" 

There is a very short discussion on this issue in the Commission Report. At page 1222 of 
the Gazette it has been stated: -- 

RFA No.281-2020 

9 

"It was admitted by all the members of the Commission that there is no sanction in the 
Holy Qur'an or any authoritative Hadith whereby the children of a predeceased son or 
daughter could be excluded from inheriting property from their grandfather. It appears 
that during ( تیلھاج ہنامز ) this custom prevailed amongst the Arabs, and the same custom 
has been made the basis of the exclusion of deceased children's children from inheriting 
property of their grandfather. It may be mentioned that if a person leaves a great deal 
of property and his father has predeceased him, the grandfather gets the share that the 
father of  the  deceased  would  have  got.  This means  that  the  right  of  representation  is 
recognized by Muslim law amongst the ascendants. It does not, therefore, seem to be 
logical or just that the right of representation should not be recognized among the lineal 
discendants.  If  a  person  has  five  sons  and  four  of  his  sons  predeceased  him,  leaving 
several  grandchildren  alive,  is  there  any  reason  in  logic  or  equity  whereby  the  entire 
property of the grandfather should be inherited by one son only and a large numbers of 
orphans left by the other sons should be deprived of inheritance altogether. The Islamic 
law  of  inheritance  entails  a  grandfather  to  inherit  the  property  of  his  grandsons  even 
though the father of the testator has predeceased him, why can the same principle be 
not applied to the lineal descendants, permitting the children of a predeceased son or 
daughter to inherit property from their grandfather. There are numerous injunctions in 
the  Holy  Qur'an  expressing  great  solicitude  for  the  protection  and  welfare  of  the 
orphans  and  their  property.  Any  law  depriving  children  of  a  predeceased  son  from 
inheriting  the  property of their  grandfather  would  go  entirely  against  the  spirit  of  the 
Holy Qur'an. 

It  was  stated  by  Maulana  Ehteshamul  Hag  that  all  the  four  Imams  are  agreed 
that  the  son  of  a  predeceased  son  or  daughter  shall  be',  excluded  from 
inheritance.  The  Maulana  Sahib  was  not  prepared  to  re-open  this  question  in 
view  of  the  unanimous  opinion  of  all  the  Imams.  The  views  of  the  Maulana 
Sahib would be elaborated by him in his note of dissent. (Underlining is by us).  

It has been suggested in some of the replies that the` grandfather can, by will, 
leave one--third of his property to his grandchildren. This provision does not do 
full  justice  to  the  orphans  as  is  evident  from  the  example  given  above.  We, 
therefore, recommend that legislation should be undertaken to do justice to the 
orphans in respect of the property of their grandfathers." 

On this point the only Alam Member had disagreed as is apparent from the last but one 
para of the above  quotation. As regards the opening sentence of the above quotation 
where  admitted  position  of  all  the  members  has  been  given  out  Maulana  Ehtishamul 
Haq, the  Alain Member  in his note has recorded that  this does  not  reflect  the correct 
position. 

49. Be that as it may, we are of the view that the above formulation of the question in 
the manner framed misdirected the proceedings of the E Commission. In the presence 
of the Ayaat of Surah Nisa quoted above the question to be framed required a positive 
frame  and  not  negative  as  was  done  by  the  Commission.  We  are  certain  that  if  the 
question had been framed so as to solicit views on the subject in the following form, the 
result may have been different: 

"Are the children of a predeceased son or daughter entitled to inherit from the 
grandfather  in  the  presence  of  a  son  of  a  propositus  according  to  Qur'an  and 
Sunnah?" 

Unfortunately  this  was  not  done.  Obviously  in  the  presence  of  a  positive 
direction that inheritance under the Islamic Law as derived from Qur'anic Verses 
 ُبی ِرَق " if the 
being based on the principle of "  ُب ُرق" and "
grandson was to be included .in the list of heirs the "father" would be equated 
with the "nearer" which would amount to interpolation in the Qur'anic Verses. 
This principle of Qur'anic Verse has been explained by the Hadith also which is 
in the following words: -- 

  َمعُب " and son being the "

 
 
RFA No.281-2020 

10 

(Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary., August 30, 1965, pages 1557 1558) 

50.  In  the  presence  of  the  above  clear  position  regarding  inheritance  to  devolve  upon 
nearer (son) to the exclusion of farther (grandson) no verse was specifically required in 
Qur'an to exclude an orphan grandson from inheritance. 

51.  To  re-explain  the  position  the  question  for  determination  was  and  is  whether  the 
grandsons/daughters of a propositus whose parents have died during the lifetime of the 
propositus  are  included  in  the  list  of  those  entitled  to  inheritance  under  the  Qur'anic 
Injunctions.  Qur'anic  Injunctions  are  of  two  types;  directory  and  prohibitory.  It  is  a 
matter of common sense otherwise also that in the presence of a mandatory injunction 
in respect of any matter no prohibitory provision would be required. The Ayaat of Quran 
e-Hakeem referred to above on the subject of inheritance are mandatory, clear, explicit 
and,  therefore,  needed  no  prohibitory  provision  for  any  explanation.  The  emphasis  in 
the  above  Ayat  of  Surah  Nisa  that  the  directions  contained  therein  as  regards 
inheritance  in  all  respects  have  to  be  followed  in  letter  and  spirit  and  any  deviation 
therefrom  entails  punishment  of  severe  nature  establishes  the  absolute  mandatory 
nature thereof. 

52.  Another  factor  which  had  been  weighing  with  the  learned  members  of  the 
Commission  and obviously  with  the  framers of  section  4  (ibfd)  appears  to  be  humane 
and compassionate  consideration qua the orphans. The inheritance principles of Islam 
are not based on financial positions but as already stated above are essentially based on 
nearness  and  close  proximity  of  relations-  with  the  deceased  whose  estate  is  to  be 
distributed.  The  above  considerations  of  humane  aspects  and  compassion,  though  of 
great  importance,  cannot  be  incorporated  in  it  on  account  of  immense  complications 
and the various discriminatory positions that may emerge therefrom. For example if the 
orphan children of the predeceased children are to be included in the list of persons to 
inherit why not include the widows of the predeceased children or for that matter the 
children of the predeceased brothers and sisters etc. and if it be so done there will be no 
end to the inclusions. Again in the matter of compassion an orphan grandchild without 
any tangible asset with him should not be equated with another orphan grandchild who 
in his own right may be much better placed financially  than even the direct  heir i.e. a 
son of the propositus. In the context of the above position that can emerge and do exist 
in  the  ground  realities,  the  human  wisdom  which,  without  any  doubt  cannot  equate 
with the wisdom of the K Creator, should not be allowed to muddle up the scheme of 
inheritance laid down by the Holy Qur'an as it is bound to create confusion and choas 
rather than be of any comfort or solace to the fiber of the Muslim Society. On the plane 
of  pure  worldly  considerations  even,  section  4  cannot  be  sustained.  In  order  to  meet 
situations  of  financial  inequality  in  the  society  it  is  not  merely  the  law  of  inheritance 
ordained through Qur'an which should be tampered with but attempt should be made 
to create a social order which takes care of all the deprived members of the society. Will 
it not be better to cater for the needs of all the orphans in a respectable manner rather 
than  care  for  only  such  orphans  who  are  being  allowed  to  inherit  from  propositus  by 
virtue of section 4 alone? 

53.  The  inclusion  of  the  grandchildren  in  the  inheritance  from  the  grandfather  in  the 
presence  of  the  sons  or  daughters  at  the  time  the  succession  opens  and  to  have  per 
stripes a share equivalent to the share which such predeceased son or daughter would 
have received if alive is, therefore, nugatory to the scheme of inheritance envisaged by 
Qur'an.  It  may  be  observed  in  this  regard  that  the  children  of  predeceased  son  or 
daughter  appear  to  have  been  purposely  excluded  and  there  appears  to  be  a 
justification therefor that they are not to share the burdens and responsibilities which a 
son as an heir would have to undertake on the demise of his father. 

54. Examining the above aspect on the principles of other jurisprudences as well it may 
be observed that it is well-settled even as regards the man-made law that if in any such 
law there is manner and mode  prescribed for doing anything in a particular manner it 
has to be done in the same manner only and in no other manner. It is also well-settled 
that  doing  of  anything  in  a  manner  other  than  specifically  provided  for  will  be  wholly 
illegal  and  will  have  no  effect  whatsoever.  If  this  principle  is  being  adhered  r  to  as 
regards the man-made law how can one think of deviating from the law of Allah which 
law  is  the  base  of  all  laws  and  there  can  be  no  other  law  better  than  that.  Although 
there  is  no  need  to  derive  support  from  principles  of  any  other  jurisprudence  to 

RFA No.281-2020 

11 

interpret  law  as  contained  in  Qur'an  but  nevertheless  the  above  view  has  been 
expressed just to satisfy those minds which are over influenced by philosophies of law 
other than that of Islam. It I is also intended to bring home to all such thinkers that the 
philosophy  of  law  I  contained  in  Qur'  an  is  the  most  just  and  in  consonance  with  all 
equitable principles that could possibly be conceived. 

55.  The  next  question  to  be  examined  is  as  to  what  would  be  the  solution  for  the 
socio-economic problem with which the orphan grandchildren may be confronted with 
on the demise of a grandparent, who may have loft estate from which Uncles and Aunts 
would inherit but they would not, and thus, may have a sense of deprivation or for that 
matter confronted with economic problems. 

56.  As already observed  above  Qur'an-e-Hakeem  is the word of  Allah  Almighty who  is 
the Creator of the Universe and who knoweth everything which none else can know and 
is  the  wisest.  It  will  be  presently  shown  that  the  solution  for  this  problem  is  also 
available in the Holy Qur'an. 

57. The Islamic Ideological Council in one of its reports on the subject of inheritance has 
recommended  that  the  Uncles  and  Aunts  of  orphan  grandchildren  are  duty  bound  to 
take  care  of  their  orphan  nephews  and  neices  and  provide  for  them.  It  has  also  been 
recommended that in the case of non -performance of this duty by Aunts and Uncles a 
legal  obligation  be  cast  upon  them  to  abide  by  their  duty.  Probably  the  above 
recommendation is derived from Ayat 8 of Sura-e-Nisa which lays down that at the time 
of distribution of assets those next of kins and orphans and others, who are present, be 
also dealt with kindly. This is a direction for general application to all next of kins who 
are present at the time of distribution to be taken care of and not specifically for orphan 
grandchildren, 

58. The above could be one of the solutions for the problem but we are of the 
view  that  this  solution  is  not  such which  will  be  considered  respectable  in the 
social conditions of our country inasmuch as in doing such type of a thing it is 
usually given out by the performer of the duty that he is doing it as a charity and 
those who receive, anything under this arrangement have a feeling of inferiority 
and may have inhibition in' taking something as a matter of charity. If the piety 
which is a requisite of an Islamic Social Order had been prevalent it could well 
have been a good solution but in the situations in which we are placed, we are 
of the view that the better solution would be the making of a law for Mandatory 
will (ہتبجاو ہتَّـی ِص َو) in favour of the orphan grandchildren. This view of ours finds 
support  from  a  Qur'anic  Verse  as  well.  Qur'an-e-Hakeem  through  Ayat  180  of 
Surah  Baqara  has'  ordained  that  it  is  prescribed  that  when  death  approaches 
near you, if he leaves any goods, that he makes a bequest to parents and next of 
kins according to reasonable usage; and this is due from the God-fearing. This 
Ayat starts with a mandate that a person, who sees death is approaching, has an 
obligation to create  will. The  importance  of the  above  mandate  of Qur'an  has 
also been stressed by the following Hadith: Narrated 'Abdullah-bin-Umar Allah's 
Apostle (s.a.w.) said, "It is not permissible for any Muslim who has something to 
will, to stay for two nights without having his last will and testament written and 
K kept ready with him." 

59. It was canvassed before us by some learned counsel and the Jurisconsults that this 
Ayat-e-Qur'ani has been abrogated on account of later revelation by which the parents 
had been included in the persons to inherit. We are unable to contribute to the above 
point of view. It is the cardinal principle of interpretation that where two provisions in a 
law are irreconcilable the latter shall prevail but all efforts should be made to keep both 
the  provisions  intact  if  a  reconciliation  of  the  two  can  be  reached.  We  find  that  the 
direction  of  creating  a  will  on  account  of  latter  revelation  by  including  the  parents  as 
heirs is abridged to the extent of will in favour of the parents alone but the creation of 
the will as regards others including the next of kins who are not heirs remains intact in 
the  mandatory  form  in  which  it  was  revealed.  Obviously  the  grandchildren  are  the 
nearest next of kin and they having not been included as heirs will be entitled to have a 
will  created  in  their  favour  within  the  limits  prescribed  for  creating  the  will.  The 
significance  and  limits  of  which  can  be  found  from  the  known  traditions  of  Prophet 
(s.a.w.).  We,  therefore,  are  of  the  view  that  creation  of  a  will  in  favour  of  orphan 

RFA No.281-2020 

12 

grandchildren out of an estate of grandparents to the extent of 1/3rd would be another 
very plausible solution to meet the socio-economic problem in this regard. 

60.  It  may  also  be  observed  that  this  measure  has  been  resorted  to  in  some  Muslim 
countries  and  that  the  laws  enforced  in  this  respect  in  Egypt  and  Kuwait  are  being 
effectively made use of. 

61. We would not dilate on this aspect of the matter in further details and leave it to the 
legislative  domain  of  the  country  to  deliberate  on  it  and  bring  about  the  law  which 
would  safeguard  the  interest  of  the  orphan  grandchildren  and  exclude  all  possible 
complications  of  litigation  that  may  crop  up  as  a  result  of  loose  or  un  thought  for 
provision  of  law.  We  are  preferring  the  creation  of  a  will  in  favour  of  the  orphan 
grandchildren by the, grandparent over other solutions which may be available for the 
socio-economic problem, inter alia, for the following reasons: -- 

(a)  That  this  derives  strength  from  Qur'anic  Injunctions  as  the  orphan 
grandchildren  being  not  heirs  would  be  entitled  to  the  will  their  favour  as 
regards the estate of the propositus; 

(b)  that  the  orphan  grandchildren  would  have  fruits  from  the  assets  of  their 
grandparent  without  any  inhibition  as  they  would  be  enjoying  the  same  as  of 
right in the same manner as their Uncles and Aunts as heirs would be enjoying 
benefits of the estate of their father; and 

(c) that a provision can be made that in case a propositus dies without creating 
a will, the will, to the extent of 1/3rd in favour of the grandchildren out of the 
estate with a ceiling that it does not go beyond the share of their predecessor, 
shall be deemed to have been created by the grandparerus in their favour 

62.  From  the  above  it  squarely  follows  that  in  the  presence  of  the  direct  mandatory 
injunctions of Holy Qur'an itself and also the Ahadith there was no occasion, and could 
possibly  be  none  ever, to add anything thereto or subtract  anything therefrom, in the 
matter of inheritance. 

63. In view of the foregoing discussion we hold that the provision contained in section 4 
of the  Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, as presently  in force,  is repugnant  to the 
Injunctions of Islam and direct the President of Pakistan to take steps to amend the law 
so as to bring the said provision in conformity with the Injunctions of Islam. We further 
direct that the said provision which has been held repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam 
shall cease to have effect from 31st day of March, 2000”. 

6. 

For ease of convenience, section 4 ibid is reproduced below:- 

"Section 4. Succession: --In the event of the death of any son or daughter of the 
propositus  before  the  opening  of  succession,  the  children  of  such  son  or 
daughter, if any, living at the time the succession opens, shall per stripes receive 
a share equivalent to the share which such son or daughter, as the case may be, 
would have received, if alive. " 

The  key  words  in  the  above  provision  are  ‘children  of  such  son  or 

daughter’; ‘living at the time of opening of succession’; ‘shall per stripes 

receive  a  share’.  The  word  ‘children’,  in  general  connotation,  is  direct 

children; the words in section are children only and not grandchildren or 

great grandchildren. Succession opens when propositus dies and at that 

relevant time, whoever is entitled to inherit under the law gets share in 

 
 
RFA No.281-2020 

13 

the estate of the deceased. The word  ‘per stripes’ literally means by the 

branch.  The  word  was  interpreted  in  detail  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 

Court of Pakistan in case reported as ‘Mst. Zainab VS Kamal Khan alias 

Kamla’ (PLD 1990 Supreme Court 1051). It was observed as follows: - 

“The  phrase  "per  stripes"  means:  By  roots  or  stocks;  by  representation.  This 
term, derived from the civil law, is much used in the law of descents and distribution, 
and  denotes  that  method  of  dividing  an  intestate  estate  where  a  class  or  group  of 
distributees take the share which their deceased ancestor would have been entitled to, 
taking thus by their right of representing such ancestor, and not as too many individuals. 
It is the anti-thesis of per capita. 

It means that the distribution has to be made to a group of share-holders taking 

the share of their ascendants.  

Per stripes referred to in section 4 is the anti-thesis of per capita. This means a 
share according to the stock or the root or the family as against per capita which means 
share  per  head.  This  assumes  greater  importance  only  where  the  propositus  leaves 
behind  a  number  of  grandchildren  whose  parents  died  during  the  lifetime  of  the 
propositus. The principle of succession in such cases will not be inheritance per capita 
but per stripes i.e. in accordance with the root or stock to which the grandchild belongs 
and will only get the share to which the grand-child is entitled through his parent. In the 
event of there being a single surviving grandchild the principle of per stripes is pushed 
to  the  background  but  cannot  be  employed  to  support  a  principle  which  militates 
against the Islamic Law of inheritance. 

On  the  opening  of  succession  each  group  of  children  of  the  deceased 
sons/daughters  would  inherit  the  share  of  their  father/mother  and  each  individual 
would not get the share in his/her individual capacity. Section 4 has been added to cater 
the needs of grandchildren and to remove their sufferings but it cannot be interpreted 
so as to decrease the share of the other descendants. According to section 4, share from 
the  deceased  grandfather's  property  has  been  bestowed  upon  the  children  of  his 
predeceased son but this does not mean that the other heirs of the deceased would be 
excluded from their share of inheritance. Under section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat)  Application  Act,  1962,  the  rule  of  decision  shall  be  the  Muslim  Personal  Law 
(Shariat) in cases where parties are Muslim. In spite of the non-obstante clause section 
4.  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  section  2  of  the  Act,  1962.  Both  thus  can  stand 
together.  

 The  interpretation  made  by  the  august  Apex  Court  clearly  elaborates 

that  section  4  ibid  is  confined  to  grandchildren  and  not  further  and 

concept  of  ‘per  stripes’  was  laid  down  only  to  clarify  that  each 

grandchild shall not inherit the share as individual but the grandchildren 

shall  inherit  as  group  of  what  their  father/mother  was  to  inherit. 

Mohammedan  Law  by  DF  Mullah  has  further  elaborated  issues  of 

inheritance  under  the  Islamic  Law.  According  to  Hanafi  Law  of 

  
  
 
  
RFA No.281-2020 

14 

Inheritance,  there  are  three  classes  of  heirs  namely  a)  sharers                  

b) residuaries and c) distant kindred: 

a)  Sharers  are  those  who  are  entitled  to  prescribed  share  of  the 

inheritance.   

b)  Residuaries are those who take no prescribed share, but succeed to 

the residue after the claims of sharers are satisfied.  

c)  Distant  kindred  are  all  those  relations  by  blood  who  are  neither 

sharers nor residuaries.  

Person entitled to inheritance becomes a vested holder of due rights the 

moment  succession  opens  [Dost  Muhammad  VS  Ghulam  Nabi  1990 

MLD  164].  Under  Islamic  Law  of  Inheritance,  after  clearance  of  debts 

and  general  expenses,  estate  is  distributed  amongst  sharers  and  if 

anything  receives  after  it  amongst  residuaries.  In  case,  there  are  no 

sharers, the residuaries  inherit the entire estate. The distant kindred are 

not entitled to succeed so long as there is any heir belonging to the class 

of  sharers  or  residuaries.  However,  there  is  an  exception  and  that  is 

where sharer is wife or husband of deceased.   

7. 

The outcome of above discussion is that under the Islamic Law of 

Inheritance,  there  is  no  concept  of  grandchildren  inheriting  from 

grandfather and section 4 ibid is an exception to the said principle. The 

bare  reading  of  section  4  ibid  shows  that  only  the  sons  and  daughters 

(children  of  predeceased  sons  and  daughters)  shall  inherit  from 

grandfather/grandmother  as  per  stripes i.e.  the  share  which  their father 

or mother was entitled to inherit.  

8. 

There  is  no  cavil  with  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  case  law 

cited  by  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  however  same  are  not 

applicable in the facts and circumstances of instant case, as none of the 

case law deals with the situation whether the great grandchild is entitled 

RFA No.281-2020 

15 

to inherit. The referred interpretation finds support from the decision of 

Hon’ble Lahore High Court reported as ‘Hussain Bakhsh VS Mst. Razia 

Bibi’ (2020 CLC 99) as well as ‘Mukhtar Ahmad VS Mst. Rasheeda Bibi 

and another’ (2003 SCMR 1664).  

9. 

In  case  reported  as  ‘Mst.  Sarwar  Jan  and  others  VS  Mukhtar 

Ahmad  others’  (PLD  2012  Supreme  Court  217),  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 

Court of Pakistan observed as follows: - 

“6.   Heard. It is a settled law that the succession to the estate of a Muslim under 
the Mohammedan Law shall open the moment a person departs from this world. It is 
his  legal  heirs,  as  per  the  Shariah,  who  are  alive  at  that  time,  shall  be  entitled  to 
inherit his estate. Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to argue, if 
under the Shariah, the legal heirs of a pre-deceased child would be entitled to inherit 
the estate of a deceased grandparent. He is also unable to controvert that except for 
Section 4 ibid there shall be no such right of inheritance vested in them. However, it 
is  reiterated,  that  the  respondents  shall  have  the  right  of  inheritance  as  per  the 
principle of  law  enunciated  by  the  judgment reported  as  Sardar  v.  Mst.  Nehmat  Bi 
and 8 others (1992 SCMR 82). As the entire case of the respondents is rested on this 
decision,  therefore,  it  seems  expedient  to  examine  the  proposition  in  hand,  in  the 
light of the facts and the ratio of Sardar's case. The relevant facts whereof are, that 
one Ilam Din died in 1947, agricultural land left by him as his estate was mutated in 
favour  of  his  widow  under  the  custom.  On  the  promulgation  of  West  Pakistan 
Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Act) the limited estate of the widow terminated and the inheritance was awarded to 
the  surviving  legal  heirs  of  Ilam  Din,  including  the  children  of  his  pre-deceased 
daughter,  namely,  Fatima,  who  had  died  in  1942.  A  collateral  of  Ilam  Din 
challenged  this inheritance  granted  to  Fatima's  children.  It  is how  the  matter  came 
up  before  this  Court  for  the  adjudication  of  inheritance  entitlement  of  the  said 
children.  Thus,  considering  the  effect  of  Section  4  ibid  which  at  that  time  was  in 
force along with certain provisions of the Act, it was held as under:-- 

that 

'The  provisions  of 

"Section 4 of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 allows inheritance to 
the children of the pre-deceased son or daughter to the extent that the son or 
daughter  would  have  got.  Section  3  of  the  latter  Ordinance  1961  also 
provides 
this  Ordinance  shall  have  effect 
notwithstanding  any  law,  custom  or  usage.  Therefore,  it  appears  to  us  that 
the learned Judge in  the High  Court was  right  in holding  that by  providing 
for devolution of the property under section 5 of the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat) Application Act, 1962 on termination of the life estate, the children 
of  pre-deceased  daughter  of  the  last  full  owner  will  inherit  the  share  which 
their mother would have got as if she were alive at the time of the opening of 
the succession, (emphasis supplied) that is to say, on the demise of her father 
Ilam Din in 1947. 

(11) 

Finally if the statutory provisions i.e. section 5, section 2 and section 2-A of 
the  Muslim  Personal  Law  (Shariat)  Application  Act,  1962  and  section  4  of 
the  Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961  are  read  together  and  the  rule  of 
interpretation for harmonizing statutory provisions is applied, it is quite clear 
that on the termination of the life estate of Mst. Nehmat Bi, inheritance will 
open with reference to the full owner namely Ilam Din who died in 1947. He 
would  be  succeeded  by  his  heirs  the  widow,  sister  and  pre-deceased 
daughter's  children  (emphasis  supplied).  The  claim  of  the  appellant  to 
exclude children of the pre-deceased daughter of Ilam Din is untenable." 

From the above, it is absolutely clear that the question of inheritance in that case was 

RFA No.281-2020 

16 

determined  and  resolved  by  this  Court  not  on  the  touchstone  of  section  4  ibid 
simpliciter,  rather  predominantly  on  the  basis  of  the  provisions  of  the  Act.  It  has 
been categorically held that "on the termination of the life estate of Mst. Nehmat Bi, 
inheritance will open with reference to the full owner namely Ilam Din who died in 
1947" obviously meaning that when the customary rights of the widow terminated in 
1962 that the succession would open, though with reference to Ilam Din, considering 
the  land  as  a  estate  left  by  him.  The  Ordinance  was  in  force  at  the  time  of  such 
termination, therefore, the retrospective application of section 4 was not an issue in 
the case. However, in the instant matter there is no element of any limited holding of 
the estate by a female under the custom which would terminate on the enforcement 
of  Act,  resultantly,  the  judgment  supra  has  no  relevance  qua  the  present 
proposition”. 

10.  The  law  does  not  support  the  claim  of  appellants;  the  judgment 

impugned  does  not  suffer  from  any  error  of  law  or  fact  warranting 

interference.  

11.  For  what  has  been  stated  above,  instant  appeal  is  without  merit 

and is accordingly dismissed.   

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
   JUDGE 

   JUDGE 

Announced in Open Court on 19.02.2021 

Approved for reporting  

Zawar 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
