ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Civil Revision No.310 of 2016 
Muhammad Hussain 

 VS          

Estate Office & others 

Date of Hearing:     27.02.2017 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by:    Ms. Sitwat Jehangir, learned Assistant  

   Mr. Khurram Mehmood Qureshi, Advocate.  

   Attorney-General. 
   Mr. Mumtaz Khan, Joint Estate Officer. 
   Mr. Miraj Khan, Section Officer, Ministry of  
   Housing and Works, Islamabad.  

____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB  J:-  Through  the  instant 

civil revision petition, the petitioner, Muhammad Hussain, who is 

employed  as  a  Naib  Qasid  (BPS-01)  in  the  Capital  Development 

Authority  (“C.D.A.”),  impugns  the  judgment  dated  12.05.2016, 

passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 

Islamabad,  whereby  the  petitioner’s  appeal  against  the  order 

dated  29.04.2016,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil 

Judge,  Islamabad,  was  dismissed.  Vide  the  said  order  and 

decree  dated  29.04.2016,  the  learned  Civil  Court  rejected  the 

plaint under Order VII, Rule 11 of the Code Civil Procedure, 1908 

(“C.P.C.”).   

2. 

The  record  shows  that  on  19.04.2016,  the  petitioner 

instituted  a  suit  for  declaration,  permanent  and  mandatory 

injunction  against  the  Superintendent  of  Police,  Islamabad,  and 

the  Estate  Office  before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad.  The  petitioner’s  case  was  that  House  No.334/A, 

Sector  G-7/3-1,  Islamabad,  (“the  suit  accommodation”)  was 

allotted on 28.04.1986 to the petitioner’s mother, who was a lady 

Constable 

in  the 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Police.  The 

petitioner’s  mother  retired  from  service  on  01.07.2015.  Vide 

office order dated 14.03.2008, the petitioner was employed in the 

Maintenance  Division  of  C.D.A.  The  petitioner,  who  has  been 

residing  with  his  mother  in  the  suit  accommodation,  applied  to 

the  Estate  Office  for  the  allotment  of  the  suit  accommodation  in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

his  favour.  On  18.08.2015,  the  Administration  Directorate  of  the 

C.D.A. informed  the Estate Office that the C.D.A. would  have no 

objection if the suit accommodation is placed in the pool of C.D.A 

for the allotment to the petitioner on family transfer basis. It was 

also  conveyed  that  C.D.A.  would  provide  accommodation  of  the 

same category on its availability.  

3. 

Fearing  eviction 

from 

the  suit  accommodation, 

the 

petitioner  on  19.04.2016,  filed  a  suit  for  declaration,  permanent 

and mandatory injunction. Along with the said suit, the petitioner 

filed an application for interim relief.  Vide ad-interim order dated 

19.04.2016, the respondents were restrained from dispossessing 

the  petitioner  from  the  suit  accommodation.  Vide  order  and 

decree  dated  29.04.2016,  the  learned  Civil  Court  rejected  the 

plaint  under  Order  VII,  Rule  11  C.P.C.  It  was inter alia  held  that 

the  petitioner  was  not  entitled  for  the  allotment  of  the  suit 

accommodation,  which  was  in  the  pool  of  the  Estate  Office. 

Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  the  petitioner,  who  was  an 

employee of the C.D.A. could not claim benefit under the proviso 

to  Section  15(2)  of  the  Accommodation  Allocation  Rules,  2002, 

("the  AAR,  2002"),  and  have  the  suit  accommodation  allotted  in 

his 

favour.  The 

learned  Appellate  Court,  on  12.05.2016, 

dismissed  the  petitioner’s  appeal  against  the  said  order  and 

decree  dated  29.04.2016.  The  operative  part  of  the  said 

judgment  of  the  learned  Appellate  Court  is  reproduced  herein 

below: 

“Record reflects that the suit accommodation was initially 
allotted to mother of appellant, who was employed with ICT.  The 
appellant’s mother has been retired from her service.  The 
appellant is appointed as Naib Qasid in BPS-1 in CDA. The 
appellant claims the allotment of suit accommodation under Rule 
15(2) of the AAR 2002. No cavil to preposition that in order to 
seek  benefit  of  Rule  15(2)  of  AAR,  2002  the  serving 
children/spouse  of  an  ex-allotee  may  be  allotted  same 
accommodation provided when he/she becomes eligible and 
otherwise entitled for allotment of same accommodation within 
six months after retirement of the ex-allotee.  Admittedly, the 
appellant is an employee of the CDA which is non-entitled 
department for allotment of accommodation from the pool of 
Estate Office.  The learned trial court has rightly rejected the 
plaint of appellant which sans any cause of action.  The learned 
trial  court  has  committed  no  illegality  or  irregularity,  no 
misreading or non-reading of evidence and material on record.  

 
 
3 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

Hence the appeal is hereby dismissed having no force/merits. 
File  may  be  consigned  to  record  room  after  due 
completion/compilation.”      

4. 

The  said  order  dated  29.04.2016,  passed  by  the  learned 

Civil  Court,  and  the  judgment  dated  12.05.2016,  passed  by  the 

learned Appellate Court have been impugned by the petitioner in 

the instant civil revision petition.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  the 

petitioner  was  entitled  to  be  given  benefit  under  the  proviso  to 

Rule  15(2)  of  the  AAR,  2002;  that  on  account  of  being  an 

employee of the C.D.A., the petitioner can be treated as a federal 

Government  servant;  that  the  petitioner’s  mother,  who  retired 

from  service  on  01.07.2015  had  been  duly  allotted  the  suit 

accommodation;  that  the  petitioner  has  been  residing  with  his 

mother;  that  the  C.D.A.  had  already  issued  a  No  Objection   

Certificate for the suit accommodation to be placed in the pool of 

the  C.D.A.;  that  whenever,  an  accommodation  of  the  same 

category is available, it shall be given by the C.D.A. to the Estate 

Office in exchange for the suit accommodation; that until such an 

exchange  takes  place,  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  remain  in 

occupation  of  the  suit  accommodation;  and  that  the  Ministry  of 

Housing  and  Works,  vide  notification  dated  14.12.2015,  has,  in 

exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by  Rule  28  of  the  AAR,  2002, 

directed  that  while  dealing  with  cases  for  transfer  of  allotment 

under  Rule  15(1)(2)  of  the  AAR,  2002,  the  Competent  Authority 

could condone the gap period up to one year from the date of the 

expiry of  the admissible time period, on payment by the outgoing 

occupant of monthly rent equivalent to one monthly rental for the 

condoned  period.  The  learned  counsel  for  the petitioner prayed 

for the concurrent orders passed by the learned Courts below to 

be set aside.    

6. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  position  taken  by  the  learned 

Assistant Attorney-General on behalf of respondents No.1 and 2 

(i.e.  the  Estate  Office  and  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Works) 

was  that  the  suit  accommodation  belonged  to  the  Estate  Office 

only,  and  that  the  same  was  allotted  to  the  petitioner’s  mother, 

who  retired  from  service  on  01.07.2015.  Furthermore,  it  was 

 
 
4 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

submitted  that  the  allotment  of  the  suit  accommodation  in  the 

petitioner’s mother’s name was cancelled on 31.12.2015 (i.e. six 

months  after  her  retirement);  that  the  petitioner’s  mother  was 

under  an  obligation  to  hand  over  the  vacant  possession  of  the 

suit  accommodation  under  Rule  11  of  the  AAR,  2002,  but  she 

failed  to  do  so;  that  the  petitioner’s  possession  of  the  suit 

accommodation  is  without  lawful  authority;  that  the  petitioner 

has  continued 

to 

remain 

in  occupation  of 

the  suit 

accommodation  on  the  basis  of  interim  orders  passed  by  the 

learned Courts below as well as this Court; that the employees of 

the  C.D.A.  are  not  eligible  for  the  allotment  of  accommodation 

from  the  pool  of  the  Estate  Office;  that  the  C.D.A.  has  its  own 

pool  of  accommodation 

for 

its  employees; 

that  as  per 

Government  policy,  government  accommodation  cannot  be 

exchanged  with  C.D.A.  unless  and  until  accommodation  of  the 

same category is placed in the Estate Office pool and possession 

of such accommodation is also handed over; that the petitioner is 

an unlawful occupant of the suit accommodation, and is liable to 

be evicted therefrom under Rule 25(1) of the AAR, 2002 read with 

Sections  4  and  5  of  the  Land  and  Building  (Recovery  of 

Possession)  Ordinance,  1965;  and  that  the  petitioner  is  also 

liable to pay penal rent under Rule 25(4) of the AAR, 2002.  

7. 

Furthermore,  the  Assistant  Attorney-General  submitted 

that  since  the  petitioner,  who  is  an  employee  of  the  C.D.A., 

cannot  be  allotted  accommodation  from  the  pool  of  the  Estate 

Office,  he 

is  not  eligible 

for  the  allotment  of 

the  suit 

accommodation; that the C.D.A. has not made accommodation of 

the same category available to the Estate Office for an exchange; 

that 

the  petitioner  cannot  continue 

to  occupy 

the  suit 

accommodation  until 

the  C.D.A.  gives  possession  of 

accommodation  of  the  same  category  to  the  Estate  Office  in 

exchange  of  the  suit  accommodation;  and  that  since  the 

petitioner  is  an  employee  of  the  C.D.A.,  he  can  apply  to  the 

C.D.A. for the allotment of suitable accommodation from the pool 

of the C.D.A.  

 
5 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

8. 

 Respondent  No.4 

(the  Superintendent  of 

Islamabad 

Police), also filed written comments  to the civil revision petition. 

In the said written comments, respondent No.4 took the position 

that  the  petitioner’s  mother  retired  from  service  on  01.07.2015, 

on  attaining  the  age  of  superannuation.  Furthermore,  it  was 

pleaded  that  the  suit  accommodation  is  on  the  police  pool;  that 

the suit accommodation cannot be allotted to the petitioner, who 

is  an  employee  of  the  CDA;  that  quarters  placed  in  the  police 

pool  are  allotted  to  the  officers  whose  names  appear  in  the 

General  Waiting  List;  and  that  the  suit  accommodation  has 

already been allotted to Assistant Sub-Inspector, Abid Hussain of 

the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Police,  vide  allotment  letter 

dated  02.09.2016.   Respondent No.4 prayed  for  the dismissal  of 

the civil revision petition.  

9. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

petitioner as well as the learned Assistant Attorney-General and 

have perused the record with their able assistance. 

10.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  this  civil  revision  petition 

have been mentioned in sufficient details in paragraphs No.02 to 

03 above, and the same need not be recapitulated. 

11. 

It is  an  admitted position that  the petitioner’s mother, who 

was  a  lady  constable  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  police 

retired  from  service  on  01.07.2015.  As  per  the  information 

furnished  by  respondent  No.4,  the  petitioner’s  mother  was 

allotted the suit accommodation on 28.04.1986. Vide office order 

dated  14.03.2008, 

the  petitioner  was  employed 

in 

the 

Maintenance  Division  of  C.D.A.  The  petitioner  lives  with  his 

mother,  and  therefore, 

is  still 

in  occupation  of  the  suit 

accommodation. The suit accommodation is not in the pool of the 

C.D.A.,  but  in  the  pool  of  the  Estate  Office.    On  18.08.2015,  the 

Administration  Directorate  of  the  C.D.A.  informed  the  Estate 

Office  that  the  C.D.A.  would  have  no  objection  if  the  suit 

accommodation  is  placed  on  the C.D.A  pool  for  the  allotment  to 

the petitioner on family transfer basis. Till date, the Estate Office 

has  not  exchanged 

the  suit  accommodation  with  any 

accommodation  provided  by  the  C.D.A.  The  learned  Assistant 

 
6 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

Attorney-General submitted that respondents No.1 and 2 have no 

intention of exchanging the suit accommodation with C.D.A. The 

petitioner  seeks  the  benefit  of  the  proviso  to  Rule  15(2)  of  the 

AAR,  2002  to  be  extended  to  the  petitioner  and  for  the  suit 

accommodation  to  be  allotted  to  him.  These  are  the  admitted 

facts.   

12.  Learned counsel for the petitioner has annexed at Page 15 

of  this  petition  notification  dated  14.12.2015,  issued  by  the 

Ministry  of  Housing  and  Works  in  exercise  of  the  powers 

conferred by Rule 28 of the AAR, 2002. This notification conveys 

the  direction  of  the  Federal  Government  to  the  effect  that  while 

dealing with the cases of transfer of allotment under Rules 15(1) 

and (2) of the AAR, 2002,  the competent  authority may  condone 

the  period  up  to  one  year  from  the  date  of  the  expiry  of  the 

admissible time period  on payment by  the  outgoing  occupant  of 

monthly  rent  equivalent  to  one  month’s  rent  for  the  condoned 

period.  

13.  Various time periods in Rule 15(1) and (2) of the AAR, 2002, 

have been stipulated.  Rule  15(1)  of  the  AAR,  2002 provides  that 

in case of the death of an allottee, the family of the allottee shall 

be  entitled  to  retain  the  accommodation  under  their  occupation 

for a period not exceeding one year on payment of nominal rent. 

Furthermore,  it  is  provided  that  the  serving  widow  or  serving 

children  of  the  expired  allottee  may  be  allotted  the  government 

accommodation  provided  any  of  them  become  eligible  for  the 

allotment  of  the  accommodation  within  one  year  of  the  death  of 

the  allottee.    In case the allottee  expires  within  six months  after 

retirement, his serving spouse or children can be considered for 

allotment provided all other conditions are met.  As regards Rule 

the 15(2) of the AAR, 2002, it provides inter alia that an allottee, 

on  his  retirement  shall  be  entitled  to  retain  the  accommodation 

under  his  occupation  for  a  period  not  exceeding  six  months,  on 

payment of nominal rent, and this facility is available to a federal 

government  servant  only  once.  The  proviso  to  Rule  15(2)  of  the 

AAR,  2002,  provides  that  the  serving  spouse  or  children  living 

with  a  federal  government  servant/allottee  may  be  allotted  the 

 
7 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

same  accommodation  if  he  is  eligible  and  otherwise  entitled  for 

accommodation within six months of the retirement of the federal 

government servant/allottee.  

14.  The AAR, 2002, have been made in exercise of the powers 

conferred by Section 25(1) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, which 

provides  that  the  President  or  any  person  authorized  by  the 

President in this behalf may make such Rules as appears to him 

to be necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of the 

said  Act.  Rule  15  of  the  AAR,  2002,  has  been  amended  earlier. 

That  amendment  was  brought  about  through  S.R.O.668(I)/2004 

dated  4-8-2004,  which  was  issued  in  exercise  of  the  powers 

conferred by Section 25 (1) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. This 

is  well  explained  in  the  case  of  Federation  of  Pakistan  through 

Secretary Ministry of Housing and  Works and another VS Abrar 

Ahmed and others  (2010 SCMR  1537). If the Ministry  of Housing 

and Works is too eager to extend or relax the time periods fixed 

in  Rule  15  (1)  and  (2)  of  AAR,  2002,  it  may  consider  moving  a 

summary  to  the  President  for  amending  the  relevant  provisions 

of  the  AAR,  2002.  An  amendment  in  the  AAR,  2002  can  be 

brought  about  by  the  President  by  exercising  powers  conferred 

under Section 25 (1) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. Without such 

an amendment, the time periods fixed in Rule 15 (1) and (2) of the 

AAR, 2002, cannot be “condoned” by the “competent authority”, 

whoever  that  is,  in  the  garb  of  powers  available  to  the  Federal 

Government under Rule 28 of the AAR, 2002.  

15.  Rule  28  ibid  empowers  the  Federal  Government  to  issue 

directions  as  it  may  deem  necessary  for  carrying  out  the 

purposes of AAR, 2002. In issuing such directions, directions or 

clarifications may be given to supplement the provisions of AAR, 

2002.  The  Federal  Government  in purported  exercise  of  powers 

under  Rule  28  of  the  AAR,  2002,  cannot  issue  directions  which 

have the effect of amending, varying, undoing, relaxing, altering, 

modifying,  or  changing  the  substantive  provisions  of  the  AAR, 

2002.  The  said  notification  dated  14.12.2015,  which  has  the 

effect  of  giving  the  “competent  authority”  the  power  to 

“condone”  a  gap  periods  stipulated  in  Rule  15(1)  and  (2)  of  the 

 
8 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

AAR,  2002  up  to  one  year,  and,  therefore,  altering  the  time 

periods fixed in Rule 15(1) and (2) of the AAR, 2002, is on the face 

of it, void.  

16.  The  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 

that  the  C.D.A.  had  issued  a  no  objection  certificate  of  the  suit 

accommodation to be placed in the pool of the C.D.A. so that the 

same  could  be  allotted  to  the  petitioner,  has  not  impressed  me. 

Rule  4(1)  of  the  AAR,  2002,  inter-alia,  provides  that  the  Estate 

Office shall not place its accommodation at the pool of any other 

department  except  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  ISI.  Now, 

the  vital  question  that  needs  to  be  answered  is  whether  the 

petitioner  can  continue  to  remain  in  occupation  of  the  suit 

accommodation  in  the  hope  that  someday  the  Estate  Office  will 

exchange  the  suit  accommodation  with  an  accommodation  that 

may  be  made  available  by  the  CDA.  I  would  say,  No.  The 

petitioner cannot be extended the benefits of the proviso to Rule 

15(2)  of  the  AAR,  2002,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  suit 

accommodation has at no material stage, been placed in the pool 

of  the  CDA.  The  petitioner  being  an  employee  of  the  CDA  is  not 

entitled  to  government  accommodation  from  the  pool  of  the 

Estate  Office.  The  petitioner  cannot  deprive  the  persons,  who 

have  been  waiting  for  years 

in  the  General  Waiting  List 

maintained  by  the  Estate  Office  under  Rule  6  of  the  AAR,  2002. 

The petitioner is at liberty to apply to the CDA for the allotment of 

accommodation from its own pool.  The argument of the learned 

counsel for the petitioner that regardless of Rule 4(1) of the AAR, 

2002, in the recent past, employees of the CDA had been allotted 

government accommodation from the pool of the Estate Office by 

placing such accommodation in pool of the CDA, suffice it to say 

that  such  an  allotment  in  derogation  of  Rule  4(1)  of  the  AAR, 

2002,  would  not have any  legal foundation.  Even otherwise,  two 

wrongs  do  not  make  a  right.  The  language  of  Rule  4(1)  is 

couched  in  negative  terms,  and  the  placement  of  the  Estate 

Office’s  accommodation  on  the  pool  of  any  other  department 

(other  than  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  ISI),  is  not 

permissible by law i.e. AAR, 2002.   

 
9 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

17.  Rule 15 (2)  of  AAR,  2002,  provides  that  an  allottee,  on  his 

retirement or expiry of contract period shall be entitled to retain 

the  accommodation  under  his  occupation  for  a  period  not 

exceeding six months, on payment of normal rent and this facility 

will be available to FGS once only.” It is an admitted position that 

a period of six months from the date of the petitioner’s mother’s 

retirement, has long expired. Till date, an allotment letter has not 

been  issued  in  the  petitioner’s  favour.  The  petitioner  has  not 

even  brought  on  record  his  application  seeking  the  allotment  of 

the  suit  accommodation  in  his  favour  under  the  proviso  to  Rule 

15(2)  of  the  AAR,  2002.  Rule  2  (p)  of  the  AAR,  2002,  defines  a 

“trespasser” as an individual or group of individuals who occupy 

Government  or  hired  accommodation  without  valid  allotment 

letter issued by the Estate Office for its occupation. In the case of 

Adnan  Qureshi  VS  Capital  Development  Authority  (2015  PLC 

(CS)  1030),  it  has  been  held inter alia that  after  the  expiry  of  a 

period  of  six  month  from  the  date  of  the  retirement  of  the 

petitioner’s  father  (federal  government  servant),  the  petitioner 

becomes a trespasser as defined in Rule 2(p) of the AAR, 2002.  

18.  The petitioner ought to think of the adverse consequences 

to his career as an employee of the CDA which may flow from his 

unauthorized  occupation  of  the  suit  accommodation.  Rule  25  of 

the  AAR,  2002,  authorizes 

the  Estate  Office 

to  eject  

unauthorized 

occupants 

from 

government 

owned 

accommodation  under  the  Federal  Government  Land  and 

Buildings (Recovery of Possession) Ordinance, 1965 (Ordinance 

LVI  of  1965).  Furthermore,  Rule  25(4)(c)  provides  that  a  federal 

government servant against whom action is taken under Rule 25 

ibid shall be liable to disciplinary proceedings under the relevant 

rules and laws. Additionally, Rule 25(4)(d) provides that a person 

other  than  a  federal  government  servant  shall  be  liable  to 

criminal  proceedings  for  being  in  illegal  occupation  of  the 

government  accommodation.  The  petitioner  in  order  to  insulate 

himself  from  the  penal  consequences  envisaged  in  Rule  25  ibid 

ought to hand over vacant possession of the suit accommodation 

to the Estate Office at the earliest. 

 
10 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

19. 

It  has  become  commonplace  for  federal  government 

employees  or  their  family  members  to  continue  to  occupy 

government  accommodation/quarters  unauthorizedly  after  the 

transfer  and  or  retirement  of  the  allottee.  As  a  direct 

consequence  of  this,  the  employees  who  are  eligible  to  get  the 

government accommodation are deprived of the housing facility, 

causing lot of inconvenience and harm. They are required to hire 

residential accommodation at an extra-ordinary cost. To require 

a retired or a transferred Government Servant to pay rent at the 

market  rates  or  at  a  rate  which  is  more  than  the  house  rent 

allowance but less than the market rate, would amount to adding 

a  premium  to  a  wrong.  The  Court  has  to  keep  this  in  mind.  The 

innocent hopeful government servants who are biding their time 

having  entered  their  names 

in  the  General  Waiting  List 

maintained  by  the  Estate  Office  under  Rule  6  of  the  AAR,  2002, 

are not before the Court and their interest is also required to be 

protected. 

20.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of 

Muhammad  Afsar  VS  Malik  Muhammad  Farooq  (2012  SCMR 

274), has given the following directions to the Ministry of Housing 

and  Works,  and  the  Estate  Office  as  regards  allotments  made 

under Rule 29A of the AAR, 2002:- 

"i.  that in future all the allotments will be made strictly on 

merits on the basis of General Waiting List; and  

ii.  Relaxation of rules under Rule 29A of the Accommodation 
Allocation Rules, 2002, will not be often exercised, except 
in  the  cases  of  hardship  and  that  too  by  recording 
justifiable reasons for the same, after hearing the likely 
affected employees in the General Waiting List."    

21.  The  Estate  Office  as  well  as  the  C.D.A.  are  under  an 

obligation to act strictly in accordance with the judgments of the 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court,  which  are  binding  on  each  and  every 

organ  of  the  State  by  virtue  of  Articles  189  and  190  of  the 

Constitution.  The  said  respondents  are  duty  bound  to  take 

emergent  steps  to  evict  the  unauthorized  occupants  from 

government  accommodation.  Laxity  or  inertia  on  the  part  of 

public  functionaries  serving  in  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and 

Works,  Estate  Office  and  the  Capital  Development  Authority  in 

 
 
11 

C.R. No.310 of 2016 

evicting 

the  unauthorized  occupants 

from  government 

accommodation  would  render  them  liable  to  be  proceeded 

against in accordance with the law. 

22. 

In view of the above, I do not find any jurisdictional infirmity 

in  the  concurrent  orders  passed  by  the  learned  Courts  below. 

Resultantly, this revision petition is dismissed with no order as to 

costs. 

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2017 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                   (JUDGE) 

*Sanaullah* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
