ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

Writ Petitlon No.2306/201 9
Ali Shan
VS
Ministry of lnterior through  its Secretary  and others

S. No. of
order  /
oroceedinos

Date  of
order/
Proceedinos
04.12.2019

Order  with  signature  of Judge  and that  of parties or counsel where
necessary.

Ch. Waseem Bahadur,  Advocate  for the
petitioner.
Arshad Mehmood  Kiani, learned Deputy
Attorney-General  for respondent  No. 1 .
Malik Shafiullah, Assistant  Director (Law) for
respondent  No.2.
Mr. lnam Ellahi,  DSP(Special  Branch)  Rawalpindi.

This petition has been filed by Taj Bibi,
wife of Muhbbath Hussain,  praying for a
direction to the respondents  to issue  a
machine readable passport  to her son Ali
Shan, who has submitted  an application  on
20l,|-0.2015  to the Consulate General of
Pakistan  at Milan, ltaly, for the said purpose.
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted  that Ali Shan had joined the
Punjab  Police  as a constable,  and in the year

2012, while he was serving in the Elite Force
at Rawalpindi, he proceeded abroad  and
deserted  his duty; that on 31.05.2012, Ali
Shan was served with a show cause  notice
and on 18.09.20'12  major penalty of dismissa!
from service was imposed on him; that Ali
Shan has settled down in ltaly and on
2O.1O.2O15, he submitted an application
before the Consulate  General  of Pakistan  at
Milan, ltaly, for the issuance  of a machine
readable  passport;  that it has been more
than four years and Ali Shan had not been
issued a passport; and that it is Ali Shan's

w

2

Writ Petition  No.2306/2019

fundamental  right to travel  for which purpose
the issuance of a passport is necessary.
Learned counsel for the petitioner  prayed for
the writ petition to be allowed  in terms of the

relief sought therein.
3.  On the other hand, learned DePutY
Attorney-General submitted  that in the year
2012 Ali Shan went with the former  Prime
Minister of Pakistan,  Syed Yousaf Raza
Gillani to the United  Kingdom as part of an
official delegation and did not return to
Pakistan; that Ati Shan was proceeded
against departmentally and was dismissed
from service;  that Ali Shan can be issued a
travel document enabling  him to travel to
Pakistan;  that once Ali Shan is in Pakistan,
he can apply for the issuance  of a new
passport; that A!a Shan had proceeded
abroad on an officia!  passport; that on
25.02.2019 the  Directorate  General,
lmmigration and Passports  had intimated all
passport  issuing  authorities  abroad that
ordinarily a passport  shall not be issued  in
lieu of  an  official PassPort  to  an
official/officer or any of his family members
while he is on posting abroad; and that in
view of the said letter dated 25.02.2019 the
Consulate General of Pakistan at Milan, ltaly,
could not have issued a passport  to Ali Shan.
Learned  Deputy  Attorney-General  prayed for
the writ petition to be dismissed,
4.  I have heard the learned counse!  for the
petitioner  as wel! as the learned Deputy
Attorney-General and perused the record
with their able assistance.

Y

J

Writ Petition  No.2306/20'l  9

5.  lt is not disputed  that in the year 2012
while Ali Shan was serving in the Elite Force
at  Rawalpindi,  he was a  Part of  the
delegation that was sent to the United
Kingdom  along with the former  Prime
Minister,  Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani.  Ali Shan
had been given an official passport.  lt is also
not disputed that Ali Shan slipped away  and
has not returned to Pakistan. Ali Shan has
settled  down in ltaly,  and his official passport

has expired.
6.  On 20.10.2015 Ali Shan applied  to
Consulate General of Pakistan at Milan, ltaly,
for the issuance of a machine  readable
passport.  Ti!! date a passport  has not been

issued to Ali Shan.
7.  lt may also be mentioned  that Ali Shan
was proceeded against  departmentally for
abandoning  his duty. The disciplinary
proceedings against him have culminated in
the imposition of major penalty of dismissal
from service  vide order dated 18.09.2012.
8.  The position taken by the office of the
lnspector General of Police, Security and
Administration,  Special Branch, Lahore
(Respondent No.4) in its wrltten comments  is
that the said branch  has no objection  to the
issuance of a passport  to Ali Shan. However
the Directorate General, lmmigration and
Passports has taken the position  that since
Ali Shan  had slipped  away in United Kingdom
while on officia! duty with the Pakistani
delegation, he should not be issued a
Pakistani passport to Consulate General of
Pakistan  at Milan, ltaly.

4

Writ Petition  No.2306/2019

9.  Since Ali Shan has alreadY  been
dismissed  from service for abanding  his
duties, the question of issuing an official
passport to him does not arise. There  is
nothing on the record to show that Ali Shan
is residing in ltaly with a valid visa. lssuance
of passports by Pakistani  Embassies/High
Commissions/Consulates  abroad to illegal
immigrants  having no valid visa or residence
permit is to be deprecated. A direction  to the
respondents  to issue a passport to Ali Shan
would be an impetus to public servants to
abandon duty while serving abroad. lf Ali
Shan wants to come to Pakistan, he can be
issued a travel document enabling  him to
come to Pakistan.  Once he is in Pakistan, he
may apply for the issuance  of an ordinary
(non-official)  Pakistani passport, by the
Directorate General, lmmigration  and
Passports in accordance  with the !aw.
10. The instant  petition is disposed  of in the
above  terms. There shall be no order as to

costs.

MIANGUL HASSA AURANGZEB
JUDGE

-

M.A.Baig.

