ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Appeal No.146/2019 
AmjadZaman 
VS
The State & another 

Appellant  by: 

Mr. Ch. Zaheer Ahmad, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Barrister Ayesha Siddique  Khan, State Counsel. 
Hafiz Farman Ullah, Advocate for Respondent  No.2 
Sultan Melunood, S.I., P.S. Koral, Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

28.02.2020. 

MOHSIN AKHTAR  KAY ANI, I: Through  the instant criminal appeal,  the 

appellant  has  called  in  question  judgment  of  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  dated  27.03.2019, whereby  the  appellant  has  been 

convicted  in  case FIR No.176, dated  08.06.2014, under  Section 302/34  PPC, P.S. 

Koral,  Islamabad  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  life as  Ta'zir  along  with 

payment  of fine of Rs.200,000/- to the legal heirs of deceased,  in failure whereof, 

the appellant  shall further  undergo  simple imprisonment  for 04 months. 

2. 

Brief facts referred  in the instant  criminal appeal  are  that  on 08.06.2014, at 

about  6  p.m.,  when  Shabbir  Alam/ complainant  along  with  his  brother  namely 

Saeed Alam (deceased) and  PW-17 Asad Ali were on their way back to home, the 

said  deceased  person  had  an  inclination  to attend  call of nature  and  in order  to 

find cover he went  in a vacant  plot in a street where  four persons  already  sitting 

there  inquired  him  of his stopover,  whereby  Saeed Alam/ deceased  told  them  of 

his  said  purpose  to  attend  the  call of nature,  whereupon  the  said  four  persons 

started  quarrel  with  him  and  ultimately  one  of  the  accused  person  shot  the 

deceased  on  his  chest  with  pistol.  The  said  episode  attracted  Shabbir 

Alam/complainant  and  PW-17 Asad Ali to the spot and  on their  hue and  cry the 

four  accused  persons  fled  away  from  the  spot,  however  Saeed  Alam  (deceased) 

succumbed  to  injuries.  Subsequently,  Shabbir  Alam/ complainant  reported  the 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  2 

incident  by  filing  complainant  (Exh.PQ), whereupon  case  FIR No.176/2014 

(Exh.P A)  was  got  lodged  against  four  unknown  accused  persons.  Later  on, 

Shabbir Alam/ complainant through supplementary statement nominated Jabbar 

Hussain, Amjad Zaman  (appellant), Faraqat Hussain alias Rafaqat (since dead) 

and Sarni Satti (proclaimed offender) as the said accused persons who committed 

murder  of the  deceased. During investigation, the  said  accused persons were 

arrested,  however  Sarni Satti/ co-accused on  getting pre-arrest  bail absconded 

from the  Court, while rest  of the  three  (03)  accused persons were  charged on 

22.09.2015, to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. During the trial, 

Faraqat  Hussain/ co-accused died,  therefore,  proceedings  to  his  extent  were 

abated on 07.01.2017. In order  to prove the charges against remaining accused 

persons  i.e.  Amjad  Zaman/ appellant  and  Jabbar  Hussain/ co-accused,  the 

prosecution has produced  19 prosecution witnesses and  the learned trial Court 

pursuant  to  recording  of evidence of said  19 PWs, recorded  the  statement of 

accused persons under  Section 342 Cr.P.C. and ultimately passed the impugned 

judgment,  whereby  Jabbar  Hussain/ co-accused has  been  acquitted  of  charge 

while Amjad Zaman/ appellant  has  been awarded  life imprisonment as Ta' zir 

along with  payment  of fine  of Rs.200,000/- to  the  legal heirs  of  deceased, in 

failure whereof, the appellant shall further undergo simple imprisonment for 04 

months. Hence, the instant criminal appeal. 

3. 

Learned counsel for appellant contended that the learned trial Court while 

passing  the  impugned  judgment  has  not  taken  into  account  the  material 

contradictions and dishonest improvements found in the statements recorded by 

the PWs; that the learned trial Court has failed to consider that the prosecution 

case  is  false  and  concocted  one  as  the  alleged  occurrence  was  an  unseen 

occurrence, even otherwise, the prosecution has not produced any independent 

witness  to  prove  the  charges  against  the  appellant;  that  conducting  of 

identification  parade  pursuant  to  nomination  of  accused  persons  through 

Crl. Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  3 

supplementary statement without disclosing any source is not warranted  under 

the  law;  that  the  learned  trial  Court  has  also  ignored  to  appreciate  that  the 

alleged recovery is planted one as the prosecution has failed to prove it from any 

independent source, therefore, passing of the impugned judgment  is absolutely 

illegal, arbitrary and against the settled principles of law. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

Respondent  No.2/ complainant  opposed  the  instant  criminal  appeal  and 

contended  that  the  prosecution  has  produced  direct  evidence, which  has  not 

been shattered by the defence in any manner; that the prosecution's version has 

further been corroborated by the recoveries effected from the place of occurrence 

and on the pointation of accused person; that the medical evidence is in line with 

the  ocular  account,  which  further  strengthens  the  prosecution  evidence with 

regard  to  involvement  of  accused  persons  in  the  commission  of  murder  of 

deceased; that the contradictions in the prosecution evidence brought on surface 

by the defence are  minor  in nature  and  could not be relied upon  to acquit the 

accused person  of the  capital  charge and  as  such, the  learned  trial  Court  has 

rightly appreciated the evidence brought on record and  sentenced the appellant 

in accordance with law. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of 

record 

reveals 

that  on  08.06.2014,  PW-16  Shabir 

Alam/complainant  along with his brother namely Saeed Alam and PW-17 Asad 

Ali went  to  see Saeed  Alam' s  daughter  in  Irfanabad Tramari, Islamabad and 

when  they  were  going back after  visiting at  about  6  p.m.  in  the  evening, the 

complainant's brother Saeed Alam in order to attend the call of nature had gone 

into a nearby plot where four unknown persons were sitting, with whom Saeed 

Alam had  an  exchange of hot  words,  which  resulted  into  physical  grappling. 

Meanwhile, one  of the  said four  persons pulled  out  his  pistol  and  fired  upon 

Saeed Alam's chest, whereupon  PW-16 complainant and  PW-17 Asad Ali made 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  4 

hue and cry, but  all the four accused persons  fled away from the scene and Saeed 

Alam succumbed  to  injuries. Consequently,  complaint  Exh.PQ was  filed, which 

was converted  into FIR No.176, dated  08.06.2014, under  Section 302/34  PPC, P.S. 

Koral, Islamabad  (Exh.PA). Consequently,  PW-18 Naseer  Ullah/SJ.  on receiving 

information  of occurrence  reached  at  Polyclinic Hospital  and  prepared  inquest 

report  Exh.PG,  received  last  worn  clothes  of  deceased  vide  Exh.P13  to  P15 

comprising  of grey color Shalwar  Qameez  and  vest (white), which were  taken into 

possession  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PM.  The  dead  body  was  identified  by 

PW-16 Shabbir  Alam/complainant  and  PW-17  Asad  Ali/eyewitness 

through 

Exh.PR, whereafter  the  Investigating  Officer visited  the  place of occurrence  and 

recovered  one  firearm  empty  of  .30  bore  pistol. through  Exh.P16 and  prepared 

recovery  memo  Exh.PT.  He  has  also  collected  bloodstained  earth  through 

recovery  memo  Exh.PU  and  also  prepared  unscaled  site  plan  of  place  of 

occurrence vide  Exh.PX. The Investigating  Officer transmitted  the  .30 bore pistol 

empty  parcel  to  the  Forensic  Science  Laboratory,  Islamabad  along  with 

bloodstained  earth  on  27.06.2014 through  Muhammad  Arif/Constable.  The 

postmortem  report  Exh.PH has been received by the Investigating  Officer which 

has  been  placed  on  record,  whereas  PW-4  Malik  Amir  Shahzad/Draftsman 

prepared  the site plan vide Exh.PB. 

7. 

The  prosecution  has  produced  PW-9  Dr.  Tanveer  Afsar  Malik,  CMO, 

Polyclinic  Hospital,  who  after  conducting  postmortem  of  the  deceased  has 

reached to the following observations. 

"External Appearance:- 

Dead  body  of  middle  age  person,  wearing  light  gray  color 
Shalwar,  Qameez  &  white  banyan, 
socked  with  blood  with 
corresponding  holes  in  Qameez.  Eyes  and mouth  were  closed.  Body  was 
in  lax  position.  There  was  no  post-mortem  lividity.  I  observed  the 
following  injuries:- 

Injuries:- 
1.  Fire  arm  entry  wound  on  the  right  side  of front  of  chest just  3cm 
the  4t1i  intercostals  space 

lateral 
measuring  2cm x  1cm  with  no blackening and charring. 

to  right  side  of  sternum 

in 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  5 

2.  Fire-arm  exit  wound  on  the  left  mid  axillary  line  in  the  11th 
intercostals  space,  measuring  1x1cm  with  edges  of  the  wound 
everted.  It is  10cm  inferio-lateral  to  the left nipple. 

Cranium  and  Spinal  Cord. 

Scalp/skull,  membranes,  brain  were found  healthy. 

Thorax 

Walls,  ribs,  cartilages  were  ruptured  and  fourth 

rib  was 
fractured.  Both  sides  of  pleurae  ruptured.  Larynx  and  trachea  were 
healthy.  Right  and  left  lung  ruptured.  Paricardium  and  heart  was 
ruptured  and clotted and un-clotted  blood was present  in  the cavity. 

Abdomen. 

All  organs  were found  healthy.  Stomach  & small  intestine  were 
healthy  and  semi  digested  food  particles  were  present.  Bladder  was 
empty. 

Large  intestine.  Small  quantity  of fecal  matter  was present. 

Opinion: 

In  my  opinion,  deceased  sustained fire-arm  injury  over  the  right 
side  of  front  of  chest  which  traversed  to  the  left  side  of  the  chest, 
rupturing  heart  and  both  lungs  leading  to  loss  of their function  causing 
death  of deceased.  All  the  injuries  were  ante-mortem  in  nature  and were 
sufficient  to cause death,  in ordinary  course  of nature. 

8. 

The case of the  prosecution  is mainly  based  upon  the  testimony  of PW-16 

Shabbir Alam/ complainant,  who  narrated  the entire  story  as referred  above, but 

introduced  the second part on 11.10.2014 i.e. after four months  of incident  that he 

had  received  a call from his cousin namely  Asif informing  him that  some people 

had  approached  him  in connection  with  murder  of his deceased  brother  for the 

purpose  of  compromise,  whereupon  PW-16  Shabbir  Alam/complainant  had 

visited  his  cousin  where  Jabbar  Hussain/ co-accused  was  in  company  of  those 

people who had  quarreled  with  the deceased. The complainant  stated  that Jabbar 

Hussain/ co-accused  admitted  his  sin,  pleaded  for  forgiveness  and  shown  his 

readiness  to  pay  compensation  for  the  murder,  but  the  complainant  refused  to 

enter into a compromise  and  on 12.10.2014 i.e. the next day, he along with  PW-17 

Asad Ali informed  the police authorities  regarding  the said incident. 

Crl. Appeal No.146/2019 

Page I  6 

9. 

PW-16 Shabbir Alam/complainant recorded his supplementary statement 

to  the  Investigating Officer on  16.03.2015 i.e.  after  09  months  of the  incident, 

whereby  he  nominated  Amjad Zaman/ appellant  along  with  Jabbar  Hussain, 

Faraqat Hussain and  Somi Satti as accused persons, who  have been identified 

through  his  personal  search and  inquiries from  residents  of street  as  well as 

through the police. Subsequently, the appellant was arrested in this case and he 

along  with  Faraqat  Hussain/ co-accused were  identified  as  accused  persons 

during  the  identification  parade  conducted  in  presence  of  PW-13  Yasir 

Mehmood/Magistrate  in  Adiala Jail on  20.03.2015, vide  identification parade 

proceedings Exh.PM. 

10.  On  16.03.2015, the  investigation  was  transferred  to  PW-19  Sultan 

Mehmood/S.I., who recorded the supplementary statement of the complainant 

and has arrested the appellant, who was also a proclaimed offender in case FIR 

No.480, dated  26.09.2012 under  Section  302/34  PPC,  P.S.  Shahzad  Town, 

Islamabad  as  well  as  in  case  FIR  No.338, dated  20.08.2011, under  Section 

13/20/65  AO, P.S.  Koral, Islamabad. During  the  course  of  investigation, the 

appellant made  disclosure on 03.04.2015 and  got recovered.30 bore pistol vide 

Exh.PE, regarding  which  a  separate  criminal  case  i.e.  FIR  No.129, dated 

03.04.2015, under  Section 13/20/65  AO, was  got  lodged  after  preparation  of 

unscaled site  plan  Exh.PZ. PW-19 Sultan Mehmood/I.0.  has  also brought  on 

record the identification parade,  the recovery memo, and  FSL  report  Exh.P AA 

and submitted the challan. 

11. 

The entire case of the prosecution rests upon the following key points. 

a.  extrajudicial confession 

b.  identification parade 

c.  recovery of weapon of offence 

d.  Forensic Science Laboratory report of the weapon 

e.  Statement of Eyewitness 

Crl. Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  7 

12. 

PW-16 Shabbir Alam/ complainant narrated  the story in his examination 

in chief that  after the murder  of his brother Saeed Alam on 08.06.2014, he was 

called  by  his  cousin  regarding  meeting  with  some  persons,  who  wanted  to 

discuss the issue of murder  and during the said meeting, he identified one of the 

accused  person  i.e.  Jabbar  Hussain/ co-accused, who  made  an  extra  judicial 

confession and  asked for forgiveness. The said meeting took place on 11.10.2014 

and  complainant  had  informed  the  police  regarding  the  said  meeting,  but 

surprisingly the  supplementary  statement of the complainant was recorded  on 

16.03.2015, whereby  he  nominated  all  four  accused  persons,  including  the 

appellant and as such, there is no logical explanation as to; 

a.  Why  PW-16  Shabbir  Alam/complainant  has  not  recorded  his 

supplementary statement on the same day i.e. 11.10.2014? 

b.  What are the sources through which PW-16 Shabbir Alam came to 

know  about  the  names  of  accused  persons  i.e.  Amjad  Zaman, 

Rafaqat Hussain, Jabbar Hussain and Somi Satti? 

c.  Why PW-16 Shabbir Alam/complainant  has  not called his cousin 

Asif and others in whose presence Jabbar Hussain/ co-accused had 

made an extra judicial confession? 

The answer to above questions is not available and such conduct of complainant 

is  beyond  any  reasonable  approach,  whereas  the  concept  of  extra  judicial 

confession has to be seen in the light of principles laid down in case reported as 

2019 SCMR 1994 (Wajeeh-ul-Hassan  VS The State), wherein it has been held that 

evidence of extra judicial confession is inherently weak and  does not  present a 

brighter picture either. 

13. 

The second important element which has been observed from the conduct 

of complainant, which has been recorded in the cross examination in the following 

manner: 

"Jabbar Hussain  accused had came  to my  door seeking for forgiveness  for 
his act of committing  murder  of my  brother.  ]abbar Hussain  accused  told 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  8 

me  the  names  of  other  accused  persons.  No  one from  the family  of  the 
accused  persons  had  approached  me  for 
the  compromise  other  than 
]abbar." 

14. 

The above referred statement further creates anomaly in the testimony of 

the complainant, who received the information regarding other accused person, 

which is based  upon  the  statement  of co-accused i.e.  Jabbar Hussain, whereas 

such  statement  could  not  be  believed  as  the  same  has  been  considered  as 

maneuvered confessional statement on the part  of the complainant, who could 

not justified such extra judicial confession on the touchstone of case reported as 

held 2017SCMR1672  (Tariq VS The State). 

15. 

The  extra  judicial  confession statement  is  valuable  for  the  prosecution 

case, but  it  requires  corroboration  from  independent  sources  through  which 

unrebutted  strong  presumption  comes  on  record  and  conclusion  that  the 

statement  leads  to  such  result  where  no  other  opinion  could  be  formulated, 

except the involvement of accused. However, in this case, the complainant has 

failed to establish that such extra judicial confession was made before him as he 

has  not  produced  his  cousin  and  other  persons  as  witnesses  in  this  case, 

therefore, the conviction could not be based upon such statement as also held in 

case reported as 2000 SCMR 1634 (Nasreen Akhtar VS The State). 

16. 

PW-16 Shabbir  Alam/ complainant  has  also  acknowledged  during  the 

course  of  cross-examination that  he  identified  Jabbar  Hussain/ co-accused on 

11.10.2014 while the other two accused persons namely Amjad Zaman/ appellant 

and  Faraqat  Hussain  on  20.03.2015 in  Adiala Jail, however  he  nominated  the 

accused persons on 16.03.2015. Such conduct on the part of complainant has to be 

seen in the light  of complainant's  earlier statement whereby he  acknowledged 

that Jabbar Hussain/co-accused  has been identified by him on 11.10.2014 when 

his cousin Asif called him that some people came to see him in connection with 

murder  of deceased, where [abbar Hussain/ co-accused had  allegedly made  an 

extra  judicial  confession  and  asked  for  forgiveness. Such  aspect  apparently 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  9 

maligns the identification parade conducted in Adiala Jail in presence of PW-13 

Yasir Mehmood/Magistrate as all the four accused persons were already known 

to the complainant, who himself acknowledged that he  drafted the application 

on  16.03.2015 and  attributed  the  roles  to  the  accused  persons,  although  his 

statement  was  objected  to  by 

the 

learned  counsel  for 

the  accused 

persons/ defence  and  even  there  is  no  logical  explanation  as  to  how  the 

complainant has referred the names of accused persons which were not known 

to him earlier, especially when he had mentioned in his application that, "accused 

Amjad  made  firing  at  my  deceased  brother.  I  do  not  know  Amjad  accused  before  the 

occurrence.  We  had  inquired  on  ourselves  about  the  names  of accused  persons  as  well  as 

from  the police and people of locality we got  to know  the names of accused persons." 

17. 

The  second  star  witness  in  this  case  i.e.  PW-17 Asad  Ali, nephew  of 

deceased, who has also narrated  the entire story referred in the complaint and 

acknowledged that he came to know about the names of accused persons when 

they were arrested and he identified accused persons in the identification parade 

conducted on 20.03.2015. He further stated that he came to know about accused 

persons for the first time at  the time of identification parade.  PW-17 Asad Ali 

also stated that, "the  fire  shot  was  made  at  a  distance  of  2/3 feet  from  the  deceased." 

However, his  demeanor  was  recorded  by  the  learned  Trial Court  during  the 

course of evidence in the following manner: 

"The  demeanor  of  PW- hesitation  to  answer  to  each  question  put  to 
him,  prolonged  thinking  and  thereafter he answered  the question." 

18. 

This aspect noted  by  the  learned Trial Court  is relevant in  this  case as 

prolonged thinking and hesitation refer certain disagreement of facts in the mind 

of prosecution witness, although  such  aspect has  not  been  highlighted in  the 

evidence  nor  comes  on  record,  but  the  important  element  giving  rise  to  a 

situation is that  both  the  eyewitnesses have  identified the  accused persons in 

Adiala Jail despite  the  fact that  the  accused persons were  already  nominated, 

known  and  their  whereabouts  were  verified  by  the  complainant,  even  the 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  10 

complainant  had  seen  Jabbar  Hussain/  co-accused  prior  to  the  identification 

parade,  who  disclosed  the  names  of other  co-accused persons  in this  case. Such 

discrepancy  could  not  be  justified  in  any  manner,  especially  when  both  the 

eyewitnesses  i.e.  the  brother  and  nephew  are  interested  and  close  relatives  of 

deceased.  The  statement  of  such  kind  of  interested  witnesses  could  only  be 

considered  with  care  and  caution,  who  otherwise  became  the  eyewitness  in this 

case,  but  they  failed  to  establish  the  link  of  their  information  from  any 

independent  source, nor  even they brought  such source on record, which creates 

a  doubt  regarding  authenticity  of their  information,  especially  the  extra judicial 

confession  made  by  one  of  the  co-accused  namely  [abbar  Hussain,  who  has 

already  been  acquitted  by the  learned  Trial Court  vide  the  impugned  judgment, 

regarding  which no appeal  has been filed by the complainant  or by the State. 

19. 

I  have  attended  to the  factum  of recovery  of fire-arm  empty  and  .30 bore 

pistol,  which  were  recovered  on  03.04.2015 on  the  disclosure  of  the  appellant 

from village Kadhrepar  and  observed  that  the said pistol was recovered  from an 

open  land/ place  kept  in  a  shopping  bag  of white  color  said  to  have  contained 

three live bullets,  as referred  in Exh.PE. The recovery  of weapon  of offence from 

open land/ place has been considered  by the apex Court  in judgment  reported  as 

2016 SCMR  1605 (Muhammad  Saleem  VS  Shabbir Ahmad,  etc.), wherein  it  has 

been held  that  "weapon  used  in  commission  of crime  had allegedly  been  recovered from 

a  place,  which  was  open  and  accessible  to  all  and,  thus,  it  was  unsafe  to  place  reliance 

upon  such  recovery."  Even otherwise,  the alleged incident  took place on 08.06.2014 

while  the  appellant  was  arrested  on  18.03.2015 and  was  identified  as  accused 

persons  during  the  course  of  identification  parade  conducted  in  Adiala  Jail on 

20.03.2015, whereas  the recovery of weapon  of offence i.e .. 30 bore pistol (Exh.Pll) 

was made  on 03.04.2015, which clearly spells out that  the recovery is belated and 

could not be believed due to the delay in this case. Reliance in this regard  is placed 

upon  2017 SCMR  1976 (Amanat  Ali  VS  The State)  and  2014 SCMR  1349 (Malik 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  11 

Muhammad  Aslam  VS  The  State).  Whereas, such belated  recovery  of weapon  of 

offence has been disbelieved by the superior Courts. 

20. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  testimony  of PW-9 Dr. Tanvir  Afsar  Malik, 

who  conducted  autopsy  of deceased  Saeed Alam, whereby  it has been  observed 

that  the deceased  received  one firearm  injury having  11 fire arm  entry  wound  on  the 

right  side of front  of chest just  3cm  lateral  to  right  side of sternum  in  the  4th  intercostals 

space  measuring  2cm  x  1cm  with  no  blackening  and charring''.  Whereas, the fire-arm 

exit wound  was  said to be found  11 on  the  left mid  axillary  line in  the  11th intercostals 

space,  measuring  1x1cm  with  edges  of the  wound  everted.  It is  10cm  inferio-lateral  to  the 

left nipple."  Such opinion  of PW-9 Dr. Tanvir Afsar Malik establishes  two aspects 

i.e. firstly, 

the  firearm  injury  has  not  been  caused  from  a  closed  range,  while 

PW-17  Asad  Ali/ eyewitness  acknowledged  during 

the  course  of  cross- 

examination  that  11 the fire  shot  was  made  at  a  distance  of 2/3 feet  from  the  deceased." 

This  aspect  clearly  establishes  that  there  is  a  difference  of  ocular  and  medical 

evidence on record  and such glaring difference was not taken into account by the 

learned  Trial Court  while  passing  the  impugned  judgment.  Secondly, 

the  other 

important  aspect  which  remained  unnoticed  is the  line  of sight  of the  injury  as 

referred  by the doctor  in his testimony,  which clearly establishes that  the firearm 

entry  wound  is on the upper  side of the chest, whereas  the  exit wound  is on the 

lower  side, which  is not  possible  when  a straight  fire was  made  by  the  accused 

person and it contradicts  the stance of eyewitness. 

21. 

The 

identification 

parade 

conducted 

by 

PW-13 

Yasir 

Mehmood/Magistrate  has  been  brought  on  record  through  Exh.PN,  however 

during  the  course  of  cross-examination,  following  discrepancies  have  been 

noticed on the part  of said PW. 

a) 

b) 

I  cannot  tell  the  number  of  persons  who  were  present  in  the 
community  hall at the  time of identification  parade as period of two 
years has elapsed. 
I  do  not  remember  the  name  of  witness  who  came  to  identity 
Amjad  zaman  at the first. 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  12 

c) 

The  accused  had  raised  objection  with  regard  to  identification 
parade  which  were noted down  by me in  the proceedings. 

22.  While considering the above, I  have gone through  the objection recorded 

by  the  appellant  as  well  as  Faraqat  Hussain/ co-accused in  the  identification 

parade proceedings (Exh.PN), which is as under: 

Lt.:)~1/ f 7J171,f.!i 

fl{Lt.:)LJ'(.J)n]-V'l{{J171v!'-.1~L.>:;{..:..>l)..::...t.:)L} ~£.1" 

"-.::....i../..,_.;mel/1Lvd.1v!Ll),f.!i 

' 

y 

The  abovementioned  fact  creates  a  suspicion  upon  the  entire  proceedings  of 

identification  parade,  especially  when  no  role  has  been  explained  by  the 

eyewitnesses, who have identified the appellant in the identification parade, nor 

they have specifically stated  the role of each accused person  as to whether  the 

appellant had caused the firearm injury to the deceased or otherwise, therefore, 

the identification parade, which is silent qua the role or where the role has not 

been ascribed, has no evidentiary value. Reliance is placed upon 2017 P.Cr.Ll  622 

Islamabad  (Tehan Ali  alias  lee Khan  VS  The State). 

23.  While considering the entire background and  evidence discussed above, 

the entire story of the prosecution suffers from serious discrepancies as the same 

have  been  started  with  eyewitness account, but  subsequently  PW-16 Shabbir 

Alam/ complainant  i.e.  the  brother  of  deceased  has  introduced  extra  judicial 

confession of  Jabbar  Hussain/co-accused  (acquitted  accused)  in  presence  of 

cousin Asif, however no such witness has been produced to prove the factum of 

recording of extra judicial confession, even the complainant has identified Jabbar 

Hussain/ co-accused  in  this  case  at  the  initial  stage,  but  he  has  not  been 

nominated for quite some time and later on all four accused persons have been 

nominated  by  the  complainant  through  supplementary  statement  after  08 

months  of  alleged  incident  without  disclosing  of  any  source,  material  or 

information  through  which  he  came  to  know  about  involvement  of  all  the 

accused persons. Similarly, the record establishes that identification parade had 

been conducted after having knowledge of all accused persons by their names, 

Crl. Appeal No.146/2019 

Page  I  13 

even then the role of each accused person  or the appellant  Amjad Zaman  has not 

been explained  in the  identification  parade  report  Exh.PN. Even otherwise,  both 

the  eyewitnesses  are  interested  and  related  witnesses  of  the  deceased,  whose 

testimonies  could  only  be considered  through  care  and  caution.  The conduct  of 

eyewitness  i.e.  PW-17 Asad  Ali is  doubtful  as  he  acknowledged  that  fire  shot 

attributed  to the  appellant  was made  at a distance  of 2/3 feet, but  the testimony 

of  PW-9 Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar  Malik  is  contrary  to  the  ocular  account  as  fire  shot 

made  at  a  distance  of  2/3  feet  causes  blackening  and  charring,  hence  the 

eyewitness  account  is not  up  to the mark.  Moreover, the  recovery  of weapon  of 

offence from the appellant  is from an open space and that  too has been recovered 

after  delay  of  09  months  of  the  occurrence,  such  belated  recovery  from  open 

space could  not  be relied  upon  for  the  purpose  of conviction.  Furthermore,  the 

prosecution  has also not  set up  any motive  in this case, nor  the eyewitnesses  are 

able to establish any such thing on record. 

24. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the judgment  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  with 

able assistance  of learned  counsel for parties  and  observed  that  the learned  Trial 

Court  has ignored  the basic principles  of appreciation  of evidence  as the instant 

case is suffering from existence of any motive, even otherwise,  on the strength  of 

same evidence  one  of the  co-accused namely  Jabbar Hussain  has been  acquitted 

of the charge  despite  the fact that  he was  the first person  introduced  in this case 

by  the  complainant  as  source  of information.  All these  lacunas  create  doubt  in 

the instant  case as nomination  of accused persons  has not been proved  from any 

independent  source, the identification  parade  is doubtful  and  could  not be made 

basis of conviction,  the  weapon  of offence recovered  from  an  open  place has no 

evidentiary  value  and  its  recovery  is  inconsequential,  although  the  FSL  report 

confirms  the  use  of weapon,  but  the  said  single  piece of evidence  could  not  be 

made  basis of conviction.  Even otherwise,  the  extra judicial confession of Jabbar 

Hussain/  co-accused  is  not  believed  by  the  learned  Trial  Court,  therefore,  the 

Crl.  Appeal  No.146/2019 

Page  I  14 

superstructure  established  on  his .statement could  not  be  made  basis  of further 

link of the  appellant  with  the  commission  of offence, hence,  at  this  stage  doubt 

emerges  on  record  and 

it  is  not  safe  to  convict  the  appellant 

in  such 

circumstances. 

25. 

In view  of above,  the  instant  criminal  appeal  is hereby  ALLOWED.  The 

impugned  judgment  dated  27.03.2019, passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge  (East), Islamabad,  Islamabad  is SET-ASIDE  and  Amjad Zaman/ appellant 

is ACQUIITED of the charge  in case FIR No.176, dated  08.06.2014, under  Section 

302/34  PPC,  P.S. Koral,  Islamabad.  The  appellant  be  released  forthwith,  if  not 

required  in any other case. 

(MOHSl~KHT  AR KA'fANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on:  14/li..pril, 2020. 

KhalidZ. 

JUDGE 

