ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.
Islamabad JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

S. No. of
order/
proceedlngs

Date of
order/
ProceedlnEs

08.10.2020

Criminal Misc. No. 1016-8,12020
Muhammad Zalran
VS
The State,  etc.

Order wlth slgnature  of Judge and that of partles
or counsel where necessary.

Petitioner on ad-interim  pre-arrest bail with
Mr. Muhammad Arif Khan, Advocate,
Syed Shahbaz Shah, State Counse!,
Ch. Muhammad Naeem Ali Gujjar,  Advocate for
complainant,
Muhammad AfzalASl with record.

Through this petition, petitioner  (Muhammad
Zafran)  has prayed for pre-arrest  bail in F.l.R.
No.375 dated 26.08.2020  under Section 452,
506(ii), 148,149 PPC, registered  at Police Station

Kohsar, lslamabad.
2. 
The allegation against  the petitioner  is that
on 23.08.2020,  he had a quarre! with sons of the
complainant  and thereafter  launched  an attack
while equipped  with firearms along with co-
accused namely Aurangzeb,  Gulfam,  Adnan  and
two unknown  persons; trespassed  into the house
of the complainant by scaling over the wall,
extended threats, caused nuisance  and hurled
abuses  to the women  folk.
Learned  counsel for  the  petitioner
3. 
contends that there is a delay of three days in
lodging the F.l.R, which  strengths the possibility  of

false implication; that a wider net had been thrown
by the complainant to involve maximum members
of the family of accused; that the residents of the
vicinity sworn affidavits to the effect that the
accused persons  never trespassed  into the house

Criminal  Misc. No. 1016-8,1  2O2O

-2-

of the complaanant, while equipped with firearm
weapons and that only a skirmish had taken place
between the  petitioner and sons of  the
complainant;  that co-accused  have been allowed
pre-arrest  bail, therefore, petitioner is entitled to
the same concession  under the principle of
consistency.  Learned  counsel placed reliance
upon case laws reported  as PLD 2018 Lahore 93,

PLD2020  Lahore 191 and 2015 US 145.
4. 
On the other hand, learned  counsel for the
complainant  argued that petitioner  is specifically
nominated  in the F.l.R; recovery is yet to be
effected; that motive is also attributed to the
petitioner while case of co-accused, who were
allowed pre arrest bail is distinct  than that of the
petitioner and in absence of any malafide  or
ulterior  motive, petitioner cannot  be held entitled
to the concession  of pre-arrest bail.
5. 
6. 
Record reveals that there is an allegation
of launching  an attack and trespass into the house

Heard, record examined.

of the complainant while holding firearm  weapons
by  the petitioner  and co-accused. During
investigation, seven  persons of the vicinity sworn
affidavits to the effect that on 23.O8.2O2O  a
skirmish had taken place between  the petitioner
and sons of the complainant in the street  and that
none of the accused  while armed with firearm
weapons trespassed into  the  house of
complainant,  as alleged.  ln addition,  there is also a
delay of three days in lodging the F.!.R, while the
investigation testified the fact of  tendering
affidavits by the inhabitants  of the area. Moreover,
the Investigating  Officer, on being questioned,  has

Criminal  Misc. No. 1016-812O2O

-3-

categorically stated that nothing is  to  be
recovered  from the petitioner. All these facts bring
the case of the petitioner within the ambit of
further inquiry and an exception where possibility

of false implication  cannot  be ruled out.
7. 
The provision of Section 498 Cr.P.C is
intended to be used sparingly in exceptional  cases
where malafide is patent or even latent. ln the
case in hand, malafide is found on the surface  in
view of peculiar circumstances  of the case
highlighted  above. Reliance is  placed upon
" Farhat Hussaln Shah and another  V. The State

and otherc'(2010  SCMR 1986).
8. 
Admittedly, co-accused have been allowed
pre-arrest bail while the offences alleged  i.e.
Section  452 and 506(ii) PPC entail punishment  up
to seven years which do not fall within the ambit of
prohibitory  clause.
9. 
Petitioner  having no criminal  record of any
nature  and remedy of pre-arrest  bail is to save the
innocent  people  from the horrors  and humiliation
of the police. The lnvestigation  Officer has stated
in the Court that investigation  is in progress  and
there are equal chances  that whether  occurrence
as alleged happened  or otherwise.  ln this view of
the matter,  petitioner who is previously not
involved  in any case seems  to be entitled to the
concession  of pre-arrest bail.
10. 
ln view of above, instant criminal  misc.
petition is allowed, ad-interim bail granted to the
petitioner (Muhammad Zatranl vide order dated
28.09.2020  is confirmed subject  to furnishing of
fresh bail bonds in the sum of Rs.100,000/-  (Rupees

Criminal  Misc. No.  1 01 6-8L2020

-4-

one hundred thousandsl  with one surety in the like
amount  to the satisfaction of learned Trial Court.
11.  Needless  to mention  that above is only
tentative  assessment,  for the purpose of instant
bail petition and sha!! not effecUinfluence  trial of

the case in any manner.

lmran

FW;Z AHrurAD ANJ UM JAN DRAN)
JUDGE

