J

nt Sheet

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAD

Crl.

No.4O3-B of 2OL7

YASIR KHAN, ETC.
VS
THE STATE AND ANOTHER.

Petitioner  by:

State by:

Complainant bg:

Date of decision:

Mr. Qaiscr  Mehmood  Autan, Adaocate.
Mr. M. Akram @ndal,  Sate Counsel along
utith Mr. Azhar Husso;ln  Shah,  DSP (I*gal)
and Mr, Bashir, InspectorlT.O  utith record.
Mian Ahned  Kltan,  Adaocqte.

3 7.08.20  77

SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI;  J: Petitioners  seek bail after

arrest in case F.I.R No.163, dated  28.O4.2OL7, offence u/s

3941376(2)13771411  PPC, registered at Police Station Koral,

Islamabad,  as Petitioners' similar  request has already been

declined by the learned Additional  Sessions  Judge-VI,

Islamabad  (East) vide order dated 12.06.20t7.

2.  Facts gleaned out from the FIR are that;

The Complainant, namely Muhammad Mobeen  s/o

Muhammad Suleman,  resident  of H.No. 51, St. No. 3, VIP

Ghauri Town,  Islamabad, was at his native town (Kot Addu)

in connection with visiting his ailing father, whereas, his
family was at Islamabad,  when on 18.04.2OL7 at about

11.00 p.m three unknown  armed persons, entered his house

and made his family members hostage and tied them with

ropes. Accused  remained in Complainant's  house for about

four to five hours and while leaving took cash of more than

rupees 5 lacs, four mobiles and registration book of Honda

2

Crl.Mrsc.No. 4o3'Bl?O17

cD-70 bearing registration No., MNP-5756, with them.
Accused  allegedly beaten the family members; made

pictures  of the ladies and threatened to put the same on the

social media in case information of the occurrence is given to
police. During the whole episode  one of the accused

allegedly remained present outside the Complainant's  house

with whom three accused, present inside the house, were

continuously  in connection  through  phone.

Initially the FIR was registered uls 392 PPC but during

investigation  it transpired that the accused committed  Zina-

bil-Jabr  and unnatural  offence with all the three ladies

present at home, hence,  relevant  sections i.e. 394, 376(2),

377 & 411 PPC were also incorporated  in the FIR.

3.  Learned counsel for petitioners, inter-alia,  submits  that

Petitioners have falsely been implicated in the instant  case

for ulterior  motive and malafide intentions. Learned Counsel

further submitted  that the FIR has been registered after the

delay of 10 days for which no explanation  has been given,

whereas,  they were not specifically  nominated in the FIR.

Moreover,  initially the FIR was lodged u/s 392 PPC whereas,

later on offences uls 376(2),377 and 4Lt PPC have been

inserted without  any plausible  reason. Petitioners have been

nominated in the FIR without any lawful justification  as

neither Complainant nor anyone else has seen them at the

spot rather they have nothing to do with the commission  of

offence  aS mentioned  in the FIR. Furthermore,  there is no
evidence to  connect the present  Petitioners  with the

3

Crl.  Mrsc.  No.  4O3-  B/ 2077

commission  of offence which leads the case of petitioners to

one of further inquiry; and there exists no extra-ordinary

circumstances to withhold the benefit of concession  of bail to
the  Petitioners. It  is  contended that petitioners are
previously non-convict  and non record holder, no more
required for further investigation and ready to  furnish

solvent sureties to the satisfaction  of court if enlarged on bai!

as keeping them behind the bar for an indefinite period  will

Serve no useful purpose. Learned Counsel in support of his

contentions  placed  reliance on the caSe law reported aS

Nasir Hussain VS The State ancl another (PLJ 2O75
Cr.C.(Lahorer343r  Muhammad Imran VS The Sate

Nazar

(Lahorel45d

(2074  P.Cr, L-f 

and  o
Hussain VS, The State and others (2O74 P,C,r,L.J.
(Lahoret43it Waqar Shah VS The State (2O72
P,Cr,L,J. (Lahoret 866r  Muhammad Afzal  alias
Abduttah  and others VS, The State and others (2OO9

SCMR  436r and Muhammad  Yameen alias Raia VS The

State and others  (2OO9  SCMR 84),

4.  On the other hand, the learned State Counsel as well

as learned counsel for the Complainant  while opposing the

bail petition, inter-alia, contended  that the Petitioners have

duly been identified during the identification parade with a

specific role which is very heinous  and unethical.  Moreover,

there is sufficient  evidence available on record to connect

them with the offences  alleged in the FIR. It is further stated

that statements  of the ladies (victims) recorded u/s L64

4

Crl.  Mrsc.No. 403  -B/2o11

Cr. P.C. paint such a horrible picture that each accused

proved himself  ruffian and criminal of highest order.  They

not only committed Zina-bil-Jabar as gang but prepared
videos/movies of  respectable  ladies in  naked condition

during the forcible act of rape, through their mobile phone,

thus, they are not entitled  for concession  of bail. Learned
Counsel for Complainant in support referred case law

reported as Muhammad  Suleman alias DAGAI  VS, The
State and another (2O77 P'Cr.L,J,  Note 27r Waseem

Bashir VS, The State and others  (2O76 P.Cr,L,J, 454)

Nasreen  Bibi VS, Farrukh  Shahzad and anolher (2O75

SCMR 825t Salman VS, The State (2O74 P,Cr.L'J. 647)

EDsalsaatl 

/|r,

aA 

l.la 

Tha 

tE*q#a 

f  ,A,  n  D fr 

,  I  z0al

Arif Ali Ansar and another VS, The State (2O7O  YLR

2O79r Zahir Muhammad  VS, The State and another
(2OO8 YLR 837r Sarfraz Alias Sarwar s, The State

(7992 P,Cr.L.J, 555) and Ali Gohar VS, The State (7989

P.Cr.L.J.  241.

5

I have heard the learned counsel for parties and

have also perused  the available record

5

No doubt,  Petitioners were not  specifically

nominated in the FIR as in such like cases, it cannot be, due

to unknown  identity of accused persons, however, in the

instant  matter  they have duly been identified by the victim

ladies at the time of identification parade and that too with a

specific  role of committing  Zina-bil-Jabar, un-natural  offence

Crl.Mrsc.No.  4c3-a/2011

and preparation of movies of the act committed  upon the

said ladies. Moreover, parties are not previously known to

each other thus no question of either enmity or any kind of

malice or malafide  to give even a hint of false implication of
Petitioners arises. Another aspect which is  of  great

importance is that in such like cases, it could not be believed

that victim ladies would put their personal  respect,  character

and family honour  at stake by fabricating  a false story, so as

to stigmatize themselves for the rest of their lives.

7.  As far as delay of ten days in lodging of FIR is
concerned, it  is  well explained  by the Complainant.

Moreover,  it is important  to observe that in the cases like in

hand, delay in lodging the FIR is not that much material  as

victims  normally  avoid approaching  the Police due to family

honour and without permission  of male family elder. In the

instant  matter  threat of making the videos viral, prepared by

accused persons  during the commission  of offence was also

apparent.  It is matter of common knowledge that fear of

being blackmailed  is not less than a trauma.  Reference in

this regard may usefully  be made to the case law reported  as

Nasreen Bibi VS, Farrukh  Shahzad and another (2015.
SCMR 825r. Accused  persons remained  at the place of

occurrence  for about six hours, committed gang rape,

committed dacoity and prepared naked movies, all on gun

point. During this period they used house  articles and food

items available at the house of victim ladies. Series  of

offences committed  by accused  persons right from forcibly

6

crl.  Misc.  No.  4o3-Bl  2-o  17

entering into the house of Complainant  and leaving  with
articles, prima-facie, shows their criminal  intent and

execution  of the same.

8.  Besides this all the offences,  except uls 4L1 fall within
the prohibitory clause of Section  497 Cr.P.C  and in cases

involving capital punishment or imprisonment  for life or for

ten years, bail cannot be granted  unless the Court first
comes to the conclusion that there are no reasonable
grounds to believe that the accused has committed the

alleged offence, whereas,  in the instant case victim ladies

have fully implicated  the accused in commission of offence

which is duly supported by the medical evidence and

recoveries  already effected, however, deeper  appreciation  of

evidence is not to be made at the bail stage,  apparently,

material available on the record connect  them with the

commission of offence.

9.  The case law relied by the learned Counsel for

Petitioners  has no relevancy or application  so far as the facts
and circumstances  of this case are concerned and it  is
settled proposition of law that each criminal  case is to be

decided on its own facts and merits, there is no universal

rule of application which can be applied to every case as

facts and circumstances of each case will determine its fate.

10,  Before  parting  with the order it is important  to point
out that the role of the Investigation officer  namely
Muhammad  Tahseen, S.I. throughout the investigation

I

Crl.Misc.No.  4O3' B/71O17

remained very callous,  irresponsible and dubious as he

investigated the matter very poorly leaving many loop holes

apparently to give favour to the accused/Petitioners  e.g. the

last worn clothes of victim ladies were not taken into custody

and sent to NFSL for analysis;  victim ladies  were not sent for

medical examination  timely and recoveries were not shown

to be effected  from the possession  of accused/petitioners
rather from their relatives. It  is also apparent  from th9

record that the said Police  Official instead  of doing his job

vigilantly  kept on pressurizing the Complainant  as well as
victim  ladies to  make a  settlement with  the
accused/Petitioners and to step back from persuading the

case. It  is observed with great concern that this sort of

negligence  on the part of Investigator in such a heinous  crime and
cruel act should not go unnoticed  by senior Police Officers.  It is
indeed the duty of an Investigator to collect best  possible

evidence  when it is in fact available which is not being done in the

present case. Videos  prepared by accused persons  of the ladies,  is
the most impoftant material for the trial as well as to protect
victim ladies from being  blackmailed at the hands of accused

persons. The office is directed to send a copy of this judgment  to

the Inspector-General  of Police, Islamabad, to assess for himself

whether investigation  in such heinous  and rare cases should be
entrusted to officers like Muhammad  Tahseen, S.I. It is a case of

culpable neglect and indifference  on the part of Investigating

Agency that an untrained  junior rank Police Officer  was asked to

investigate such a case when the high ups should have been

vigilant  and watchful  of the gravity of the offence committed  in

their jurisdiction. Moreover, with such dishonest  investigation  and

Crl.Misc.No.  4O3  B/2OL7

lack of assistance from the Police it becomes difficult for the
Courts  to do justice. It is also directed that the outcome of the

inquiry  initiated against the said police official should also be

intimated to this Court  through Registrar.

1f,,- For what has been discussed above,  this Court is not

inclined to allow this petition. Hence, post arrest bail is

declined.

L2" Al! the observations  made hereinabove  are tentative  in

nature and shall not affect the merit of the case.

UI)

Approved for Reporting,
BIue  SIip  Added

Adnan/*

