 Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

           WRIT PETITION NO. 4232 OF 2016 

  Euro Tiles & Granite, etc. 

VS 

Federation of Pakistan, etc.  

 PETITIONER BY:       Mr. Salman Farooq and Mr. Umer Altaf, 

Advocates.  

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr. Ahmed Sheraz, Advocate for NTC. 

Mr. Farrukh Shahzad Dall, AAG. 

DATE OF HEARING: 

12.08.2022. 

======================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-    The  petitioners  have  impugned    order 

dated  22.04.2016  passed  by  National  Tariff  Commission 

(“NTC”)  rejecting  the  request  for  refund  of  provisional  anti-

dumping  duty  imposed  by  NTC  on  the  basis  of  preliminary 

determination  in  the  case  of  anti-dumping  investigation  on 

imports  of  Wall/Floor  Tiles  into  Pakistan  dated  03.04.2014 

(“Preliminary Determination”). 

2.        Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  contended  that  the 

Preliminary  Determination  was  challenged  before  the  learned 

Lahore High Court through M.I. Sanitary Store, etc. VS The 

Federation of Pakistan (W.P No. 12255/2014), which by 

order  dated  19.05.2014 

set  aside 

the  Preliminary 

Determination  for  being  coram  non  judice.  The  question  of 

resumption  of  proceedings  into  the  investigation  in  which  the 

Preliminary Determination was made was taken up by NTC on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   2 | P a g e  

27.07.2015.  But  the  representative  of  domestic  industry  on 

whose  application  the  investigation  leading  to  the  issuance  of 

the  Preliminary  Determination  was  initiated,  withdrew  his 

application.  After  withdrawal  of  the  application  by  the 

domestic industry in exercise of power under Section 40 of the 

Anti  Dumping  Duties  Ordinance,  2000  (“Ordinance”),  NTC 

terminated  the  investigation  without  imposition  of  any  anti-

dumping  duty  or  other  measures  provided  under  the 

Ordinance by order dated 10.08.2015. After termination of the 

said investigation, the petitioners sought a refund of the cash 

deposit  received  by  NTC  from  the  petitioners  as  provisional 

anti-dumping  duty,  which  request  was  rejected  through  the 

impugned order. Learned counsel for the petitioner contended 

that  pursuant  to  Section  55(4)  of  the  Anti-Dumping  Duties 

Act,  2015  (“Act”),  once  NTC  makes  a  negative  final 

determination  any  cash  deposit  made  during  the  period  of 

application  of  provisional  measures  is  to  be  refunded  by  NTC 

within forty days of such determination. He contended that the 

scheme  of  the  Act  provided  that  under  Section  43  the 

provisional  anti-dumping  duty  could  be 

imposed  as  a 

provisional  measure  to  prevent  injury  to  be  caused  to  the 

domestic 

industry.  But  Section  44  clarified  that  such 

provisional measures took the form of security by way of cash 

deposit  and  such  security  deposit  acquired  the  form  of  anti-

dumping duty only once such duty was imposed by NTC after 

it  made  a  final  determination  of  dumping  causing  injury.  He 

submitted  that in the  instant case,  the domestic industry had 

withdrawn its application under Section 40 of the Act. And NTC 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   3 | P a g e  

in its wisdom deemed the case not to be fit for continuation of 

the  investigation  pursuant  to  its  suo  moto  power  under  the 

proviso of Section 40 and terminated the investigation without 

imposition  of  any  duty.  Given  that  there  was  no  final 

determination of dumping and injury to the domestic industry, 

the  petitioners’  case  clearly  fell  within  the  scope  of  Section 

55(4)  of  the  Act.  He  contended  that  to  deny  the  refund  NTC 

was  conflating  the  matter  by  relying  on  a  judgment  of  the 

august  Supreme Court in the case  of Fecto  Belarus Tractor 

Ltd.  VS  Government  of  Pakistan  (2005  PTD  2286), 

wherein  the  subject-matter  was  refund  of  customs  duty  and 

sales tax and not anti-dumping duty. And such precedent had 

no  co-relation  to  the  lis  before  this  Court.  He  further 

submitted  that  NTC  was  also  relying  on  a  judgment  of  this 

Court  in  M/s  Home  Life  VS  National  Tariff  Commission, 

Islamabad.  (W.P  2000  of  2010),  wherein  this  Court  had 

expressed  its  opinion  in  relation  to  Section  52  of  the  Act  and 

not  Section  55(4),  and  such  precedent  was  also  not  relevant 

to the controversy before this Court. 

3.            Learned  counsel  for  NTC  submitted  that  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  Fecto  Belarus  Tractor  had  held  that  an 

importer cannot recover customs duty and sales tax from the 

State  once  it  had  passed  on  the  burden  of  the  same  to  end 

consumers,  while  enumerating 

the  doctrine  of  unjust 

enrichment  that  prohibited  a  person  from  availing  the  benefit 

of a windfall. And in such case, the tax and duty collected was 

to  be  retained  by  the  State,  as  the  end  consumers  to  whom 

such duty was due to be refunded could not be identified. He 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   4 | P a g e  

further  relied  on  judgment  of  this  Court  in  M/s  Home  Life 

wherein,  the  learned  Judge-in-Chambers  had  held  that  the 

grant  of  allowance  and  refusal  of  refund  was  an  exclusive 

prerogative  of  NTC  and  that  a  Court  could  not  enter  into  an 

exercise  of  calculating  anti-dumping  duty.  And  further  that 

where liability had been passed on to consumers the importer 

would  not  be  entitled  to  recover  anti-dumping  duty.  That  the 

Intra Court Appeal, against said  judgment was dismissed  and 

CPLA  against  the  same  was  pending  before  the  august 

Supreme Court. 

4. 

The question before this Court is whether NTC is entitled 

to  seek  documentary  evidence  from  an  importer,  who  has 

made cash deposit due to application of provisional measures 

by  NTC  through  a  Preliminary  Determination,  as  to  whether 

such  provisional  anti-dumping  duty  has  been  passed  on  to 

buyers/consumers, 

in  order  to  decide  the  question  of 

entitlement  of  such  importers  in  a  claim  for  refund  under 

Section 55(4) of the Act.  

5. 

The  facts  as  enumerated  above  are  undisputed.  NTC 

imposed  provisional  anti-dumping  duty  as  a  provisional 

measure  pursuant  to  the  Preliminary  Determination.  The 

petitioners  made  cash  deposits  pursuant  to  Section  44  of  the 

Act  to  discharge  their  obligation  under  the  Preliminary 

Determination.  The  Preliminary  Determination  was  declared 

illegal  by  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court  for  being  coram  non 

judice. The question of continuation of investigation was then 

heard  by  NTC  during  which  the  domestic  industry,  on  whose 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   5 | P a g e  

application  the  investigation  had  been  initiated,  withdrew  its 

application  under  Section  40  of  the  Ordinance  (which  is  pari 

materia  to  Section  40  of  the  Act).  NTC  by  order  dated 

10.08.2015  terminated  the  anti-dumping  investigation  re 

import  of  Wall/Floor  Tiles  without  imposition  of  anti-dumping 

duty. 

6. 

It  is  not  contested  by  NTC  that  there  was  no  final 

determination  issued  by  NTC  declaring  that  the  petitioners 

were  liable  for  dumping  or  had  inflicted  any  “injury”  on 

“Domestic  Industry”  within  the  meaning  of  Sections  2(i)  and 

2(d),  respectively,  of  the  Act.  The  only  question  then  is 

whether  issuance  of  a  refund  under  Section  55(4)  of  the  Act 

within a  period of forty-five days is a  mandatory requirement 

under  the  Act  or  whether  such  refund  is  contingent  on  NTC 

first  satisfying  itself  that  the  provisionally  determined  anti-

dumping duty has not been passed on by the importer to end 

consumers. 

7. 

Section 55(4) of the Ordinance states the following: 

“Where 

the  Commission  makes  a  negative 

final 

determination,  any  cash  deposit  made,  during  the  period 

of application of provisional measures shall be refunded by 

the  Commission  within 

forty-five  days  of 

such 

determination.” 

It  would  be  useful  to  contrast  the  language  of  Section 

55(4)  with  provisions  of  Section  52,  also  related  to  refund  of 

amounts  paid  in  excess  of  the  dumping  margin.  It  states  the 

following: 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   6 | P a g e  

52. Refund of anti-dumping duties paid in excess of 

dumping  margin.—(1)  An  importer  shall  be  granted  a 

refund  of  the  actual  amount  of  anti-dumping  duties 

collected  if  the  Commission  determines  that  dumping 

margin,  on  the  basis  of  which  such  antidumping  duties 

were paid, has been eliminated or reduced to a level which 

is below the level of the anti- dumping duty in force.  

(2)  An  importer  may  submit  an  application  for  refund  of 

anti-dumping  duties  collected  within  any  twelve  months 

period  to  the  Commission  not  later  than  sixty  days  from 

the end of such period. 

(3) An application under sub-section (2) shall contain such 

information as may be prescribed. 

(4)  The  Commission  shall  provide  an  importer  making  an 

application  under  sub-section  (2)  with  an  explanation  of 

the  reasons  for  the  decision  concerning  a  request  for 

refund.  

(5)  A  refund  of  anti-dumping  duties  under  this  section 

shall normally take place within twelve months, and in no 

case  later  than eighteen months,  after  the  date  on  which 

an application for refund compliant with the requirements 

of sub-section (3) is received by the Commission. 

8. 

Section  55  addresses  the  situation  where  at  the  end  of 

the  adjudicatory  process  NTC  reaches  a  conclusion  while 

making  its  final  determination  that  there  was  no  injury  or 

threat  of  injury  (which  Section  55(4)  describes  as  negative 

final  determination).  NTC  is  then  under  an obligation  to  issue 

a  refund  of  “any  cash  deposit  made  during  the  period  of 

application  of  provisional  measures…  within  the  period  of 

forty-five days of such determination”. The scheme of Section 

55 reflects that the issuance of a refund is not the product of 

any adjudicatory process but is a mandatory requirement with 

a  fixed  timeline  i.e.  to  issue  a  refund  in  the  amount  of  any 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   7 | P a g e  

cash deposit received as provisional anti-dumping duty within 

a  period  of  forty-five  days  of  issuance  of  a  negative  final 

determination.  

9. 

In  the  instant  case,  the  adjudicatory process  in  relation 

to the  investigation in which a  Preliminary Determination was 

made, pursuant to which cash deposits were received from the 

petitioners as provisional measures, came to an end by order 

dated  10.08.2015,  after  withdrawal  of  application  by  the 

domestic  industry  and  a  decision  by  NTC  to  terminate  the 

proceedings without imposition of anti-dumping duty pursuant 

to its power under proviso of Section 40. NTC, in the event it 

deemed  it  fit  to  do  so,  could  continue  the  investigation  even 

after  the  withdrawal  of  application  by  the  domestic  industry. 

NTC,  however,  in  exercise  of  its  power  decided  not  to  do  so 

and  the  decision  to  terminate  proceedings  in  relation  to  the 

investigation  that  resulted  in  the  Preliminary  Determination 

was  for  all  practical  purposes  a  negative  final  determination 

clearly stating that investigation was being terminated without 

imposition of any anti-dumping duty. 

10.  The  scheme  and  mechanism  for  refund  under  Sections 

52  and  55  of  the  Act,  respectively,  can  also  not  be  confused. 

Under  Section  55(4)  the  refund  of  cash  deposit  taken  as  a 

provisional  measure  after  the  issuance  of  a  negative  final 

determination  is mandatory  and  automatic.  Section  52(2), on 

the  other  hand,  provides  for  an  adjudicatory  process  which 

kicks  off  with  the  importer  filing  an  application  for  refund. 

Section  52(3)  endows  the  Federal  Government  with  the 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   8 | P a g e  

authority to prescribe through rules the information that must 

be furnished by an  importer  along with its refund application. 

Sub-section  52(4)  then  requires  NTC  to  give  reasons  for  the 

decision in relation to the refund. Obviously in view of Section 

52(1)  there  is  need  for  application  of  mind  and  to  make 

calculations while  determining whether or not a refund is due 

to  an  importer.  But  the  scheme  of  Section  52  cannot  be 

imported  and  read  into  the  scheme  of  refund  under  Section 

55. 

11.  The  principles  of  statutory  interpretation  in  this  regard 

are well settled. A Court must give meaning and effect to the 

words  used  by  the  legislature  in  a  statue  in  order  to  garner 

legislative  intent  (see  for  example  Federation  of  Pakistan 

VS  Durrani  Ceramics  (2014  PTD  2016),  Jamat-I-Islami 

VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2000  SC  111)  and 

Standard  Printing  Press  VS  Sind  Employee’s  Social 

Security Institution (1988 SCMR 91). A Court cannot read 

into  the  statue  in  view  of  the  established  doctrine  of  casus 

omissus  (see  for  example  Gul  Taiz  Khan  Marwat  VS 

Registrar,  Peshawar  High  Court  (PLD  2021  SC  391).  A 

Court  is  also  not  to  give  meaning  to  the  language  of  a 

provision  in  such  manner  that  it  renders  the  provision 

redundant.  

12. 

In  view  of  the  unambiguous  language  used  in  Section 

55(4) neither the scheme of Section 52 of the Act can be read 

into  Section  55(4)  nor  can  any  provision  of  the  Customs  Act, 

1969, be read into Section 55(4) of the Act. 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   9 | P a g e  

13.  NTC  argued  before  the  Court  that  the  impugned  order 

has  been  passed  in  view  of  the  law  laid  down  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  Fecto  Belarus  Tractor.  The  argument  is 

misconceived.  In  Fecto  Belarus  Tractor  the  Court  had 

interpreted  the  provisions  of  the  Customs  Act,  1969,  and  the 

Sales  Tax  Act,  1990,  and  by  applying  the  principle  against 

unjust enrichment it had been held that in the event that in a 

case  of  refund  the  refund  could  not  be  issued  to  the  person 

who bore the burden of the duty or tax collected by the State, 

the  excessive  amount  collected  would  remain  with  the  State 

and would not be transferred to a private person who had not 

discharged  such  burden  of  tax  but  had  transferred  it  further 

down  the  chain.  The  doctrine  of  unjust  enrichment  had  been 

applied in the context of a tax or duty collected by the State. 

The imposition of anti-dumping duty under the Act is not akin 

to  collection  of  tax.  The  Act,  according  to  its  preamble,  was 

promulgated  “to  provide  a  framework  for  investigation  and 

determination  of  dumping  and  injury  in  respect  of  goods 

imported  into  Pakistan…”  The  object  of  imposing  of  anti-

dumping duty is to prevent the infliction of injury on Domestic 

Industry  by  import  of  goods  at  a  price  that  constitutes 

dumping.  

14. 

 This  Court  need  not  determine  conclusively  whether  or 

not  the  doctrine  of  unjust  enrichment  is  applicable  to  anti-

dumping  duties  given  the  fundamental  differences  between 

the  duty  imposed  to  protect  domestic  industry  VS a  duty 

or  tax  collected  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  State  and  for  the 

general welfare of the  citizens. Suffice  it to say that the ratio 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   10 | P a g e  

in Fecto Belarus Tractor is not applicable in the instant case. 

In  Fecto  Belarus  Tractor  the  august  Supreme  Court 

interpreted provisions of the Customs Act, 1969, and the Sales 

Tax Act, 1990, and provisions of such statutes cannot be read 

into  the  Act.  It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Ghulam  Mustafa  Jatoi  VS  Additional  Distrct  &  Sessions 

Judge (1994 SCMR 1299) that provision of one statute need 

not be imported or read into another statue where the text of 

the  provision  to  be  interpreted  is  not  ambiguous  while 

endorsing  the  judgment  of  the  learned  Karachi  High  Court  in 

Mahbub  Ahmad  VS  First  Additional  District  Judge  (PLD 

1976  Karachi  978)  wherein  it  was  held  that  “unless  the 

provision  is  pari  materia,  it  is  not  correct  to  construe  a 

provision with reference to another provision in a different Act, 

for it is the language of the provision which is the determining 

factor.” It is a settled principle of interpretation that looking at 

provisions of statues that are pari materia is an interpretation 

tool  to  decipher  the  legislative  intent  behind  provisions  of  a 

statute where the language of such provisions is ambiguous or 

amenable  to  multiple  interpretations.  Section  55(4)  is  not 

ambiguous  and  consequently  while  deciphering  the  intent  of 

the legislature in promulgating such provision there is no need 

to seek guidance from provisions of other statutes.  

15. 

 In  view  of  the  law  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme 

Court  in Fecto  Belarus Tractor  the  legislature  amended  the 

Customs  Act,  1969  and  Section  33(4)  now  states  that,  “no 

refund  shall  be  allowed  under  this  section,  if  the  sanctioning 

authority  is  satisfied  that  the  incidence  of  customs  duty  and 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   11 | P a g e  

other  levies  has  been  passed  on  to  the  buyer  or  consumer.” 

The  legislature  was  cognizant  of  the  ratio  in  Fecto  Belarus 

Tractor  and  incorporated  the  same  in  the  form  of  Section 

33(4) of the Customs Act, 1969. There was nothing preventing 

the  legislature  from  incorporating  such  provision  within 

Section  55  of  the  Act  (or  for  that  the  matter  even  within 

Section  52). But  the  legislature  has not  done  so  and  it is  not 

for NTC or for this Court to read Section 33(4) of the Customs 

Act,  1969,  into  the  provisions  of  the  Act  that  deals  with  the 

subject  of  refund.  The  Act  is  not  a  tax  statute.  In  relation  to 

tax statutes it was held in Cape Brandy Syndicate v. Inland 

Revenue  Commissioner  (1921)  1  K.B.  64)  that  “…  in  a 

taxing  Act  one  has  to  look  merely  at  what  is  clearly  said. 

There  is  no  room  for  any  intendment.  There  is  not  equity 

about a tax. There is no presumption as to a tax. Nothing is to 

be read in, nothing is to be implied. One can only look fairly at 

the  language  used”.  This  principle  of  interpretation  of  fiscal 

statutes has been endorsed by the august Supreme Court (see 

for  example  Collector  of  Customs  VS  Muhammad 

Mahfooz  (PLD  1991  SC  630),  Star  Textile  Mills  Ltd.  VS 

Govt.  of  Sindh  (2002  SCMR  356)  and  Province  of  the 

Punjab VS Muhammad Aslam (2004 SCMR 1649).  

16.  The  second  argument  of  NTC  with  regard  to  law  laid 

down  by  this  Court  in  M/s  Home  Life  is  also  misconceived. 

The  question  before  this  Court  in  M/s  Home  Life  related  to 

the  entitlement  of  importers  to  be  refunded  anti-dumping 

duties collected pursuant to a final determination that was set 

aside  and  the  matter  was  remanded  back  to  NTC.  The 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   12 | P a g e  

judgment  is  distinguishable  as  it  related  to  interpretation  of 

Section  52  of  the  Act  and  not  Section  55,  which  forms  the 

subject  matter  of  the  instant  petition.  Even  in  the  context  of 

Section 52, the Court had held that the matter whether or not 

anti-dumping  duty  was  due  from  the  importers  was  pending 

adjudication before NTC, which had not turned down the claim 

of  the  importers,  and  consequently  the  importers  were  at 

liberty  to  raise  their  claim  regarding  the  refund  before  NTC. 

The  comments  about  the  question  of  grant  of  refund  falling 

within  the  exclusive  prerogative  of  NTC  or  that  the  importers 

were not entitled to such refund in the event that liability had 

been passed on  to  consumers were obiter  comments that did 

not  form  the  ratio  of  the  decision.  The  principles  of  statutory 

interpretations as applicable here, including that Section 33(4) 

of  the  Customs  Act,  1969,  cannot  read  into  provisions  of  the 

Act has been stated above. As the interpretation of Section 52 

of  the  Act  and  the  entitlement  to  refund  under  it  does  not 

form  the  subject-matter  of  the  present  petition,  this  Court 

need not to delve upon it. Suffice it to say that the judgment 

of this Court in M/s Home Life is distinguishable and is not a 

precedent  on  the  basis  of  which  NTC  can  conclude  that  it  is 

authorized  to  impose  additional  conditions  to  be  satisfied  by 

importers  while  processing  a  refund  under  Section  55(4)  of 

the Act. 

17. 

 For the aforementioned reasons, this Court finds that in 

the  event  that  NTC  terminates  an  investigation  without 

imposition of any measures under the Act pursuant to Section 

40  of  the  Act  or  issues  a  negative  final  determination  the 

                                    W.P No. 4232 of 2016                                                                                   13 | P a g e  

effect  is  that  NTC  has  determined  that  the  matter  before  it 

does not involve any injury or threat of injury to the domestic 

industry  and  any  security  deposit  received  by  NTC  as  a 

provisional  measures  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Sections 

43,  44  and  51  becomes  refundable  automatically  pursuant  to 

Section 55(4). And is to be refunded within a period of forty-

five  days  of  the  termination  of  the  investigation  without 

imposition of any measures or the issuance of a negative final 

determination as the case may be. The petition is accordingly 

allowed. The impugned order is set aside for being in breach 

of Section 55(4) of the Act. NTC is directed to refund the cash 

deposit  received  as  provisional  anti-dumping  duty  within  a 

period of forty-five days.  

             (BABAR SATTAR) 
                         JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 29.08.2022. 

*Shakeel Afzal*88888 

                             JUDGE 

                     Approved for reporting. 

   
  
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
     
  
 
  
