Form No: HCJD/C-121. 

ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

          W.P. No. 475 of 2015 

Mst. Samina Khattak, etc   
VS 
SHO, Police Station Kohsar, etc 

        PETITIONERS BY:       Mian Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, Advocate in W.P.No.475  

        Date of hearing:    

  of 2015. 
  Mr. Iqbal Khattack, petitioner in Crl. Misc.No.02/H/2014. 
 27-02-2015. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  J.-    Through  this  consolidated 

judgment this Court intends to decide the instant petition alongwith Crl. Misc. 

No.02/H/2014.  

2.   

The facts, in brief, are that the petitioner in W.P.No.475/2015 M/s. 

Samina  Khattak  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Mother”)  has  sought  the 

intervention of this Court, for quashment of a criminal case registered as FIR 

No.76  dated  08-02-2015,  at  Police  Station  Kohsar,  Islamabad,  hereinafter 

referred to as the "FIR") . Mr. Iqbal Hussain Khattak (hereinafter referred to 

as  the  “Father”)  petitioner  in  Crl.  Misc.  No.02/H/2014,  has  sought  the 

intervention of this Court, for issuance of a direction to the respondents for 

handing  over  the  custody  of  minors/daughters.  The  Petitioners  contracted 

marriage in 2003. Out of this marriage two daughters were born i.e. Maheen 

Iqbal Khattak and Benish Iqbal Khattak, presently aged 6-1/2 and 4-1/2 years 

respectively  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Minors”).  Differences  arose 

between  the  petitioners,  which  subsequently led to  their  divorce  on  23-03-

2014.  Both  the  petitioners  contracted  second  marriages  respectively,  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
2                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

thereafter  the  custody  of  the  Minors  became  a  dispute  between  them.  It 

appears from the record that well wishers intervened, but the dispute could not 

be  resolved.  The  custody  of  the  Minors  at  some  stage  remained  with  the 

Father and on 08-02-2015, with the consent of the latter, the maternal uncle of 

the Minors took them for their agreed meeting with the Mother. It is alleged 

by the Father, as recorded in the FIR, that when the Minors did not return, he 

was  informed that  they  were  with  their  Mother.  It  was  on  account  of  the 

refusal of the Mother to return the Minors to the Father which caused the latter 

to file a complaint with the Police Station Kohsar, Islamabad on 09-02-2015, 

for  registration  of  a  criminal case  under  Section  363/34  of  Pakistan  Penal 

Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the “PPC”). The Police Station Kohsar 

registered the FIR. On the same date the petition of the Mother was also heard 

by the learned Guardian Judge at Multan. Hence the instant petitions.  

3.   

             In compliance with this Court’s order dated, 16-02-2015, 

the  Minors  were  produced  by  their  Mother,  while  the  Father  appeared  in 

person.  It  was  inquired  from  the  Investigating  Officer,  whether  any  other 

cases  were registered  under  similar  circumstances  i.e  when the  minors  are 

admittedly in the custody of the mother and she refuses to return them to the 

their father? The Investigating Officer was visibly at a loss and conceded that 

no other FIR had been registered in such a situation. It was further inquired as 

to why the FIR was registered in this particular case? By remaining silent he 

preferred not to answer the question. The Mother of the Minors has alleged 

that the Father, being an officer employed in the august Supreme Court of 

Pakistan, has been misusing his position by influencing the police officials. 

She further expressed apprehension that in the given situation she felt that the 

Courts could also be influenced.  

4.   

It is ironic when innocent minors suffer, while the divorced parents 

drag them to the courts and are pitted against each other, fighting for their 

 
 
 
3                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

custody. The Father, who appeared in person, contended that the Minors were 

in his lawful custody and, therefore, refusal on the part of the Mother to return 

them  constituted  an  offence  under  Section  363/34  of  PPC.  He  further 

contended that his concern was the older daughter’s education.  

5.   

On the other hand, Mian Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, Advocate High 

Court, appearing for the petitioner/Mother, has contended that a criminal case 

could not have been be registered against the Mother, as she is admittedly the 

natural guardian of the Minors. It was further contended that the ingredients of 

363/34  PPC  were  not  made  out  and  that  the  FIR  was  registered  without 

application  of  the  mind  and  in  colorable  exercise  of  jurisdiction  by  the 

concerned officials. It was also stressed that the criminal case was registered 

on the same date when the suit for the custody of the children was heard by 

the competent Court at Multan and, therefore, in order to subvert the lawful 

proceedings the respondent/Father influenced and pressurized the officials in 

registering the criminal case, by misusing the name of the august Supreme 

Court, which also finds mentioned in the FIR. It has, therefore, strenuously 

been argued that neither is any case made out, nor is the registration bonafide, 

and that the officials have exceeded their jurisdiction which is floating on the 

surface of the FIR. It was pointed out that mentioning the name of the august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  FIR  was  also  not  justified,  as  it  inevitably  raised 

apprehensions in the mind of the Mother that any fair investigation and trial 

would be prejudiced, thereby violating the right to a fair trial and access to 

justice. Relying on “Kausar Parveen VS The State”, P L D 2008 Lahore 533  

it was contended that a criminal case cannot be registered against a natural 

guardian  i.e.  the  mother.  At  this  stage  the  Court  inquired  from  the 

Investigating  Officer,  as  to  whether  the  charge  had  been  framed  or  any 

proceedings taken by the Trial Court?  The I.O informed that neither charge 

has been framed nor report under Section 173 of Cr. P. C has been submitted. 

 
 
 
4                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

6.   

The petitioners in person, and the learned counsel for the Mother 

were heard at length and record perused with their able assistance.  

7.   

It is indeed unpleasant for divorced parents to drag minors into the 

Courts and expose them to an undesirable and hostile environment, rather than 

settling  their  differences  amicably.  This  inevitably  leaves  scars  on  the 

impressionable  minds  of  the  minors,  and  many  have  to  live  with  its 

psychological effects. As if this is not enough, in some cases the parents go to 

the extent of registering criminal cases, rather than invoking the jurisdiction of 

a competent Guardian Court for settling disputes relating to the custody of 

minors. The instant case is a classic example of a father, who despite being an 

employee of the apex Court, resorted to registration of a criminal case rather 

than  approaching  a  competent  Court  for  the  custody  of  the  minors.  The 

Minors in this case are two innocent little girls, who have been exposed to the 

undesirable environment of the Courts. In the instant case the unwarranted 

reference made to the august Supreme Court further confounds the problem. 

The right of fair trial and confidence of the parties that neither the officials 

investigating the case nor the Court would be influenced by the position held 

by  the  complainant  also  becomes  relevant.  In  such  cases,  the  burden  is 

obviously far greater than in a normal case, to ensure that no party leaves the 

Court having the slightest doubt that justice may be prejudiced. Justice is not 

only to be done but manifestly seen to be done.  There was no justification to 

have referred to the complainant as an official of the apex Court. This always 

gives rise to an exceptional situation.  

8.   

This Court will first examine the petition of the Mother to answer 

whether a case is made out to quash the FIR. It is evident from the complaint, 

as  reproduced  in  the  FIR,  that  the  complainant  was  fully  aware  that  the 

custody of the minors was taken by the natural guardian i.e. the mother from 

their maternal  uncle.  The father  had  admittedly  not  approached  a  court  of 

 
 
 
5                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

competent jurisdiction to obtain the custody of the minors, nor is there any 

lawful order  giving custody of the minors to the Father, who is not the natural 

guardian.  The  Father  also  did  not  hesitate in  naming  several  other  family 

members/relatives of the Mother, most obviously to harass them as well. The 

contents of the FIR leave no doubt whatsoever that, let alone the ingredients 

of  Section  361  of  PPC,  no  criminal  case  is  made  out  for  attracting  the 

punishment  under  Section  363  of  PPC.  The  Father,  not  being  a  natural 

guardian, has admittedly not been declared as a lawful guardian by any Court 

having  competent  jurisdiction  in  this  regard.  The  definition  of  kidnapping 

from 'lawful guardianship' under Section 361 of PPC further affirms that the 

said  provision  would  certainly  not  be  attracted  in  the  case  of  a  natural 

guardian  i.e.  the  mother.  This  Court  concurs  with  the  view  taken  by  the 

Lahore High Court in “Kausar Parveen VS The State”, P L D 2008 Lahore 

533,  that  father  and  mother  cannot  prosecute  each  other  on  the  charge  of 

kidnapping of their own minors/children. Moreover, there is no cavil to the 

proposition that a trial court, nor the police authorities, are  competent forums 

for the resolution of disputes between parents of minors arising, particularly 

when the question of custody is involved. This Court further affirms the view 

that the  police  authorities  have  no jurisdiction in  interfering  with  a  purely 

family dispute, relating to the custody of minors between their parents. The 

relevant observations from the case of “Kausar Parveen VS State” (supra) are 

reproduced as follows:- 

“The words ‘lawful guardian’ in section 361, P.P.C 

are  used in  a  wider  sense  including  any  person  lawfully 

interested  with  the  care  or  custody  of  the  minor.  The 

principle of dual guardianship of the minor is by itself not 

repugnant to Islamic Law or law of the land. Under this 

conception the guardianship of the father does not cease 

while the minor is in the custody of mother. Again there is 

 
 
6                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

nothing in law to prevent the mother to agitate her right of 

hizanat  when  the  minor  is  with  the  father.  Father  and 

mother  cannot  prosecute  each  other  on  the  charge  of 

kidnapping of their own minor children.” 

“The mere fact that at one time the mother herself 

passed on custody of her minor children to her ex-husband 

in lieu of dowry effects and maintenance allowance would 

not  make  her  liable  for  the  charge  of  kidnapping 

punishable under section 363, P.P.C. 

It would not be out of place to mention here that the 

criminal Court or the police station are not the competent 

and proper forums for resolution of any dispute between 

the  parents  of  the  minor  arising  out  of  matrimonial  life 

particularly touching hizanat and custody of the minor. I 

am  supported  in  my  view  by  the  case-law  laid  down  in 

Bashir Ahmad VS The State 1971 PCr. LJ Lahore 252 and 

Ahmad  Nawaz  and  three  others  VS  The  State  PLD  1968 

Lahore 97.”  

9.   

The complainant in the FIR had, admittedly, given the custody of 

the minors to their maternal uncle, and he knew that they were in the custody 

of the mother. In such circumstances, by no stretch of the imagination could it 

be  construed  that  refusal  to  handover  the  custody  to  the  Father  would 

constitute  an  offence  punishable  under  section  363  of  PPC.  Moreover,  the 

complainant, being an official of the highest Constitutional Court, ought to 

have known that the law provides for settling disputes relating to custody of 

minors by approaching a Guardian Court. It is also noted that a suit for the 

custody of minors was filed by the Mother under the Guardian and Wards 

Act, 1890, in the Court of learned Civil Judge/Guardian Judge, Multan on 09-

 
 
  
7                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

02-2015.  On  the  same  date  an  order  was  also  passed  granting  ad-interim 

injunction in favour of the Mother. It was on the same date that a complaint 

was filed by the Father for registration of a criminal case. The Investigating 

Officer  present in  the  Court also appears  to  be  aware that  a  criminal  case 

cannot be registered,  when it is obvious from the complaint that it relates to a 

purely  family  dispute,  particularly  the  custody  of  minors.  In  these 

circumstances, there is force in the argument of the learned counsel for the 

mother/respondent that it would reasonably give rise to the apprehension that 

the father, being an employee of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan, is 

using his influence. This was not a case in which the concerned officials ought 

to have converted the complaint into a criminal case by registering the FIR. 

The non application of mind and the officials acting in a mechanical manner is 

obvious.   

10.  

This Court is conscious of the settled law relating to the scope and 

extent of the powers to be exercised by this Court under Article 199 of the 

Constitution  by  way  of  quashment  of  a  criminal  case.  In  this  regard,  the 

principles of law, as enunciated and laid down by the august Supreme Court, 

are well settled by now and may be summarized as follows:-    

i) 

The High Court is not vested with the power to quash an FIR under 

Section 561-A of Cr.P.C. on the grounds of malafide or disclosing 

a civil liability. 

ii) 

Resort to the provisions of Section 561-A of Cr.P.C. or Article 199 

of the Constitution for quashing a criminal case is an extraordinary 

remedy, which can only be granted in exceptional circumstances. 

iii)  As  a  general  rule  powers  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution 

cannot be substituted for the trial, nor can any deviation be made 

from the normal course of law. 

 
 
 
 
 
8                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

iv) 

The consideration to be kept in view for quashment of a criminal 

case is whether the continuance of the proceedings before the trial 

Court would be a futile exercise, wastage of time and abuse of the 

process of the Court, and whether an offence on the admitted facts 

is made out or not. 

v) 

The exercise of powers and jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 

Constitution is discretionary in nature, however, the same are to be 

exercised in good faith, fairly, justly and reasonably, having regard 

to all relevant circumstances. 

vi)  While  considering  quashment  of  a  criminal  case  in  exercise  of 

powers  vested  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  the  High 

Court is required to take into consideration the various alternate 

remedies available to a petitioner before a trial Court,  inter alia, 

under Sections 249-A and 265-K of Cr.P.C. 

vii)  Besides the above, the other alternate remedies available under the 

law  have  been  enumerated  by  the  august  Supreme  Court in  the 

case of ‘Col. Shah Sadiq VS Muhammad Ashiq and others’ [2006 

SCMR 276] as follows.-  

a.  To  appear  before  the  Investigating  Officer to  prove  their 

innocence. 

b.  To  approach  the  competent  higher  authorities  of  the 

Investigation  Officer  having  powers  vide  section  551  of 

Cr.P.C. 

c.  After  completion  of  the  investigation,  the  Investigation 

Officer has to submit the case to the concerned Magistrate, 

and the concerned Magistrate has the power to discharge 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

them  under  section  63  of  the  Cr.P.C.  in  case  of  their 

innocence. 

d.  In case he finds the respondents innocent, he would refuse 

to take cognizance of the matter. 

e.  Rule 24.7 of the Police Rules of 1934 makes a provision for 

cancellation  of  cases  during  the  course  of  investigation 

under the orders of the concerned Magistrate. 

f.  There are then remedies which are available to the accused 

person who claims to be innocent and who can seek relief 

without going through the entire length of investigation. 

viii)  A criminal case registered cannot be quashed after the trial Court 

has  taken  cognizance  of  a  case,  as  the  law  has  provided  an 

aggrieved  person  with  efficacious  remedies  for  seeking  a 

premature acquittal, if there  is  no  probability  of  conviction  or  a 

case is not made out. 

ix) 

Prior  to  exercising  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution, the High Court has to be satisfied that the trial Court 

has neither passed an order nor any process issued. 

x) 

Courts  exercise  utmost  restraint  in  interfering  with  or  quashing 

investigations  already  in  progress,  pursuant  to  statutory  powers 

vested in the police or other authorities. Courts do not interfere in 

the  matters  within  the  power  and  jurisdiction  of  the  police, 

particularly when the law imposes on them the duty to inquire or 

investigate. 

11.  

The above principles of law have been enunciated and laid down in 

the cases of ‘Director General, Anti Corruption Establishment, Lahore and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

others VS Muhammad Akram Khan and others’ [PLD 2013 SC 401], ‘Rehmat 

Ali and others VS Ahmad Din and others’ [1991 SCMR 185], ‘Miraj Khan 

VS Gul Ahmed and 3 others’ [2000 SCMR 122], ‘Muhammad Mansha VS 

Station House Officer, Police Station City, Chiniot, District Jhang and others’ 

[PLD  2006  SC  598]  ‘Col.  Shah  Sadiq  VS  Muhammad  Ashiq  and  others’  

[2006  SCMR  276],  ‘Emperor  v.  Kh.  Nazir  Ahmad’  [AIR  1945  PC  18]  & 

‘Shahnaz  Begum  VS  The  Hon’ble  Judges  of  the  High  Court  of  Sind  and 

Baluchistan and another’ [PLD 1971 SC 677]. 

12.  

In the instant case, the facts are unequivocally admitted, and on 

this Courts query, it was reiterated by the Father that he had given the custody 

to  the  maternal  uncle  of  the  minors  with  consent,  and that thereafter  they 

remained  with  the  petitioner/mother. It  is  further  admitted  that  he  has  not 

approached  a  Court  having  Competent Jurisdiction to  decide  his  grievance 

relating to the custody of the children/minors while the petition of the Mother 

was  pending before the learned Guardian Court in Multan.   

13.  

In  the  light  of  the  above  principles  enunciated  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court,  and  the  statement  of  the  Investigating  Officer  that  no 

proceedings by way of framing a charge or submission of report under Section 

173 of Cr. P. C have taken place before the Trial Court, this Court has no 

hesitation in concluding that the instant case comes within the exception to the 

general rule that courts neither interfere in investigations nor quash a criminal 

case. The W.P.No.475/2015 is, therefore, allowed and FIR No.93/2015 dated 

09-02-2015 is hereby quashed.  

14.  

Next, this Court will take up Crl. Misc. No.02/H/15. The petition 

has been filed under Section 491 Cr. P. C. The provisions are reproduced as 

follows:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
11                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

“Power  to  issue  direction  of  the  nature  of  a  ‘habeas 

corpus’ (1)[Any High Court] may, whenever it thinks fit, direct---- 

(a) 

that  a  person  within  the  limits  of  its  [appellate  criminal 

jurisdiction] be brought up before the Court to be dealt with 

according to law; 

(b) 

that a person illegally or improperly detained in public or 

private custody within such limits be set at liberty; 

(c) 

that a prisoner detained in any jail situate within such limits 

be  brought  before  the  Court  to  be  there  examined  as  a 

witness in any matter pending or to be inquired into in such 

Court; 

(d) 

that  a  prisoner  detained  as  aforesaid  be  brought  before  a 

Court martial or any Commissioners * * * for trial or to be 

examined  touching  any  matter  pending  before  such  Court 

martial or Commissioners respectively; 

(e) 

that  a  prisoner  within  such  limits  be  removed  from  one 

custody to another for the purpose of trial; and  

(f) 

that the body of a defendant within such limits be brought in 

on the Sheriff’s return of cepi corpus to a writ of attachment.  

[(1A)  The  High  Court  may,  by  general  or  special  order 

published in the official Gazette, direct that all or any of its powers 

specified in clauses (a) and (b) of subsection (1) shall, subject to 

such  conditions,  if  any,  as  may  be  specified  in  the  order,  be 

exercisable also by- 

(a) 

(b) 

a Sessions Judge; or 

an Additional Sessions Judge,  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

within the territorial limits of Sessions Division.] 

(2) 

[The High Court] may, from time to time, frame rules to 

regulate the procedure in cases under this section. 

[(3) 

Nothing in this section applies to persons detained under 

any law providing for preventive detention.]”  

15.  

The perusal of the above provisions clearly shows that the same 

are attracted in the case of habeas corpus. Habeas corpus petitions are filed 

when the whereabouts of the person for whom the relief is being sought are 

not known, and one of the conditions mentioned in the above provision is 

satisfied.  The  scope  and  principles  for  exercising  powers  and  jurisdiction 

under section 491 Cr. P.C, when the case involves the custody of minors, have 

been affirmed by the Supreme Court in “Mst Nadia Parveen VSMst Almas 

Noreen” PLD 2012 SC 758, and the same may be summarized as follows:- 

(i). 

The matter of custody of minor children can be brought before a 

High Court under section 491 Cr.P.C  only if, (a) the children are 

of  very  tender  ages, (b) they  have  quite recently  been  snatched 

away from lawful custody and (c) there is a real urgency in the 

matter.  

(ii).  Even if the above conditions are fulfilled the High Court may only 

regulate the interim custody leaving the matter of final custody to 

be determined by a Guardian Court.  

(iii).  The  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  in  such  matters  is  to  be 

exercised sparingly and in exceptional and extraordinary cases of 

real urgency, keeping in view that the Guardian Judge is vested 

with the requisite powers. 

 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
13                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

For  the  above  principles  reference  was  made  to  “Nisar  Muhammad  and 

another VS Sultan Zari”, PLD 1997 SC 852, “Muhammad Javed Umrao VS 

Miss Uzma Vahid”, 1988 SCMR 1891, “Naziha Ghazali VS The State and 

another”, 2001 SCMR 1782 and “Mst. Khalida Perveen vs Muhammad Sultan 

Mehmood”, PLD 2004 SC 1.  

16.  

On the admitted facts and the averments made in the petition, it is 

obvious that the conditions are not satisfied. There is no urgency, let alone 

real urgency. The minors were not snatched from the custody of the Father, 

nor  are  the  former  of  such  tender  ages  as  would  persuade  this  Court  to 

exercise its powers and jurisdiction under section 491 Cr.P.C.  In the instant 

case the petitioner was fully aware that the minors were in the custody of the 

natural guardian i.e. the Mother. It is further noted that the prayer sought in 

the petition is in the nature of seeking custody of the minors from their natural 

guardian i.e. the Mother. The petitioner, being a responsible official of the 

Supreme  Court,  is  expected to  have  known  that  the  proper  course  was  to 

approach  a  competent  Guardian  Court  having  jurisdiction,  rather  than 

invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 491 Cr. P. C. In any case, 

habeas corpus is neither relevant in the facts and circumstances of the case, 

nor can Section 491 Cr.P.C  substitute the powers of a Competent Guardian 

Court under the provisions of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890. There is no 

merit in the petition nor is it maintainable.  

17.  

The Minors were also produced in compliance with this Court’s 

order dated 16-2-2015. It was observed that they were comfortable with their 

natural guardian/mother. It was inquired from them whether they wanted to go 

with the Father or the Mother, and they vehemently insisted to go with their 

mother. Both the parents are admittedly remarried. A suit for the custody of 

the Minors is pending before the Guardian Court at Multan. At one stage the 

parties agreed before this Court that they shall approach the Guardian Court at 

 
  
 
14                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

Islamabad.  However,  as  this  matter  is  not  before  this  Court,  therefore,  the 

parties are left to decide for themselves and shall be at liberty to proceed in 

accordance with law. It is expected that both, Mother and the Father, will keep 

the welfare and interests of the Minors supreme and resolve their disputes in a 

civilized manner and in accordance with the law. As an interim arrangement 

the Minors shall remain in the custody of the Mother and shall be subject to an 

order whether interim or final, passed by a Guardian Court.     

18.  

The Crl. Misc. No.02/H/15 is, therefore, dismissed.  

19.  

On  a  final  note, this  Court  cannot  turn  a  blind  eye to the trend 

observed in several cases, wherein unwarranted references are made to the 

courts in the FIRs. In the instant case it was neither appropriate nor justified to 

have mentioned the name of the august Supreme Court in the FIR. Naming a 

Court, and holding oneself out as an employee of  a Court, certainly raises 

apprehension in the minds of the affected parties that the right to a fair trial 

would be denied in the circumstances. Ideally, neither the police officials nor 

the courts are expected to be influenced. But we live in a real world and not in 

utopia. Many  may  not  get influenced  but  some  do,  and  it  is  enough for  a 

travesty of justice if one person involved in the proceedings is prejudiced. The 

result is denial of the right to a fair trial and due process, a violation of the 

fundamental right  guaranteed  under  Article  10-A  of the  Constitution. It  is, 

therefore,  held that  unwarranted references  in  a  FIR  to  a  court  is  likely  to 

cause miscarriages of justice and is therefore illegal.      

20.  

It would be appropriate to direct that in case the name of a Court is 

to  be  mentioned  in  a  FIR,  unless  it  is  necessary,  the  permission  of  the 

respective Registrar shall be sought in writing before the registration thereof.  

 
 
 
    
 
15                                                                                                         W.P.No.475 of 2015 

21.  

The office is directed to send a copy of this order to the Inspector 

General  Police,  Islamabad  and  the  respective  Registrars  of  the  august 

Supreme Court and the Islamabad High Court.   

(ATHAR MINALLAH)             
           JUDGE       

Approved for reporting.  

Asif Mughal/* 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
