Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W. P. No.769/2019 

Amjad Mustafa Malik 

VS

Director General, 
National Accountability Bureau & 4 others 

Petitioners by 

Respondents by 

: 

: 

Mr Asad Manzoor Butt, Advocate. 
Mr Abid Jalil, Advocate. 
Mr Nauman Zafar, Advocate.  

Sardar Muzaffar A. Khan, Addl. Dy. Prosecutor 
General. 
Barrister Rizwan Ahmed, Special Prosecutor. 
Ch. Muhammad Tahir Mehmood, Asstt. Attorney 
General. 
Kh. Muhammad Farooq Mehta, Sr ASC. 
Mr Muhammad Umar Vardag, Advocate. 
Mr. Muhammad Ayub, Section Officer, M/o 
Information. 
Ch. Adil Javed, Assistant Director, PTA. 
Mr M. Naeem Ashraf, Law Officer, PTA. 
Malik Zubair, Dy. Director/I.O. NAB with record.  

Date of Hearing 

: 

18.12.2019 

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.- 

Through 

this 

consolidated 

judgment,  we  will  record  our  reasons  for  allowing  the  instant  petition 

along  with  W.P.  No.771/2019  titled  ‘Abdul  Samad  v.  Director  General, 

National Accountability Bureau & another’. Abdul Samad, son of Ghulam 

Qadir,  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Petitioner  No.1’)  and  Amjad 

Mustafa  Malik,  son  of  Ghulam  Mustafa  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Petitioner  No.2’),  have  sought  judicial  review  of  executive  power 

whereby it is intended to deprive them of the right to liberty. They have 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 2 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

questioned the validity of actions taken by the Chairman of the National 

Accountability Bureau (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Bureau’), who has 

ordered their arrest in the exercise of power vested under section 24 read 

with  section  18(e)  of  the  National  Accountability  Ordinance,  1999 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Ordinance of  1999’).  Pursuant  to  the 

said orders, their respective warrants of arrest have been issued. It is not 

an  ordinary  case  regarding  the  seeking  of  anticipatory  bail.  The 

constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 has been invoked, 

raising  questions  of  paramount  public  importance  in  the  context  of 

fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution. The fundamental 

question  raised  in  these  petitions  is  the  scope  of  power  vested  in  the 

Chairman of the Bureau to order the arrest of a person under section 24 

read with section 18(e) of the Ordinance of 1999. Whether the said power 

is  absolute,  unfettered  and  unquestionable  or  is  to  be  strictly 

circumscribed  by  the  purpose  expressly  described  in  the  relevant 

provisions. Moreover, whether the exercise of this power is subject to the 

settled  principles  relating  to  the  exercise  of  executive  authority  and 

discretion.  

2. 

The 

Petitioners 

are  working 

in 

the 

Pakistan 

Telecommunication  Authority 

(hereinafter 

referred 

to  as 

the 

‘Authority’).  At  the  relevant  time,  Petitioner  No.1  was  appointed  as 

Member (Compliance and Enforcement) i.e. from May 2015 till May 2018. 

He is currently posted as Director General (Strategy and Development). 

Petitioner  No.2  is  working  as  Director  (Wireless)  and  he  reports  to  the 

Director  General  (Licensing).  According  to  the  written  report  filed  on 

 
 
 
 
-: 3 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

behalf of the Bureau, a source report was received and pursuant thereto 

the Chairman of the Bureau, vide letter dated 16.10.2018, had authorized 

investigation in the exercise of powers conferred under the Ordinance of 

1999. It appears that an inquiry was not conducted prior to authorizing 

the investigation. The investigation pertains to approval granted in favour 

of M/S Warid Telcom (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Cellular Company’) 

on  04.12.2014  to  use  4G/LTE  (1800  MHz)  on  its  already  acquired 

spectrum.  It  is  alleged  that  by  allowing  the  Cellular  Company  to  use 

4G/LTE technology on its acquired existing spectrum, the Authority had 

extended  an  illegal  benefit  which  had  caused  a  purported  loss  of  US  $ 

516  million.  It  is  the  case  of  the  Bureau  that  the  said  approval  was 

granted  in  violation  of  the  laws  which  govern  the  Authority  and  the 

policies  framed  by  the  Government  of  Pakistan  from  time  to  time.  The 

Bureau  has  annexed  a  document  at  page  22  (A/2)  with  its  written 

report/comments  which  refers  to  and  names  a  known  dignitary  of  a 

foreign  State  as  owner  of  the  Cellular  Company  and  the  latter's 

relationship  with  a  political  figure  of  Pakistan.  In  order  to  properly 

appreciate the controversy in hand, it would be beneficial to refer to some 

other relevant facts in more detail.   

3. 

The  Authority  has  been  established  under  section  3  of  the 

Pakistan  Telecommunication  (Re-Organization)  Act  1996  (hereinafter 

referred to as the ‘Act of 1996’). The functions of the Authority and its 

powers  are  described  in  sections  4  and  5  respectively.  The  grant  and 

renewal of license for telecommunication system / service and its terms 

and conditions exclusively vests in the Authority. Likewise, the function 

to receive an application for the use of radio frequency spectrum and then 

 
 
 
 
-: 4 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

to refer it to the Frequency Allocation Board (hereinafter referred to as 

the  ‘Board’)  for  assigning  spectrum  is  also  within  the  domain  of  the 

Authority. The Authority is empowered to modify licenses, or the terms 

and conditions thereof, as has been described under sections 21 and 22 

of  the  Act  of  1996.  The  Authority  was,  therefore,  unambiguously 

established as a regulator for all matters  relating to telecommunication 

services  and  telecommunication  systems.  The  Board  is  constituted  in 

exercise of powers conferred under section 42 of the Act of 1996 by the 

Federal Government through a notification required to be published in the 

official gazette. The powers and functions of the Board are described in 

section 43 i.e. having exclusive authority to allocate and assign portions 

of  radio 

frequency  spectrum  to  the  Government,  providers  of 

telecommunication  services  and  telecommunication  systems,  radio  and 

television broadcasting operations, public and private wireless operators 

and  others.  Sub  section  (4)  of  section  43  provides  that  in  order  to 

exercise  its  powers,  the  Board  shall  be  guided  by  the  applicable 

recommendations of the International Telecommunication Union or any 

of  its  standing  committees  or  organizations,  including  the  International 

Consultative 

Committee 

on 

Telecommunication, 

International 

Consultative  Committee  on  Radio, 

the  International  Frequency 

Registration  Board  and  other  similar  international  organizations.  Sub 

section (5) of section 43 provides that every application for the allocation 

and assigning of radio frequency spectrum shall, in the first instance, be 

made  to  the  Authority  which  shall,  after  such  inquiry  as  it  may  deem 

appropriate,  refer  the  application  to  the  Board  within  thirty  days  from 

receipt thereof. Sub section (6) of section 43 further explicitly provides 

that on receipt of an application under sub section (5), the Board shall 

 
 
-: 5 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

classify  the  telecommunication  services  and  may  allocate  or  assign 

specific 

frequencies 

to 

the  applicant.  The  expression 

‘Federal 

Government’ has been expressly defined in clause (fa) of section 2 of the 

Act  of  1996  as  meaning  'the  Federal  Government  in  the  Ministry  of 

Information Technology and Telecommunication Division, unless for any 

specific purpose specified otherwise by notification in the official gazette, 

notification  or  amendment  in  the  Rules  of  Business,  1973'.  Section  8 

empowers  the  Federal  Government  to  issue  policy  directives  to  the 

Authority  as  and  when  it  considers  necessary  on  matters  relating  to 

telecommunication  policy  referred  to  in  sub  section  (2)  and  that  such 

directives  are  binding  on  the  Authority.  The  latter,  therefore,  has  the 

status of a regulator and all entities governed under the Act of 1996 are 

bound to follow the policy directives issued by the Federal Government. 

The  Federal  Government  framed  the  De-Regulation  Policy  for  the 

telecommunication sector which was approved by the Federal Cabinet on 

January  10,  2004  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘De-Regulation 

Policy’).  The  Federal  Government,  in  order  to  give  effect  to  its  De-

Regulation  Policy,  framed  the  Mobile  Cellular  Policy,  dated  28.01.2004 

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Cellular Policy’). The objects of the said 

policy mentioned therein are reproduced as follows.- 

Mobile Policy Objectives: 

In  addition  to  the  broad  Telecom  sector  objectives,  as 

outlined  in  the  Telecom  Deregulation  Policy,  the  following 

objectives  specific  to  mobile  cellular  sector  are expected to 

be achieved through this policy: 

i. 

Promotion of efficient use of radio spectrum; 

ii. 

Increased  choice  for  customers  of  Cellular  mobile 

services at competitive and affordable price; 

 
 
 
 
-: 6 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

iii. 

Private investment in the cellular mobile sector; 

iv.  Recognition  of  the  rights  and  obligations  of  mobile 

cellular operators; 

v. 

Fair  competition  amongst  mobile  and  fixed  line 

operators; 

vi.  An effective and well defined regulatory regime that is 

consistent with international best practices.  

4. 

The expression ‘scarce resource’ is defined in clause (qc) of 

section 2 of the Act of 1996 as meaning radio frequency spectrum, right 

of  way  and  numbering.  Clause  5.1  of  the  Cellular  Policy  expressly 

provides that the Authority will issue new national "technology neutral" 

Mobile  Cellular  Licenses  for  a  tenure  of  15  years  each.  It  has  been 

provided that the Government of Pakistan had decided to grant 15 years 

new "technology neutral" national mobile cellular licenses. The relevant 

portion is reproduced as follows.- 

The  standards  employed  for  licensed  blocks  of 
Spectrum 
recognized 
conform 
international standards 

shall 

to 

resulted 

The  standardization  process  has 
in  some 
technologies being associated with specific spectrum. To date 
GSM  and  CDMA  are  two  such  technologies.  In  such 
circumstances  the  cellular  License  should  be  linked  to  the 
associated  recognized  standard.  Where  more  than  one 
standard could be adopted in any given block of spectrum the 
licensee  shall  have  the  right  to  choose  which  standard  to 
employ. 

5. 

Pursuant  to  the  said  policy,  the  allocation  of  spectrum  was 

offered  to  interested  eligible  entities  and  in  this  regard  a  competitive 

transparent  process  was  conducted  through  auction.  The  Cellular 

Company  was  one  of  the  successful  bidders  and  consequently  it  was 

granted  a  "technology  neutral"  license  on  26.05.2004  for  a  period  of 

fifteen years against payment of fee of US $ 291 million.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 7 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

6. 

In  2013  the  Federal  Government,  vide 

letter  dated 

11.09.2013,  constituted  an  Advisory  Committee  for  auction  of  the 

available spectrum. The terms of reference regarding auction of spectrum 

for  next  generation  mobile  services  were  also  publically  notified.  The 

policy  directives  in  this  regard  were  also  issued  by  the  Federal 

Government  vide  letter,  dated  07.10.2013.  The  Authority,  through  a 

transparent  process,  appointed  a  consultant  for  conducting  the  auction 

proceedings 

i.e.  M/s  Value  Partners  Management  Consultancy 

(hereinafter referred to  as  the ‘Consultant’).  The  relevant  information 

regarding the bidding process was made public and was duly displayed 

on  the  website  of  the  Authority.  Through  letter,  dated  10.01.2014, 

addressed to the then Minister of State of the Federal Government, five 

cellular service providers including the Cellular Company, informed that 

one  Mr.  Ricardo  Tavares  had  been  appointed  as  a  facilitator  on  their 

behalf.  In  response,  the  Federal  Government,  vide  letter  dated 

17.02.2014, replied  that  the  spectrum auction  will  be  conducted  in  the 

most transparent manner and that interested parties may coordinate with 

the Authority and the Consultant. The bids were received till 14.04.2014 

and on conclusion of the auction proceedings, the names of the successful 

bidders  were  declared  on  17.04.2014.  The  Cellular  Company  did  not 

submit its bid nor did it participate in the auction proceedings. The highest 

bid  received  for  the  use  and  allocation  of  the  spectrum  was  US  $  591 

million.  The  Bureau,  in  its  written  report,  has  acknowledged  that, 

according to the Cellular Company it had not participated in the auction 

proceedings  because  its  existing  spectrum  had  sufficient  capacity  to 

employ  4G/LTE  technology.  The  Cellular  Company  filed  an  application 

before  the  Authority  for  permission  to  use  4G/LTE  technology  on  its 

 
 
 
-: 8 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

existing  spectrum  and  further  requested  that  its  license  be  amended 

accordingly. It appears from the written report submitted by the Bureau 

that  the  Authority,  after  processing  the  said  application,  granted 

permission on 04.12.2014 to use 4G/LTE (1800 MHz) technology on the 

already acquired spectrum. After expiry of the initial term of fifteen years, 

the license of the Cellular Company was duly renewed in 2019 and on the 

same terms and conditions, which are alleged to have been the result of 

corruption  and  corrupt  practices.  The  renewal  was  pursuant  to  the 

payment  of  a  fee  which  was  determined  by  the  Federal  Government 

through a policy directive issued under the Act of 1996.  

7. 

In a nutshell, it is the case of the Bureau that the permission 

granted  by  the  Authority  to  the  Cellular  Company  on  04.12.2014, 

regarding use of the next generation technology on its existing spectrum 

and  consequently  amending  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  license, 

constitutes  the  offence  of  misuse  of  authority.  In  the  opinion  of  the 

Investigating  Officer  such  permission  could  not  have  been  granted 

without an auction. In other words the Cellular Company, in order to use 

the next generation technology, was required to participate in the auction 

and that additional spectrum ought to have been acquired. It is evident 

from  the  written  report  submitted  by  the  Bureau  and  the  arguments 

advanced at the Bar that the Investigation Officer has formed an opinion 

on the basis of his own interpretation of the provisions of the Act of 1996, 

the  Cellular  Policy  and  other  directives  of  the  Federal  Government  and 

has  thus  concluded  that  the  permission  granted  by  the  Authority  was 

illegal  and  constituted  the  offence  of  misuse  of  authority,  which  is 

punishable under the Ordinance of 1999. There is another interesting and 

 
 
 
 
-: 9 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

relevant aspect of the case in hand. It is obvious from the record that the 

Board  had  taken  up  the  issue  regarding  interpretation  of  the  legal 

provisions with the Federal Government vide letter, dated 10-05-2018. 

In response, the Federal Government, vide letter dated 19-07-2018, had 

explained the essential features of the Cellular Policy and had highlighted 

the meaning of the expression ‘technology neutral’. The relevant portions 

of  the  said  letter  for  adjudication  of  the  controversy  before  us  are 

reproduced as follows.- 

“MoIT  finds  the  contents  of  the  above  mentioned  letter 

against some of the longest standing settled principles of the 

GoPs telecom sector policies.” 

“In  light  of  Cabinet  approved  Deregulation  Policy  2003  and 

Cellular Mobile Policy 2004 “Technology Neutrality” means 

that  any  available  technology  to  date  can  be  employed  to 

provide a specified service within the scope of the License of 

telecom  Licenses  in  the  assigned  frequency  band,  which  is 

still  applicable  as  carried  forward  under  the  current 

Telecommunication  Policy  2015  as  formulated  after  more 

than  a  year  of  deliberations  and  stakeholder  consultations 

including FAB. FAB management, in the referenced letter, has 

itself  admitted  the  success  of  stable  policy  based  on 

international best practices which is evident from the growth 

of the sector and widespread coverage of affordable service 

for the users. With this in view such a position by the ED FAB 

against well settled policy principle of “Technology Neutrality” 

is  questionable  and  contrary  to  FAB’s  earlier  stance  since 

2003/4  and  have  never  been  brought  by  ED  FAB  to  the 

relevant for a like Auction Advisory Committees setup by the 

Federal  Government  for  devising  policies  for  the  various 

spectrum  Auctions  conducted  in  2014,  2016  and  2017,  of 

 
 
 
 
-: 10 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

which  ED  FAB  -----.  Detailed  analysis  of  MoIT  is  placed  at 

Annex III.” 

“Keeping  the  above  listed  institutional  mandates  in  view, 

MoITT is of the opinion that FAB Board is not the right forum 

for  deliberation  on  the  settled  core  principles  of  Telecom 

Policy. However, it would be appropriate that the FAB Board 

looks  into  the  matter  of  FAB  management  raising  such 

objections without even the Boards approval and against the 

stipulated  provisions  of  the  Rules  of  Business.  As  per 

assigned  mandates  under  the  Pakistan  Telecommunication 

(re-Organization)  Act  1996  and  RoB  19736  as  mentioned 

above, this Ministry considers that being a policy matter the 

issue be dealt at the level of the MoIT&T where by default the 

consultation would duly include FAB, for better understanding 

of perspectives”.  

8. 

The  Bureau,  in  disregard  to  the above  interpretation  of  the 

Federal Government relating to its policy, and for reasons best known to 

it, requested the Ministry of Defence, Government of Pakistan, vide letter 

dated 04-09-2018, to appoint an expert to assist the Investigating Officer 

during the course of investigations. The Ministry of Defence, vide letter 

dated  07-09-2018,  requested  the  Board  to  nominate  an  expert.  It  is 

apparent from the record that the Board was an interested party because 

it  had  challenged  the  authority  of  the  regulator  and  the  Federal 

Government.  Consequently  the  Board,  vide  letter  dated  17-09-2018, 

nominated one of its officials, namely, Muhammad Khalid Noor, Director 

General (SP&M/N&IC) as an expert to assist the Investigating Officer. The 

dispute regarding the interpretation of the provisions of the Act of 1996, 

the Cellular Policy and powers of the Authority and Board appear to have 

been raised by the latter in his report, copy whereof has been attached 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 11 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

with the comments filed by the Bureau. The official of the Board who was 

nominated as a purported expert supported the contention of the latter 

as is obvious from his report. According to assertions mentioned in the 

written  report  submitted  by  the  Bureau,  the  Petitioners  are  one  of  the 

accused. The entire report does not disclose or attribute any role to the 

Petitioners nor is there any allegation that they had, directly or indirectly, 

made illegal gains or benefited in any manner. There is nothing on record 

to even remotely suggest the involvement of criminal intent or motive. 

The written report is self contradictory and the entire case of the Bureau 

is solely based on the interpretation of the provisions of the Act of 1996, 

the  Cellular  Policy  and  policy  directives  issued  by  the  Federal 

Government.  When  the  Investigating  Officer  was  asked  whether  the 

petitioners  had  been  cooperating  during  the  investigation  proceedings, 

he  unambiguously  answered  in  the  affirmative.  He  was  asked  why 

detention  or  arrest  of  the  Petitioners  is  required  when  the  case  was 

entirely based on the examination of official documents and, more so, on 

the interpretation of statutory provisions, notified policies of the Federal 

Government  and  other  documents  which  are  already  in  his possession. 

He was unable to give any plausible reason for depriving the Petitioners 

of their constitutional rights, except expressing an apprehension that the 

latter could either abscond or tamper with the documents.   

9. 

The learned counsels for the Petitioners have been heard at 

length. It is their case that the Investigating Officer and the Chairman of 

the Bureau are exercising the power to order the arrest of the Petitioners 

arbitrarily. They have stressed that the powers vested in the Chairman 

of the Bureau to order the arrest of the Petitioners is neither unbridled 

 
 
 
 
-: 12 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

nor unfettered and cannot be used to achieve any purpose other than the 

object for which the legislature has empowered them in this regard. They 

have strenuously argued that the dispute is between the Board and the 

Authority  and  no  offence  has  been  committed.  It  is  their  case  that  the 

cellular policy directives issued by the Federal Government from time to 

time  are  being  grossly  misinterpreted  and  that  there  is  not  an  iota  of 

incriminating  material  collected  during  the  investigation  which  would 

even remotely indicate mens rea on the part of the Petitioners so as to 

justify  their  arrest.  The  arrest  of  the  Petitioners  in  the  facts  and 

circumstances of this case would be in violation of their constitutionally 

guaranteed  rights  and  the  principles  relating  to  fair  trial.  They  have 

alleged  that  the  Petitioners  are  being  pressurized  by  the  Investigating 

Officer to enter into a plea bargain or to persuade the Cellular Company 

to do so.  

10. 

The  learned  Additional  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  has 

appeared along with the Investigating Officer of the Bureau. They were 

not able to give a reasonable explanation for restricting the Petitioners’ 

right to liberty by arresting them. They have argued on the basis of their 

own interpretation of the Cellular Policy and provisions of the Act of 1996 

that the permission granted in favour of the Cellular Company amounted 

to  misuse  of  authority.  They  have referred  to  various  provisions  of  the 

Cellular Policy and other official documents in support of the contention 

that permission to use an available technology on the existing spectrum 

could not have been granted and that it was mandatory for the Cellular 

Company to have participated in the auction held by the Authority or seek 

consent  from  the  Board.  The  documents  which  they  have  referred  to 

 
 
 
 
-: 13 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

relate  to  the  auction  of  spectrum,  having  no  nexus  with  granting 

permission to a licensee to employ an available technology on its already 

acquired spectrum. The Investigating Officer explicitly stated that he did 

not  accept  the  interpretation  of  the  expression  'Technology  Neutral' 

described  in  the  letter,  dated  19-07-2018,  issued  by  the  Ministry  and 

defined in the Act of 1996 as meaning the Federal Government.   

11. 

The  learned  counsels  for  the  Petitioners  and  the  learned 

Additional Deputy Prosecutor General of the Bureau have been heard and 

the record perused with their able assistance.  

12. 

The Petitioners have invoked the extraordinary discretionary 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Constitution’)  seeking  judicial  review  of  the  power  exercised  by  the 

Chairman of the Bureau under clause (a) of section 24 read with section 

18(e)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  whereby  the  latter  has  ordered  their 

arrest.  It  is  the  case  of  the  Petitioners  that  the  power  vested  under 

section  24  read  with  section  18(e)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  is  not 

absolute, unbridled or unfettered nor can it be exercised arbitrarily and 

unnecessarily  for  achieving  any  purpose  other  than  the  one  explicitly 

mentioned ibid. It is their case that unnecessary and arbitrary exercise 

of  power  to  order  their  arrest,  if  executed,  would  gravely  violate  their 

fundamental  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution,  besides  causing 

irreversible damage to their repute. The questions which have arisen for 

our consideration are (i) whether the power to order arrest of an accused 

under  section  24  read  with  section  18(e)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  is 

unfettered and absolute (ii) if the answer is in the negative, then whether 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 14 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

the exercise of this power is subject to the purpose expressly mentioned 

by the legislature and the constitutionally guaranteed rights (iii) whether 

the principle of presumption of innocence is attracted in the case of an 

accused who has not been convicted under the Ordinance of 1999 (iv) in 

case  the  answer  to  the  last  question  is  in  the  affirmative,  then  how 

protection of the fundamental rights guaranteed  under the Constitution 

could simultaneously be balanced while achieving the public interest and 

object for which the Ordinance of 1999 has been enacted (v) whether the 

principles of ‘proportionality’ and ‘unreasonableness’ are relevant in this 

context  and,  lastly,  the  principles  and  law  enunciated  by  the  superior 

courts  regarding  deprivation  of  liberty.  In  order  to  answer  these 

questions, which are definitely of paramount public importance, because 

they involve the likelihood of restricting the constitutionally guaranteed 

fundamental rights, it would be beneficial to survey the provisions of the 

Ordinance  of  1999,  the  principles  enunciated  by  the  superior  courts 

regarding  power  to  arrest,  the  constitutional  rights  which  are  affected 

and the principles adopted by constitutional courts for the judicial review 

of executive power. 

The Ordinance of 1999.   

13. 

The  Ordinance  of  1999  was  enacted  with  the  object  and 

purpose of providing effective measures for the detection, investigation, 

prosecution  and  speedy  disposal  of  cases  involving  corruption,  corrupt 

practices, misappropriation of property, kickbacks, commissions and for 

matters connected and ancillary or incidental thereto. Section 3 gives an 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 15 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

overriding effect to the provisions of the Ordinance of 1999 and provides 

that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the provisions 

ibid  shall  have  effect.  Section  5  defines  various  expressions.  Section  9 

describes  offences  while  section  10  prescribes  the  punishment  for 

corruption  and  corrupt practices.  The  maximum  punishment  prescribed 

in clause (a) of section 10 is rigorous imprisonment for a term which may 

extend  to  fourteen  years  with  a  fine,  while  the  assets  and  pecuniary 

resources found to be disproportionate to the known sources of income, 

acquired from funds obtained through corruption and corrupt practices, 

are liable to be forfeited. Moreover, the offences specified in the Schedule 

to the Ordinance of 1999 are punishable in the manner specified therein. 

Section  11  provides  that  the  fine  imposed  upon  conviction  shall  not  be 

less  than  the  gain  derived  by  the  accused  or  any  relative  or  associate, 

due to commission of the offence. The Chairman of the Bureau has been 

empowered  to  freeze  the  property  of  an  accused,  or  part  thereof,  if  it 

appears to the latter that there are reasonable grounds for believing that 

the accused has committed an offence. The tender of pardon is another 

extraordinary  power  of  the  Chairman  under  section  26.  Section  15 

provides for disqualification to contest an election or to hold public office 

upon conviction of an accused. The disqualification to contest elections is 

for  a  period  of  ten  years  from  the  date  the  convicted  person  has  been 

released after serving the sentence. Clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f) of section 

18  describe  the  powers  relating  to  the  inquiry  or  investigation  of  an 

offence.  A  plain  reading  of  section  18  as  a  whole  shows  that  the 

legislature, in its wisdom, has divided the proceedings into various stages 

i.e.  (i)  initiation  of  proceedings  and,  in  this  context,  formation  of  an 

opinion by the Chairman, or an officer authorized by him, has been made 

 
 
-: 16 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

as a pre-condition (ii) after the opinion has been formed, the competent 

person refers the matter for inquiry or investigation, (iii) the powers in 

relation  to  conducting  an  inquiry  and  investigation  are  expansive,  (iv) 

after  the  conclusion  of  the  inquiry  and  investigation,  the  material  and 

evidence collected is required to be placed before the Chairman, or such 

officer authorized in this behalf and the latter decides whether or not it 

would be proper and just to proceed further and, lastly, (v) the test for 

proceeding further has been expressly provided i.e. subjecting the filing 

of a Reference to sufficiency of material, which would justify doing so (vi) 

the  trial  is  exclusively  regulated  and  conducted  by  special  courts  i.e 

Accountability Courts. The legislature has expressly used the expression 

'expeditiously' in relation to the completion of an inquiry or investigation. 

Section 18(e) unambiguously confines the exercise of power to arrest an 

accused  "for  the  purposes  of  an  inquiry  or  investigation”  and  that  the 

inquiry or investigation are mandated to be completed as "expeditiously 

as  may  be  practical  and  feasible".  Likewise  statutory  safeguards  have 

been  provided  for  the  purposes  of  filing  a  Reference.  Section  18(b) 

empowers  the  Chairman,  or  an  officer  authorized  in  this  behalf,  to 

institute criminal proceedings for a frivolous complaint, if it has been filed 

with  the  intent  to  'malign  or  defame'  any  person.  This  is  an  offence 

punishable with imprisonment, which could extend to one year.  Clause 

(a)  of  section  24  empowers  the  Chairman  of  the  Bureau  to  direct  the 

arrest of an accused at 'any stage of the inquiry or investigation'. Sections 

24 and 18(e) are not exclusive of each other and thus have to be read 

together  in  the  context  of  the  power  to  arrest  an  accused.  Section  24 

further provides that, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 

Criminal  Procedure, 1898  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Cr.P.C.’)  if  a 

 
 
-: 17 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

person is arrested, then, as soon as possible, it is the statutory duty of 

the Bureau to inform him of the grounds and substance on the basis of 

which he has been arrested and to produce him before the Court within 

a  period  of  twenty  four  hours  of  arrest,  excluding  the  time  of  journey 

from  the  place  of  arrest  to  the  Court.  Moreover,  it  is  provided  in  clear 

language  that  a  person  who  has  been  arrested  shall  be  liable  to  be 

detained  in  the  custody  of  the  Bureau  for  the  'purpose  of  inquiry  and 

investigation' for a period not exceeding ninety days. The legislature has 

further  made  it  mandatory  for  the  Court  to  ensure  that  a  person  is 

remanded to custody for a period not exceeding 15 days at a time, and 

every subsequent remand is subject to the said restriction and recording 

of reasons. Section 31 and 31-A have obviously been inserted with the 

intent that the proceedings and trial are concluded rapidly, efficiently and 

with  speed.  There  is  yet  another  crucial  aspect  and  that  is  the  power 

vested in the Bureau under section 25 of the Ordinance of 1999 to refer 

a case to the Court for approval of plea bargain. This unique feature is 

not  provided  in  other  penal  statutes.  The  unambiguous  language  of 

section 25(b) makes the validity of an offer made by an accused subject 

to being 'voluntary'. It is obvious that factors such as unreasonable delay 

in  the  conclusion  of  a  trial,  incarceration  for  an  indefinite  period  or 

arbitrary  exercise  of  power  to  arrest  an  accused  may  have  serious 

consequences in relation to the ‘voluntary’ consent of the accused. The 

Ordinance of 1999, therefore, is a special law and the proceedings consist 

of various stages. The first stage is of receiving information, which can 

be in the form of a reference received from an appropriate government, 

or a complaint, or the Bureau may initiate it on its own accord. The second 

stage is to order an inquiry or investigation, while formation of an opinion 

 
 
-: 18 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

by the competent authority that it is necessary and appropriate to do so, 

is a precondition. The third stage is inquiry or investigation proceedings, 

which  are  to  be  completed  expeditiously.  The  Chairman  or  any  other 

authorized person is empowered to arrest an accused 'for the purposes 

of  inquiry  or  investigation’.  The  accused  after  arrest  can  be  kept  in 

detention by the Bureau for the purposes of inquiry or investigation for a 

period not exceeding ninety days. After inquiry or investigation has been 

completed then the next stage is of filing a reference and the decision by 

the Chairman is circumscribed by appraisal of evidence and the evidence 

placed before him/her. The last stage is that of trial. A plain reading of 

the provisions of the Ordinance of 1999 unambiguously shows that the 

power to arrest has been expressly restricted to and can only be used 'for 

the purposes of an inquiry or investigation'. It, therefore, means that the 

object of arrest is to enable the investigating officer to conduct an inquiry 

or investigation effectively and efficiently and to conclude it expeditiously. 

From the language used in the provisions it is obvious that arrest of an 

accused is not mandatory, rather it has been left to the discretion of the 

authorized  person  to  exercise  this  power,  as  and  when  necessary,  for 

achieving  the  intended  object.  It  is  an  executive  power  and  thus  its 

exercise  is  subject  to  safeguards to  prevent  abuse  or excess.  The  next 

important factor to consider is how superior courts have interpreted the 

statutory provisions which empower an executive authority to arrest an 

accused.                                       

Principles and law regarding the exercise of the power of arrest.  

 
 
 
 
-: 19 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

14. 

Crimes and offences are of different nature and categories. A 

broad  distinction  is  that  of  offences  under  the  general  law  and  those 

which  are  dealt  with  under  specially  enacted  laws.  Crimes  can  also  be 

divided  according  to  their  characteristics and  impact  such  as  violent  or 

non  violent crimes. Crimes such as murder, rape and child molestation 

are  categorized  as  offences  associated  with  violence,  while  white  collar 

crimes  are  distinct.  The  latter  are  crimes  involving  complex  and 

complicated financial or other data analysis. The perpetrators of a white 

collar  crime  are  mostly  professionals  or experts  and  they  know  how  to 

cover  up  the  crime  by  shrewdly  erasing  its  traces.  This  distinction  is  a 

relevant factor to be taken into consideration when the power of arrest is 

exercised. The precedent law in the context of power of arrest, under the 

general law and the Ordinance of 1999, needs to be examined. The apex 

Court, after exhaustively examining the provisions of Cr.P.C. in the case 

titled “Muhammad Bashir v. Station House Officer, Okara” [PLD 2007 SC 

539] has held that arrest of an accused by a police officer would not be 

justified on the sole ground that a FIR was registered and  because the 

latter  was  nominated  therein.  There  must  be  sufficient  incriminating 

material to justify deprivation of liberty. The august Supreme Court has 

explicitly  declared  arbitrary  exercise  of  power  to  arrest  as  'abuse  of 

authority'. This view has been recently reaffirmed by a larger Bench of 

the august Supreme Court in the case titled “Mst. Sughran v. The State” 

[PLD 2018 SC 595] by observing;       

“(VI) Ordinarily no person is to be arrested straightaway only 

because he has been nominated as an accused person in an 

FIR  or  in  any  other  version  of  the  incident  brought  to  the 

notice  of  the  investigating  officer  by  any  person  until  the 

 
 
 
                     
-: 20 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

investigating officer feels satisfied that sufficient justification 

exists  for  his  arrest  and  for  such  justification  he  is  to  be 

guided  by  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 

Procedure, 1898 and the Police Rules, 1934. According to the 

relevant provisions of the said Code and the Rules a suspect 

is not to be arrested straightaway or as a matter of course 

and,  unless  the  situation  on  the  ground  so  warrants,  the 

arrest is to be deferred till such time that sufficient material 

or evidence becomes available on the record of investigation 

prima  facie  satisfying  the  investigating  officer  regarding 

correctness of the allegations leveled against such suspect or 

regarding his involvement in the crime in issue.” 

15. 

The august Supreme Court in the case titled “Manzoor and 4 

others v. The State” [PLD 1972 SC 81] has emphasized the foundational 

principles for protecting liberty and avoiding unnecessary incarceration, 

and the relevant portion is reproduced as follows.- 

“It is important to remember that bail is not to be withheld 

as  a  punishment.  There  is  no  legal  or  moral  compulsion  to 

keep  people  in  jail  merely  on  the  allegation  that  they  have 

committed offences punishable with death or transportation, 

unless  reasonable  grounds  appear  to  exist  to  disclose  their 

complicity.  The  ultimate  conviction  and  incarceration  of  a 

guilty  person  can  repair  the  wrong  caused  by  a  mistaken 

relief  of  interim  bail  granted  to  him,  but  no  satisfactory 

reparation  can  be  offered  to  an  innocent  man  for  his 

unjustified  incarceration  at  any  stage  of  the  case  albeit  his 

acquittal in the long run.” 

16. 

The above elucidation of law is in the context of the general 

law  relating  to  the  power  of  arrest  but  is  equally  applicable  to  the 

Ordinance of 1999. In the case of the latter statute, the first case in which 

the  provisions  were  examined  and  interpreted  in  great  detail  by  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 21 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

august Supreme was  “Khan Asfandyar Wali and others v. Federation of 

Pakistan through Cabinet Division, Islamabad and others” [PLD 2001 SC 

607].  The  power  of  arrest  and  the  factors  required  to  be  taken  into 

consideration while exercising the discretion have been specifically dealt 

with and the observations provide guidelines in this regard. In the context 

of remand, it has been observed that it was well established that remand 

is  not  granted  in  routine  because  'the  liberty  of  citizens  must  be 

protected,  subject  to  law  and  the  Constitution'.  As  a  precondition,  the 

requirement  of  sufficiency  of  evidence  against  an  accused  must  be 

satisfied in order to exercise the power of arrest. It is implicit in the last 

four  lines  of  paragraph  250  of  the  judgment  that  justification  for  the 

arrest  is  subject  to  satisfaction  on  the  basis  of  sufficient  incriminating 

material and evidence. The nexus of the power to arrest with that of its 

express purpose is also evident from the observations. Likewise, the apex 

Court was also mindful of the conflicting fundamental rights. It has been 

held that 'it is the duty of this Court to jealously safeguard the liberty of 

the  citizens  and  to  strike  down  a  law  or  suggest  amendments  for 

protecting  the  same  or  avoiding  undue  harassment  to  them'  and  that 

'prolonged  detention  of  an  accused  without  sufficient  cause  for  such 

detention makes inroads on the personal liberty of citizens as guaranteed 

under  the  Constitution  which  cannot  be  countenanced  by  this  Court'. 

Regarding the role of the Bureau and the Chairman, it has been observed 

that  the  "Chairman  NAB  cannot  under  any  principle  of  jurisprudence 

simultaneously  assume  the  role  of  prosecutor  and  judge."  It  has  been 

unambiguously held, in the context of the executive power vested in the 

Chairman to order the arrest of an accused, that "we have no doubt in 

our  minds  that  while  exercising  powers  under  section  24(a)  of  the 

 
 
-: 22 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

impugned  Ordinance  the  Chairman  NAB  shall  consider  the  facts  and 

circumstances of each case justly, fairly, equitably in accordance with law 

and  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  section  24  A  of  the  General 

Clauses  Act,  1897  and  not  in  a  discriminatory  manner".    It  has  been 

further  held  that  "any  order  passed  by  him  is  subject  to  correction  in 

appropriate  cases  by  the  superior  courts  in  the  exercise  of  their 

Constitutional  jurisdiction".  While  enunciating  the  law  in  relation  to  the 

exercise  of  executive  power  to  order  arrest,  the  highest  Constitutional 

Court  has  highlighted  the  significance  of  safeguarding  the  liberty  of  an 

accused. It has declared it a duty of a Constitutional Court to correct any 

excess  of  this  power  and  shield  an  accused  from  its  abuse.  The 

applicability  of  the  principle  of  proportionality,  reasonableness  and  the 

need to adopt means that would cause least prejudice to the conflicting 

rights guaranteed by the Constitution is undoubtedly inherent in the law 

expounded by the august Supreme Court, regarding the power to order 

arrest under the Ordinance of 1999. 

17. 

In  the  case  titled  ‘Rafiq  Haji  Usman  v  Chairman  NAB  and 

others’ ’[2015 SCMR 1575] the august Supreme Court has emphasized 

that  existence  of  criminal  intent  and  motive  was  a  pre  requisite  for 

attracting  the  offences  under  the  Ordinance  of  1999.  The  petitioner  in 

that case was seeking bail and it was observed by the august Supreme 

Court that bail should not be withheld as a punishment. 

18. 

In  the  case  titled  ‘The  State  v  Anwar  Saifullah  Khan’  [PLD 

2016 SC 276] the august Supreme Court, in the context of the Ordinance 

of  1999,  has  observed  and  held  that  in  order  to  constitute  an  offence 

there  must  be  existence  of  mens  rea  and  the  element  of  conscious 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 23 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

knowledge  and  conscious  participation  on  the  part  of  the  accused  with 

the  object  of  obtaining  illegal  means  and  undue  benefit.  The  offences 

under  the  Ordinance  of  1999  would  be  attracted,  therefore,  if  there  is 

sufficient material regarding mens rea and the element of obtaining illegal 

means or undue benefit. The offences under the Ordinance  of 1999 are 

obviously  criminal  in  nature  which  could  result  in  conviction  following 

trial. Mere irregularity or violation of law, regardless of its seriousness, 

will not attract the offences under the Ordinance of 1999 in the absence 

of  incriminating  material  indicating  mensrea,  conscious  knowledge  and 

illegal  gain  or  benefit.  The  incriminating  material  must,  prima  facie, 

indicate criminal intent or motive.  

19. 

In  the  case  titled    “Tallat  Ishaq  VS  National  Accountability 

Bureau through Chairman and others”  [PLD 2019 S.C 112], the august 

Supreme Court has held and observed in the context of the grant of bail 

in cases relating to the Ordinance of 1999 as follows.- 

“(d) In an appropriate case through exercise of its jurisdiction 

under Article 199 of the Constitution a High Court may grant 

bail  to  an  accused  person  arrested  in  connection  with  an 

offence  under  the  National  Accountability  Ordinance,  1999 

and  section  9(b)  of  the  said  Ordinance  does  not  affect  the 

jurisdiction  of  a  High  Court  conferred  upon  it  by  the 

Constitution. The constitutional jurisdiction of a High Court is, 

however, an extraordinary jurisdiction meant to be exercised 

in  extraordinary  circumstances  and  not  in  run  of  the  mill 

cases or as a matter of course”. 

“(f)  Ordinarily  bail  is  allowed  to  an  accused  person  on  the 

ground of delay only where the delay in the trial or the period 

of custody of the accused person is shocking, unconscionable 

or  inordinate  and  not  otherwise.  The  primary  consideration 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 24 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

for grant of bail on the ground of such delay is undue hardship 

and  more  often  than  not  prima  facie  merits  of  the  case 

against  the  accused  person  are  also  looked  into  before 

admitting him to bail on the ground of delay”.  

20. 

A  larger  Bench  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  further 

elaborated the law laid down in the Tallat Ishaq case supra in [PLD 2019 

SC  445]  “Chairman  National  Accountability  Bureau,  Islamabad  through 

Prosecutor  General  Accountability,  Islamabad  VS  Mian  Muhammad 

Nawaz  Sharif  and  2  others”.  The  relevant  portion  is  reproduced  as 

follows.- 

“With reference to many a precedent case a Larger Bench of 

this Court has clarified in the case of “Tallat Ishaq v. National 

Accountability  Bureau,  etc”  (Civil  Petition  No.  632  of  2019 

decided  on  01.10.2018)  that  in  cases  under  the  National 

Accountability Ordinance, 1999 bail may be granted through 

exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction of a High Court only in 

extraordinary  circumstances  and  in  cases  of  extreme 

hardship  but  in  the  present  cases  no  such  extraordinary 

circumstance  or  hardship  had  been  referred  to  by  the  High 

Court in the impugned judgments passed by it”. 

21. 

In a recent case the august Supreme Court in the case titled 

“National Accountability Bureau through Chairman v.  Murad Arshad and 

others” [PLD 2019 S.C. 250] has held;  

“Since the promulgation of Ehtesab Act, 1997 as succeeded 

by  NAO,  1999  jurisdiction  of  Trial  Court  i.e.  Accountability 

Court  has  been  expressly  ousted  to  concede  bail,  which  in 

turn  has  burdened  all  the  High  Courts  with  load  of  bail 

application  under  Article,  199  of  the  Constitution,  1973.  As 

held  in  the  case  of  Hema  Misra  (Supra)  jurisdiction  under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 25 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

Article,  199  of  the  Constitution  has  to  be  exercised  with 

circumspection  and  caution  as  extraordinary  jurisdiction  is 

invoked  and  exercised  to  advance  the  cause  of  justice  and 

not  to  frustrate  it  or  to  defeat  the  intent  of  law.  The 

jurisdiction under Article, 199 of the Constitution, 1973 are 

therefore  to  be  exercised  to  prevent  miscarriage  of  justice 

and  abuse  of  NAO,  1999.  Such  jurisdiction  is  not  to  be 

exercised  as  a  substitute  of  power  under  sections  426,491, 

497,489  and  561-A  of  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  1898 

liberally  and  indiscriminately  converting  High  Court  into 

wholly Court of ordinary criminal jurisdiction.” 

22. 

What  transpires  from  the  above  highlighted  principles  and 

law is this; be it the general law or a special law, such as the Ordinance 

of 1999, the power to arrest an accused cannot be exercised mechanically 

and  deprivation  of  liberty  or  intrusions  into  fundamental  rights 

guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  are  required  to  be  adequately  and 

demonstrably  justified.  The  power  to  arrest  is  to  be  exercised  fairly, 

justly,  equitably  and  without  discrimination.  There  must  be  sufficient 

incriminating material to justify arresting an accused. The 'incriminating 

material' must be of the nature which, prima facie, indicates involvement 

of the accused in the commission of the offences under the Ordinance of 

1999. The material brought on record should, prima facie, show existence 

of criminal intent or motive, mens rea, element of conscious knowledge 

and  participation  with  the  object  of  obtaining  illegal  gain  or  benefit.  In 

the absence of these crucial elements, arrest of an accused would amount 

to an abuse of the power to arrest vested under the Ordinance of 1999. 

Mere  allegations  of  misuse  of  authority  would  not  justify  depriving  an 

accused of liberty because an irregularity or wrong decision sans criminal 

intent, mens rea and illegal gain or benefit does not attract the offences 

 
 
 
 
-: 26 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

under the Ordinance of 1999. The power of arrest under the Ordinance 

of  1999  cannot  be  exercised  in  an  indiscriminate,  reckless  or  wanton 

manner  because  there  are  conflicting  fundamental  rights  guaranteed 

under  the  Constitution  which  cannot  be  ignored.  The  august  Supreme 

Court  in  the  above  referred  judgments  has  used  expressions  such  as 

'unconscionable', 'extra ordinary circumstances' and 'extreme hardship' 

as  grounds  for  releasing  an  accused  on  bail.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of 

Murad Ashraf and others supra, it has held in the context of liberty of an 

accused that the purpose of exercising  jurisdiction under Article 199 of 

the  Constitution  is  to  prevent  miscarriages  of  justice  and  abuse  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1999.  It  is  obvious  that  exercising  power  of  arrest 

excessively, in an arbitrary manner and which has the effect of limiting 

the conflicting constitutionally guaranteed rights unnecessarily, definitely 

amounts  to  abuse  of  such  executive  power.  In  such  an  eventuality 

deprivation of liberty and curtailment of other rights guaranteed by the 

Constitution  would  be  unconscionable,  expose  the  person  to  extreme 

hardship and thus give rise to extraordinary circumstances. The Bureau 

misconstrues  the  judgments  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  relating  to 

release of an accused who has been arrested under the Ordinance of 1999 

as giving unfettered and  absolute power to arrest an accused. It would 

be atrocious to imagine or read into the law laid down in the above cited 

judgments  approval  of  abuse  of  the  executive  power  of  arrest.  To  the 

contrary,  the  apex  Court  in  the  above  discussed  precedent  law  has 

highlighted the importance of safeguarding the rights guaranteed by the 

Constitution against abuse of executive power to arrest an accused. What 

are those rights which are affected when an accused is arrested?  

 
 
 
-: 27 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

Rights that could be affected by arresting an  accused under the 

Ordinance of 1999 

a)  Right to be presumed innocent. 

23. 

Fair trial  is  a  constitutionally  guaranteed right  under  Article 

10 A of the Constitution. It declares that for the determination of rights 

and  obligations,  inter  alia,  in  any  criminal  charge,  an  accused  shall  be 

entitled to a fair trial and due process. The importance of fair trial cannot 

be overstated. It is a guarantee to prevent injustices and for this reason 

it has been declared as the 'golden thread' of the criminal justice system. 

It ensures that the victims as well as the accused have confidence in the 

criminal  justice  system.  Independence  and  impartiality  of  the  legal 

process is the foundation of a fair trial. As a corollary, treating a person 

as guilty before the charges are proved in a fair trial is a negation of the 

independence and impartiality of the legal process. It is for this reason 

that  the  presumption  of  innocence  is  crucial  and  its  recognition  is  a 

foundational principle of the right to a fair trial. The serious consequences 

which may follow a conviction is the reason for imposing the onerous duty 

on the State to prove a criminal  charge beyond reasonable doubt. It is 

because  of  this  crucial  presumption  that,  despite  being  alleged  of 

committing an offence and regardless of its gravity, the accused retains 

his or her fundamental rights, such as the right to liberty and inviolability 

of dignity. The intrusions into the said constitutionally guaranteed rights 

will  be  legitimate  and  lawful  if  they  can  be  adequately  justified  in  the 

context  of  the  relevant  law.  William  Blackstone,  the  eminent  English 

jurist, had stated in his book published in 1760 that it is better that ten 

guilty  persons  escape  than  that  one  innocent  suffers.  The  Prophet 

 
 
 
       
 
-: 28 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

Mohammad (peace be upon him), had said fourteen centuries ago that it 

is better to let go hundred guilty persons than to punish one  innocent. 

This saying laid the foundation of the embedded principle of presumption 

of  innocence  in  the  Islamic  criminal  jurisprudence.  The  principle  of 

presumption  of  innocence  does  not  mean  that  an  accused  becomes 

immune  from  being  arrested.  However,  it  is  one  of  the  most  relevant 

factors  which  is  required  to  be  taken  into  consideration  whenever  the 

power of arrest is exercised. The Bureau, under the Ordinance of 1999, 

has been established to achieve a paramount public interest. In order to 

enable  it  to  achieve  the  intended  object,  the  legislature  has  clothed  it 

with  extensive  powers,  the  exercise  whereof  can  have  serious 

consequences  in  relation  to  the  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  of 

liberty  and  inviolability  of  dignity.  The  power  to  order  the  arrest  of  an 

accused during inquiry or investigation can have deleterious effects, not 

only for the latter but other family members as well. In order to justify 

an  arrest  of  a  person  in  a  non  violent  crime,  who  is  presumed  to  be 

innocent, the authority empowered in this regard has to show that there 

were  no  other  less  intrusive  means  or  alternatives.  Does  an  accused 

under the Ordinance of 1999 retain the presumption of innocence before 

being convicted? It could be argued that there is no such presumption, 

keeping  in  view  section  14  ibid,  because  it  contemplates reverse  onus. 

Does this provision affect the principle of presumption of innocence at the 

stage of inquiry or investigation i.e before conviction is handed down by 

a  special  court  following  a  fair  trial?  Section  14,  for  the  first  time,  was 

interpreted  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Khan 

Asfandyar  Wali  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Cabinet 

Division,  Islamabad  and  others”  [PLD  2001  S.C.  607]  and  it  was  held 

 
 
-: 29 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

therein  that  the  prosecution  has  to  establish  the  preliminary  facts  and 

after that the onus shifts and the defence is then required to be called 

upon to disprove the presumption. For safer dispensation of justice and 

in  the  interest  of  good  governance,  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the 

context of section 14(d) has observed and held that the prosecution shall 

first  make  out  a  reasonable  case  against  the  accused  charged  under 

section  9(a)  (vi)  and  (vii)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  and,  in  case  the 

prosecution succeeds in making out a reasonable case to the satisfaction 

of the learned Accountability Court, only then it would be deemed to have 

discharged the prima facie burden of proof and, in such an eventuality, it 

would shift to the accused so that the latter rebuts the presumption of 

guilt.  The  above  principles  and  law  were  reiterated  by  the  august 

Supreme Court in the cases titled “Pir Mazhar ul Haq and others v. The 

State  through  Chief  Ehtesab  Commission,  Islamabad”  [PLD  2005  S.C. 

63],  “Syed  Qasim  Shah  v.  The  State”  [2009  SCMR  790],  “Muhammad 

Siddiqul Farooq v. The State” [2010 SCMR 198], “Hashim Babar v. The 

State”  [2010  SCMR  1697]  and  “Khalid  Aziz  V.  The  State”  [2011  SCMR 

136]. The august Supreme Court has eloquently summed up the law and 

principles in the case titled “Ghani ur Rehman v. National Accountability 

Bureau and others” [PLD 2011 S.C. 1144], relating to the onus which is 

required  to  be  discharged  by  the  prosecution  before  it  is  shifted  to  the 

accused.  It  is  thus  obvious  that,  despite  the  reverse  onus  of  proof 

contemplated  under  section  14,  the  presumption  of  innocence  of  an 

accused remains unaffected till he or she, as the case may be, has been 

handed down conviction by a learned court after the conclusion of a trial. 

We  will  discuss  next  the  relevance  of  the  principle  of  presumption  of 

innocence in the context of the legitimate exercise of power to arrest an 

 
 
-: 30 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

accused and the adequacy of justifications in making intrusions in other 

constitutionally guaranteed rights. It is thus settled law that an accused 

under the Ordinance of 1999 is presumed to be innocent till the guilt is 

proved  at  the  end  of  a  fair  trial.  An  accused  has  a  right  to  be  treated 

accordingly. 

b)  Right  to  be  treated  in  accordance  with  Article  14  by 

recognizing inviolability of Dignity  

24. 

Life is the most elevated thing amongst the creations while 

humans have been bestowed with qualities which make them superior to 

all  those  who  possess  the  gift  of  'life'.  A  human  is  distinct  from  other 

creations because of its ability to reason. The status of a human in every 

religion is that of the most exalted amongst the creations. A human has 

been  declared  as  a  vicegerent  of  the  Creator  on  earth.  The  Quran  has 

several references which recognises the elevated status of a human. It 

says  'We  have  conferred  dignity  on  the  children  of  Adam  ---'  (Al.  Isra; 

70).  It  has  declared  the  human  as  a  creation  in  the  'best  of  forms' (At 

Taghabun;3). This distinct status as a human highlights its value and thus 

the  meaning  of  the  expression  'human  dignity'.  The  preciousness  and 

sacredness of 'life' essentially is the premise for the inviolability of dignity. 

'Dignity'  thus  refers  to  recognition  of  the  worthiness  or  excellence  of  a 

human  who  has  been  created  with  superior  attributes  such  as  intellect 

and  the  ability  to  reason.  The  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights 

acknowledges  that  all  humans  have  been  born  with  equality  in  dignity 

and  rights.  The  preamble  of  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and 

Political  Rights  explicitly  recognizes  that  the  rights  described  therein 

 
 
  
 
 
-: 31 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

derive  from  the  inherent  dignity  of  the  human  person.  In  a  nutshell,  a 

human  possesses  rights  because  he  or  she  has  been  born  as  a  human 

and  its  worthiness  or  value  has  a  nexus  with  humanity.  A  human  is 

distinct from other creations because of the ability to organize, manage, 

regulate and control his or her actions and life.  The expression 'Dignity' 

inevitably  has  its  origins  in  humanity  or  the  status  of  being  a  human. 

According to the influential German philosopher Immanuel Kant, humans 

must not be used as a means to an end  but only as means in  him/her 

self. A human, therefore, deserves respect and to be treated as a human. 

Dignity, which stems from humanity, is the foundational principle for the 

autonomy  which  a  human  is  entitled  to  enjoy.  Dignity  is  abused  and 

undermined  when  the  treatment  is  contrary  to  the  recognition  of  a 

human's respect and worthiness.  This is the essence and meaning of the 

constitutional right guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution which 

has declared dignity to be inviolable and recognises it as a right in itself. 

The inherent dignity which stems from humanity is the foundation for the 

necessity to protect all other rights regardless of sex, status in society, 

race, religious beliefs or other conditions. It guarantees to every human 

the  right  to  enjoy  autonomy, respect,  self  determination  and  liberty  so 

long it does not come in conflict with the rights of others.  The inviolability 

of  dignity,  even  of  a  convicted  person,  is  breached  when  the  latter  is 

subjected to intolerable conditions of detention in a State prison. Slavery, 

bonded labour, exploitation of an employee or labourer, or humiliation in 

any other form are examples of the violation of human dignity. Parading 

suspects or convicted criminals publicly in handcuffs amounts to a breach 

of their dignity. Likewise, imposing illegal, unreasonable and unnecessary 

limits and restraints on the autonomy, self determination and freedom of 

 
 
-: 32 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

a human  would be  inconsistent with  the  right  guaranteed under Article 

14.  The  right  to  life  guaranteed  under  Article  9  would  also  become 

meaningless  if  the  inviolability  of  dignity  is  breached.  The  august 

Supreme Court in the case titled “Juris Foundation through Chairman v. 

Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Defence’ [PLD 2020 

SC 1] has held that in a living Constitution fundamental rights were to be 

liberally  interpreted  so  that  they  continued  to  embolden  freedom, 

equality,  tolerance  and  social  justice.  In  “Mst.  Laila  Qayyum  v.  Fawad 

Qayum” [PLD 2019 SC 449] it was held that compelling a lady to give a 

sample for DNA testing was an infringement of dignity. In the case titled 

“President  Balochistan  High  Court  Bar  Association  v.  Federation  of 

Pakistan  and  others”  [2012  SCMR  1958]  the  apex  Court  held  forced 

disappearances, kidnapping of citizens by the law enforcing agencies and 

sectarian  killings  as  violations  of  dignity  enshrined  in  Article 14.  In  the 

case  titled  “Government  of  N.W.F.P  v.  Dr.  Hussain  Ahmed  Haroon  and 

others” [2003 SCMR 104] incarceration of medical practitioners who were 

peacefully  protesting  for  their  rights  was  held  to  have  breached  the 

inviolability  of  dignity.  Extra  judicial  killings,  custodial  deaths,  arbitrary 

arrests and torture were declared as violative of Article 14. In the case 

titled “Suo Motu Constitution Petition No.9/1991” [1994 SCMR 1028] it 

was observed by the august Supreme Court that public hangings of even 

the  worst  criminal  appeared  to  violate  the  dignity  of  man.  All  these 

examples explicitly show that human dignity stems from the sacredness 

and value of life and is pervasive. Any treatment which is degrading or is 

incompatible with the value or worthiness of a human is an affront to the 

inherent dignity acknowledged by the framers of the Constitution under 

Article  14.  As  a  corollary,  an  arbitrary,  indiscriminate  and  reckless 

 
 
-: 33 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

exercise  of  the  executive  power  to  arrest  during  an  inquiry  or 

investigation  under  the  Ordinance  of  1999  would  be  in  violation  of  the 

constitutionally guaranteed right and the explicit recognition that human 

dignity is inviolable. Arresting a person in an alleged white collar crime 

by exercising the executive power in a mechanical and arbitrary manner, 

or  unnecessarily,  has  serious  consequences.  It  can  cause  irreversible 

damage  to  the  reputation  of  a person.  The  social  stigma  attached  with 

being  arrested  for  an  offence  under  the  Ordinance  of  1999  can  have 

devastating  implications  and  massive  human  impact,  not  only  for  that 

person but for the latter's family members as well. The publicity given to 

the arrest of an accused through press releases issued by the Bureau and 

any  irresponsible  reporting  in  the  print  or  electronic  media  could  ruin 

lives, including those who at the end of a fair trial are declared innocent. 

Moreover, presenting suspects as though they are guilty exacerbates the 

humiliation  which  is  already  suffered  because  of  the  arrest.  Such 

treatment  and 

interference  with 

liberty  definitely  amounts 

to 

infringement  of  the  inherent  dignity  of  a  human  and  thus  is  a  serious 

violation  of  inviolability  of  dignity  guaranteed  under  Article  14  of  the 

Constitution. A suspect cannot be exposed to humiliation unnecessarily 

as a result of exercising powers excessively or arbitrarily. Sub Article 2 

of  Article  14  is  a  constitutional  assurance  to  every  person  not  to  be 

subjected to torture for the purposes of extracting evidence. This is most 

relevant in the context of the expansive powers vested in the Bureau and 

its  Chairman  under  the  Ordinance  of  1999,  particularly  its  distinct 

features relating to the acceptance of plea bargain or the power to allow 

an  accused  to  become a  witness against others.  Abuse  of  the  intrusive 

 
 
-: 34 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

power  of  arrest  or  the  threat  thereof  can  have  serious  implications 

regarding the right under Article 14.   

c)  Right to Liberty and freedom of movement   

25. 

The other crucial fundamental rights which become relevant 

while  exercising  the  executive  power  of  arrest  under  the  Ordinance  of 

1999  are  'liberty'  of  a  person  and  'freedom  of  movement'.  Both  these 

rights, despite being distinct, are inextricably linked to human dignity. To 

enjoy liberty and freedom of movement has a nexus with the status of a 

person  as  a  human.  Article  9  of  the  Constitution  guarantees  to  every 

person that he or she shall not be deprived of liberty save in accordance 

with law. Deprivation of liberty in any form, unless adequately justified, 

becomes  a  tort  and  amounts  to  a  violation  of  the  fundamental  right 

guaranteed  under  Article  9.  The  right  to  liberty,  besides  being  a 

constitutionally guaranteed right, is a foundational element of the rule of 

law.  The  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  has  declared  that 

everyone has the right to liberty and it explicitly recognises that no one 

can be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile. This recognition 

was later embedded and further elaborated in the International Covenant 

on  Civil  and  Political  Rights.  As  is  obvious  from  the  unambiguous 

language of Article 9, the right to liberty is subject to law. It is thus not 

an absolute right but a guarantee against illegal or arbitrary deprivation 

of  liberty.  In  fact  it  is  a  guaranteed  shield  against  the  abuse  of  the 

executive  power  to  arrest  which  is  vested  in  the  State  authorities.    It 

would only be lawful to deprive a person from enjoying the right to liberty 

if it can demonstrably be shown that the exercise of the power to arrest 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 35 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

was authorized by law and had been actually exercised in order to achieve 

the object for which it has been provided by the legislature. In addition, 

it would also be required that the deprivation of liberty was justified and 

was not excessive or unnecessary.  A statute, such as the Ordinance of 

1999, may provide for the grounds upon which a person can be lawfully 

deprived  of  the  right  to  liberty.  It  becomes  the  duty  of  the  authority 

directing  the  deprivation  of  liberty  to  adequately  justify  the  intrusion 

thereof.  The  significance  of  protecting  liberty  has  been  consistently 

highlighted by the august Supreme Court. In the case titled “Federation 

of  Pakistan  and  others  v.  Shaukat  Ali  Mian  and  others”  [PLD  1999  S.C 

1026], it was observed and held.- 

“The perusal of the above quoted Article indicates that every 

citizen and every other person for the time being in Pakistan 

is guaranteed as his inalienable right to enjoy the protection 

of law and to be treated in accordance with law wherever he 

may  be  and  in  particular  no  action  detrimental  to  the  life, 

liberty,  body,  reputation  or  property  of  any  person  can  be 

taken except in accordance with law.” 

26. 

In  the  case  titled  “Watan  Party  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan” 

[PLD  2011  S.C  997]  the  august  Supreme  Court  reiterated  the 

observations made  in the earlier judgment reported as Commissioner of 

Income  Tax  v.  Eli  Lilly  Pakistan'  [2009  SCMR  1279]  and  a  portion 

therefrom was quoted; 

"It is the duty and obligation of the State on account of the 

various  provisions  of  the  Constitution  to  provide  the 

atmosphere based on honesty by providing equal protection 

of  law.  Every  citizen  must  be  treated  equally,  dignity  of 

human being life should be maintained, and liberty of life and 

 
 
  
 
 
 
-: 36 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

honour  must  be  guaranteed  as  envisaged  in  the  Articles  9, 

14 and 25 of the “Constitution.” 

27. 

In the case titled “Ismail v. The State” [2010 SCMR 27] it was 

observed by one of the Honourable Judges.-  

“I would also like to add that the ‘interest of the country’ is 

best served when the executive and the judicial machinery of 

the  State  while  administering  penal  statues,  adhere  to  the 

law. This is particularly so where the fundamental rights of a 

citizen such as his liberty, are involved. The right of personal 

liberty of a citizen is enshrined in Article 9 of the Constitution 

and has been jealously guarded by the Courts in Pakistan. If 

the petitioner is 'to be deprived of his liberty, this should only 

happen  in  accordance  with  law.  It  may  well  be  that  in  a 

particular case, a procedural rule may be violated.” 

28. 

In  a  judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords  titled  “Liversidge  v. 

Anderson” reported as [1941] 3 All E.R  338, Lord Atkin, in the context 

of  an  action  for  false  imprisonment,  has  highlighted  the  importance  of 

liberty as follows.-  

“The plaintiff’s right to particulars, however, is based upon a 

much broader ground,  and on a principle which again is one 

of  the  pillars  of  liberty,  in  that  in  English  law  every 

imprisonment  is  prima  facie  unlawful  and  that  it  is  for  a 

person  directing  imprisonment  to  justify  his  act.  The  only 

exception is in respect of imprisonment ordered by a judge, 

who  from  the  nature  of  his  office  cannot  be  sued,  and  the 

validity  of  whose judicial  decisions  cannot, 

in  such 

proceedings as the present, be questioned.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 37 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

29. 

The  House  of  Lords,  in  another  judgment  titled  “Christie  v. 

Leachinsky” reported as [1947] 1 All E.R 567 has highlighted as follows; 

“Such  a  situation  may  be  tolerated  under  other  systems  of 

law, as, for instance, in the time of letters de cachet in the 

eighteenth  century  in  France,  or  in  more  recent  days  when 

the  Gestapo  swept  people  off  to  confinement  under  an 

overriding  authority  which  the  executive  in  this  country 

happily  does  not  in  ordinary  times  possess.  This  would  be 

quite  contrary  to  our  conceptions  of  individual  liberty.  If  I 

may introduce a reference to the well known book, Dalton's 

Country  Justice,  that  author,  dealing  with  arrest  and 

imprisonment, says: "The liberty of a man is a thing specially 

favoured  by  the  common  law."  “There  are  practical 

considerations, as well as theory, to support the view I take. 

If  the  charge  on  suspicion  of  which  the  man  is  arrested  is 

then and there made known to him, he has the opportunity 

of giving an explanation of any misunderstanding or of calling 

attention  to  other  persons  for  whom  he  may  have  been 

mistaken, with the result that further enquiries may save him 

from  the  consequences  of  false  accusation.  It  must  be 

remembered  that  in  former  days  arrest  was  practiced  not 

only in certain cases of suspected crime, but as a preliminary 

in civil suits also.” 

30. 

Lord  Denning  MR,  authoring  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of 

Appeal in the case titled “Ghani and others v. Jones” reported as [1969] 

3 All E.R 1700, has observed.- 

“A  man's  liberty  of  movement  is  regarded  so  highly  by  the 

law  of  England  that  it  is  not  to  be  hindered  or  prevented 

except on the surest grounds. It must not be taken away on 

a suspicion which is not grave enough to warrant his arrest”. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 38 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

31. 

It  is  obvious  from  the  above  discussion  that  liberty  and 

freedom of movement are regarded as the most crucial human rights and 

their protection as one of the foundational pillars for upholding the rule 

of law. But these rights are not absolute.  Restrictions on its enjoyment 

can  be  imposed  by  law.  Such  limitations  can  be  lawfully  imposed  and 

authorized by the legislature and one such example is the power of arrest 

provided  under  the  Ordinance  of  1999.  The  grounds  upon  which  such 

authorization would be justified may also be set out in the statute itself. 

Keeping in view the value and importance of the fundamental rights of 

liberty and freedom of movement, the exercise of the executive power to 

arrest must be strictly circumscribed by the object which is intended to 

be achieved and not excessive or disproportionate. In a nutshell, the right 

to liberty, being a sacred shield against abuse of statutory power vested 

in  an  executive  authority,  must  be  jealously  guarded  as  the  duty  of  a 

Constitutional Court.  Abuse, excess or unlawful exercise of authority or 

power  vested  in  an  authority  under  the  law  and  having  the  effect  of 

depriving a person from enjoying the right to liberty amounts to a serious 

violation  of  the  constitutional  right  guaranteed  under  Article  9.  The 

exercise of the power to arrest provided under section 18(e) read with 

section 24 of the Ordinance of 1999 would be lawful if the intrusions into 

the conflicting fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 9 and 14 of 

the Constitution could be adequately justified. 

c) Right not to be treated differently    

32. 

Besides the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 9, 

14 and 15, the constitutional right under Article 25 also becomes relevant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 39 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

in the context of ordering the arrest of an accused under the Ordinance 

of  1999.  It  is  the  duty  of  authorities  vested  with  powers  under  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  to  treat  an  accused  fairly  during  the  course  of  the 

inquiry or investigation because the latter is presumed to be innocent. No 

accused must feel that the powers are being exercised indiscriminately. 

Equal treatment of all similarly placed accused should be demonstrably 

reflected from the manner in which statutory powers are being exercised. 

The power to order the arrest of an accused must not be exercised in an 

indiscriminate and arbitrary manner giving rise to complaints that some 

are  treated  less  favourably  than  others.  The  actions  ought  to  show, 

unambiguously,  that  the  executive  discretion  of  ordering  the  arrest  is 

exercised  in  each  case  uniformly  and  without  discrimination.  The 

foundational  principle  of  structuring  of  the  discretion  must  be  obvious 

from  the  actions  of  the  executive  authorities  which  adversely  affect 

fundamental  rights.  If  the  authority  vested  with  the  power  to  arrest 

provided under a statute fails to adequately explain its exercise in a way 

that  is  manifestly  uniform  and  similar  in  all  cases  then  it  would  be  an 

infringement of the right guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution. 

No  power  or  discretion  vested  in  an  authority  under  the  law  can  be 

exercised  indiscriminately  and  without  being  structured.  Needless  to 

mention  that  Article  4  of  the  Constitution  declares  that  to  enjoy  the 

protection  of  law  and  to  be  treated  in  accordance  with  law  is  an 

inalienable right of every citizen and, in particular, no action detrimental 

to  life,  liberty  and  reputation  shall  be  taken  except  in  accordance  with 

law.  The  test  is  public  perception  and  confidence.  Across  the  board 

accountability can only be achieved if there is no perception that accused 

 
 
-: 40 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

are treated differently. The Bureau must be able to demonstrably justify 

why some accused are arrested while others are treated differently.    

33. 

Having  discussed  the  rights  which  are  at  stake  when  an 

accused is arrested, the next question that needs to be examined is how 

to strike a balance between the conflicting interests. On the one hand is 

the public interest for which the Ordinance of 1999 has been enacted and 

on  the  other  the  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution.  How  does  a 

Constitutional  Court  ensure,  while  exercising  jurisdiction  to  ascertain 

whether  or  not  the  executive  power  has  been  abused?  This  question 

brings us to examining of the tools or principles developed in this regard  

Safeguards against excessive and arbitrary exercise of power to 

detain a person and to avoid miscarriages of justice. 

34. 

As  noted  above,  the  power  to  arrest  a  person  under  the 

Ordinance  of  1999  has  an  unambiguous  purpose  and  if  its  exercise 

becomes  necessary  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case, 

deprivation of liberty and restrictions on enjoyment of other rights would 

be justified. In order to protect the most crucial and fundamental rights, 

such  as  the  right  to  liberty  and  not  to  be  subjected  to  degrading  and 

humiliating treatment, courts have developed and applied the principles 

of proportionality, reasonableness and the need to use the least intrusive 

alternatives  as  tools  for  judicially  reviewing  the  exercise  of  executive 

power which results in detention or arrest.   

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
-: 41 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

35. 

Proportionality in simple words is the principle that an action 

must  not  be  more  than  what  is  necessary  in  the  given  facts  and 

circumstances.  Cracking  a  nut  or  killing  an  ant  with  a  sledgehammer 

could  be  appropriate  illustrations  which  highlight  the  essence  of  the 

principle of proportionality. An act or action that is extreme, excessive or 

is more than what is necessary for achieving an intended purpose or goal 

would  be  negation  of  the  principle  of  proportionality.  The  scope  of 

constitutional  rights  and  justifications  for  its  restriction  on  the  basis  of 

the principle of proportionality has been elaborately discussed by Aharon 

Barak in the celebrated book titled 'Proportionality, Constitutional Rights 

and their limitations'. He has described the existence of four core factors 

to  justify  limiting  constitutional  rights;  i)  proper  purpose,  ii)  rational 

connection,  iii)  necessary  means  and  iv)  proper  relation  between  the 

benefit gained by realizing the proper purpose and the harm caused to 

the  constitutional  right.  According  to  the  author,  proportionality  is  a 

principle applied so as to achieve a balance between the benefit gained 

and  the  resultant  prejudice  that  is  caused  to  the  rights.  The  means 

adopted  should  be  rational  and  necessary  and  the  harm  to  rights 

proportional to the benefit gained from imposing the restrictions.             

36. 

The  above  components  of  the  principle  of  proportionality 

have been applied by courts in almost all jurisdictions. Lord Bingham of 

Cornhill, in the case titled ‘A and other v. Secretary of State for the Home 

Department’   [(2005)  3  All  ER  169],  has  cited  a  judgment  of  the  Privy 

Council which describes the elements as.-  

“Privy Council in De Freitas v Permanent Secretary of Ministry 

of Agriculture, Fisheries, Lands and Housing [1999] 1 AC 69 

 
 
 
                                                                       
 
 
-: 42 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

at  80,  [1998  3  WLR  675  at  684.  In  determining  whether  a 

limitation is arbitrary or excessive, the court must ask itself— 

‘whether: (i) the legislative object is sufficiently 

important  to  justify  limiting  a  fundamental  right;  (ii) 

the measures designed to meet the legislative objective 

are rationally connected to it; and (iii) the means used 

to  impair  the  right  or  freedom  are  no  more  than  is 

necessary to accomplish the objective.” 

37. 

The Supreme Court of Canada in the case titled ‘R. v. Oakes’ 

[(1986) 1 S.C.R. 103] has elucidated the principle as follows; 

“To  establish 

that  a 

limit 

is 

reasonable  and 

demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society, two 

central criteria must be satisfied. First, the objective, which 

the  measures  responsible  for  a  limit  on  a Charter  right  or 

freedom  are  designed  to  serve,  must  be  "of  sufficient 

importance to warrant overriding a constitutionally protected 

right  or  freedom": R.  v.  Big  M  Drug  Mart  Ltd., supra,  at  p. 

352.  The  standard  must  be  high  in  order  to  ensure  that 

objectives which are trivial or discordant with the principles 

integral  to  a  free  and  democratic  society  do  not  gain s. 

1  protection.  It  is  necessary,  at  a  minimum,  that  an 

objective  relate  to  concerns  which  are  pressing  and 

substantial in a free and democratic society before it can be 

characterized as sufficiently important. 

Second,  once  a  sufficiently  significant  objective  is 

recognized, then the party invoking s. 1  must show that the 

means  chosen  are  reasonable  and  demonstrably  justified. 

This involves "a form of proportionality test": R. v. Big M Drug 

Mart  Ltd., supra,  at  p.  352.  Although  the  nature  of  the 

proportionality test will vary depending on the circumstances, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
-: 43 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

in each case courts will be required to balance the interests 

of society with those of individuals and groups. There are, in 

my  view,  three  important  components  of  a  proportionality 

test. First, the measures adopted must be carefully designed 

to  achieve  the  objective  in  question.  They  must  not  be 

arbitrary,  unfair  or  based  on  irrational  considerations.  In 

short,  they  must  be  rationally  connected  to  the  objective. 

Second,  the  means,  even  if  rationally  connected  to  the 

objective  in  this  first  sense,  should  impair  "as  little  as 

possible"  the  right  or  freedom  in  question: R.  v.  Big  M 

Drug Mart  Ltd., supra,  at  p.  352.  Third,  there  must  be  a 

proportionality  between  the effects of  the  measures  which 

are responsible for limiting the Charter  right or freedom, and 

the  objective  which  has  been  identified  as  of  "sufficient 

importance". 

38. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  recognized 

proportionality as a valid principle for examining and judicially reviewing 

the executive powers and exercise of discretion.  In the case titled ‘Sabir 

Iqbal  v.  Cantonment  Board,  Peshawar  through  Executive  Officer  and 

others’ [PLD 2019 SC 189] it has been observed and held as follows.- 

“The court can examine and judicially review of the executive 

discretion exercised by the authorized officer on the ground 

of proportionality. Alongside reasonableness, proportionality 

is now a central standard directing the action of the executive 

branch. The point of departure is that a disproportionate act 

that infringes upon a human right is an illegal act. The court, 

which guards the legality of the acts of the executive branch, 

performs  judicial  review  over  these  acts  and  examines 

whether 

they 

fulfill 

the 

tests  of  proportionality. 

Proportionality  is  a  standard  that examines  the relationship 

between  the  objective  the  executive  branch  wishes  to 

achieve, which has the potential of infringing upon a human 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 44 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

right, and the means it has chosen in order to achieve that 

infringing  objective.  The  fiduciary  duty,  from  which  the 

administrative  duty  of 

fairness  and  administrative 

reasonableness  are  derived,  demands  administrative 

proportionality  as  well.  "The  courts  will  quash  exercises  of 

discretionary  powers  in  which  there  is  not  a  reasonable 

relationship  between  the  objective  which  is  sought  to  be 

achieved  and  the  means  used  to  that  end,  or  where 

punishments  imposed  by  administrative  bodies  or  inferior 

courts  are  wholly  out  of  proportion  to  the  relevant 

misconduct.  An  administrative  measure  must  not  be  more 

drastic than necessary or to sum up in a phrase - not taking 

a  sledgehammer  to  crack  a  nut.  According  to  De  Smith's 

Judicial  Review,  the  standards  of  proportionality  and 

unreasonableness 

are 

inextricably 

intertwined. 

Unreasonableness  contains  two  elements  of  proportionality 

when it requires the weight of relevant considerations to be 

fairly  balanced  and  when  it  forbids  unduly  oppressive 

decisions.  Under  the  first  element,  proportionality  is  a  test 

requiring  the  decision-  maker  to  maintain  a  fair  balance. 

Under this category the courts evaluate whether manifestly 

disproportionate  weight  has  been  attached  to  one  or  other 

considerations relevant to the decision. The second element 

is  that  the  courts  consider  whether  there  has  been  a 

disproportionate  interference  with  the  claimants  rights  or 

interests.  A  more  sophisticated  version  of  proportionality 

provides  for  a  structured  test.  Here  the  courts  ask  first 

whether the measure, which is being challenged, is suitable 

to  attaining  the  identified  ends  (the  test  of  suitability). 

Suitability  here  includes  the  notion  of  "rational  connection" 

between  the  means  and  ends.  The  next  step  asks  whether 

the  measure  is  necessary  and  whether  a  less  restrictive  or 

onerous  method  could  have  been  adopted  (the  test  of 

necessity  -  requiring  minimum  impairment  of  the  rights  or 

interest in question)”. 

 
 
 
-: 45 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

39. 

In an earlier case titled ‘Messr MFMY Industries Limited and 

others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Ministry  of  Commerce  and 

others’ [2015 SCMR 1550] the august Supreme Court had acknowledged 

the relevance of the principle of proportionality. Reference may also be 

made to “D.G. Khan Cement Company Ltd. through Chief Financial Officer 

v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Law  and  03 

others” [PLD 2013 Lahore 693].  

40. 

The principle of reasonableness or unreasonableness has also 

been acknowledged and applied by the courts to examine the validity of 

executive actions and as a shield against abuse of executive powers which 

limit  the  enjoyment  of  rights  guaranteed  by  the  constitution.  In  the 

context of the power of arrest, the House of Lords has observed and held 

in the case titled “Holgate-Mohammad V Duke”  reported as [1984] 1 ALL 

ER  1054  as follows.- 

“Since this is an executive discretion expressly conferred by 

statute on a public officer, the constable making the arrest, 

the  lawfulness  of  the  way  in  which  he  has  exercised  it  in  a 

particular  case  cannot  be  questioned  in  any  court  of  law 

except  on  those  principles  laid  down  by  Lord  Greene  MR  in 

Associated Provincial Picture House Ltd. V. Wednesbury Cop  

[1947] 2 All ER 680, [1948] 1 KB 223, that have become too 

familiar  to  call  for  repetitious  citation.  The  Wednesbury 

principles  as  they  are  usually  referred  to,  are  applicable  to 

determining  the  lawfulness  of  the  exercise  of  the  statutory 

discretion of a constable under S. 2(4) of the 1967 Act, not 

only  in  proceedings  for  judicial  review  but  also  for  the 

purpose  of  founding  a  cause  of  action  at  common  law  for 

damages for that species of trespass to the person known as 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 46 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

false imprisonment, for which the action in the instant case 

is brought.”  

41. 

The  principles  of  Wednesbury  unreasonableness  has  been 

explained in the case titled “Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. V. 

Wednesbury Corporation”  reported as [1947] 2 All E.R 680 as follows.- 

“In  the  present  case  we  have  heard  a  great  deal  about  the 

meaning of the word “unreasonable”. It is true the discretion 

must  be  exercised  reasonably.  What  does  that  mean? 

Lawyers  familiar  with  the  phraseology  commonly  used  in 

relation to the exercise of statutory discretion often use the 

word “unreasonable” in a rather comprehensive sense. It is 

frequently  used  as  a  general  description  of  the  things  that 

must  not  be  done.  For  instance,  a  person  entrusted  with  a 

discretion  must  direct  himself  properly  in  law.  He must  call 

his  own  attention  to  the  matters  which  he  is  bound  to 

consider.  He  must  exclude  from  his  consideration  matters 

which are irrelevant to the matter that he has to consider. If 

he does not obey those rules, he may truly be said, and often 

is said, to be acting “unreasonably”. Similarly, you may have 

something  so  absurd  that  no  sensible  person  could  ever 

dream  that  it  lay  within  the  powers  of  the  authority. 

Warrington, L.J, I think it was, gave the example of the red-

haired teacher, dismissed because she had red hair. That is 

unreasonable in one sense. In another sense it is taking into 

consideration extraneous matters. It is so unreasonable that 

it might almost be described as being done in bad faith. In 

fact, all these things largely fall under one head.”    

42. 

The above principles of Wednesbury unreasonableness were 

explicitly cited with approval as a ground for judicial review by the august 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  titled  “Hyder  Ali  Bhimji  v.  Vith 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 47 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

Additional District Judge Karachi (South) and another” [2012 SCMR 254]. 

It  has  been  recognised  as  one  of  the  crucial  parameters  for examining 

the  validity  of  executive  actions  and  discretion.  The  august  Supreme 

Court later reaffirmed irrationality or unreasonableness as an important 

ground  for  judicial  review  of  administrative  actions  and  exercise  of 

executive  discretion  in  the  case  titled  ‘Asaf  Fasihuddin  Khan  Vardag  v. 

Government of Pakistan and others’ [2014 SCMR 676].  

Power  to  arrest  vested  under  the  Ordinance  of  1999  is  not 

absolute, unfettered and its exercise is subject to the principles 

and law highlighted herein.- 

43. 

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  from  the  above discussion  that  the 

executive power to order the arrest of an accused under sections 18(e) 

read with section 24 of the Ordinance of 1999 is subject to judicial review 

under Article 199 of the Constitution on the grounds of proportionality, 

unreasonableness and necessity. As held by the august Supreme Court 

in  the  case  titled  “Asif  Faseehuddin  Khan  Vardag  v.  Government  of 

Pakistan” [2014 SCMR 676] no unfettered power existed under public law 

and that a public authority possessed powers only to use them for public 

good, which imposed the duty to act fairly. Any deprivation of liberty or 

curtailment of rights guaranteed by the Constitution inevitably has to be 

adequately justified on the touchstone of the principles of proportionality, 

unreasonableness  and  necessity.  The  limitation  must  be  for  proper 

purposes,  rational  and  necessary  and  the  prejudice  caused  to  the 

constitutional  rights  must  be  proportional  to  the  benefit  achieved  from 

imposing  restrictions  thereon.  In  the  context  of  arresting  an  accused 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 48 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

under the Ordinance of 1999, it is the duty of the authority directing such 

an  action  to  adequately justify  and  show  that  there  were  no  other  less 

restrictive  means  of  achieving  the  object  i.e.  for  effectively  conducting 

and  concluding  inquiry  or  investigation  or  that  there  were  other 

compelling reasons justifying deprivation of liberty as a last resort. The 

other compelling reasons could be the likelihood of abscondence of the 

accused, or that the latter may repeat the offences, or if not restrained 

could  cause  harm  to  others.  The  said  reasons  are  not  exhaustive  and 

would  depend  on  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  each  case.  However, 

instead  of  depriving  a  person  of  liberty,  appropriate  measures  are 

required to be taken such as placing the name of the accused on the Exit 

Control List, prescribing a schedule for appearance, securing the entire 

record at the first instance, most of which is official etc.  The principles, 

law and preconditions for ordering an arrest under the Ordinance of 1999 

have  been  highlighted  in  paragraph  22  above  and  they  need  not  be 

repeated again. The fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution, 

which are affected when an arrest is made at the inquiry or investigation 

stage, have also  been discussed in great detail. The intrusions into the 

fundamental rights must be adequately and demonstrably justified on the 

touchstone of the principles of proportionality and unreasonableness. The 

executive power to arrest a person under the Ordinance of 1999 cannot 

be  exercised  unnecessarily  or  for  conducting  roving  inquiries.  If  an 

accused  is  cooperating  in  the  inquiry  or  investigation  and  appropriate 

measures have been taken to ensure the latter's attendance then in such 

an eventuality restrictions on constitutional rights would be an abuse of 

the  executive  power.  The  august  Supreme  Court  has  consistently 

observed and desired the need for promoting the law of tort and reference 

 
 
-: 49 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  “Punjab  Road  Transport  Corporation  v. 

Zahida  Afzal,  etc.” [2006  SCMR  207]  and  “Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan 

through Secretary, Ministry of Railways, etc. v. Abdul Wahid, etc.” [2011 

SCMR 1836]. Recognizing the applicability of the law of tort, it was held 

in “Abdul Majeed Khan v. Tawseen Abdul Haleem” [PLD 2012 SC 80], that 

the  law  is  applicable  and  administered  in  Pakistan  as  rules  of  justice, 

equity and good conscience. In the absence of lawful authority, to justify 

intrusions  into  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights,  the  detention  or 

incarceration  would  become 'false  imprisonment',  which  has  evolved  in 

the law of tort for the protection of liberty and against abuse of executive 

power.  It  is  thus  an  obligation  of  the  person  directing  the  arrest  to 

discharge the onus by demonstrably justifying that there were no other 

less restrictive means for the purposes of conducting effective inquiry or 

investigation. Deprivation of liberty must be exercised as an exceptional 

option  for  the  purposes  of  inquiry  or  investigation  in  relation  to  white 

collar  crimes.  The  principles  and  law  highlighted  in  this  judgment  are 

confined to the Ordinance of 1999, which is a special law and exclusively 

deals  with  white  collar  crimes.  As  noted above,  white  collar  crimes  are 

committed by skilled professionals, most of whom are experts in covering 

up  and  erasing  the  traces  when  the  crime  is  committed.  It,  therefore, 

poses  enormous  challenges  for  the  investigators.  The  detection  and 

investigation of offences dealt with under the Ordinance of 1999 requires 

highly  trained  professionals  having  expertise  in  forensic  accounting, 

money laundering, data mining and data analysis etc. If the investigator 

of  a  white  collar  crime  is  unable  to  conduct  effective  inquiry  and 

investigation without arresting an accused then it raises serious questions 

regarding competence and professionalism. This important aspect cannot 

 
 
-: 50 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

be ignored because of the massive human impact involving physical and 

psychological  damage  and  the  social  stigma  caused  due  to  arrest  of  a 

person  on  allegations  of  corruption  and  corrupt  practices  under  the 

Ordinance of 1999. The Chairman and the investigators are vested with 

expansive powers under the Ordinance of 1999, without any oversight by 

an independent body. The nature and expansiveness of executive powers 

vested  in  individuals  inevitably  raises  the  threshold  of  judicial  review 

because  constitutionally  guaranteed  rights  are  at  stake.  Incompetence, 

lack of professional expertise and proper training to deal with white collar 

crime,  besides  jeopardizing  constitutional  rights,  can  have  deleterious 

consequences  for  the  governance  system  and  cause  harm  to  the 

economy. This makes it an even more onerous task for the Chairman and 

investigators  of  the  Bureau  to  take  extraordinary  care  while  exercising 

executive powers, particularly that of arresting a person who is presumed 

to  be  innocent  at  the  inquiry  or  investigation  stage.  Likewise,  a  heavy 

burden falls on a Constitutional Court to jealously guard against abuse of 

executive  power  against  unjustified  deprivation  of  liberty.  It  is 

unacceptable  in  a  society  governed  under  a  Constitution  guaranteeing 

fundamental rights to allow abuse of executive power, which cannot be 

demonstrably and lawfully justified. The power to arrest under section 24 

read  with  section  18(e)  of  the  Ordinance  of  1999  is  definitely  not 

unfettered, absolute or allowed to be exercised without being adequately 

justified on the touchstone of the principles and law highlighted above.    

The exercise of power to order arrest in the instant case. 

 
 
 
  
-: 51 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

44. 

  The  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  in  hand  have  been 

discussed  in  detail  above.  The  petitioners  have  been  working  in  the 

Authority as its permanent employees for a considerable period. Nothing 

has been placed on record which would even remotely indicate that they 

have blemished service records. It is also not the case of the Bureau that 

the petitioners had made personal gains. It has been candidly conceded 

that they were cooperating in the  investigation proceedings. The entire 

case of the Bureau is based on the interpretation of statutory provisions, 

policies  of  the  Federal  Government  and,  particularly,  the  expression 

“Technology Neutral”. The said expression has been used in the Cellular 

Policy of the Federal Government. The policy is binding on the Authority 

and the Board. The relevant portions of the Federal Government’s letter 

have been reproduced above. It is alarming that the Investigating Officer 

of the Bureau, without being professionally competent in this regard, has 

on his own interpreted the Cellular Policy and, that too, in disregard of 

the 

letter  of  the  Federal  Government,  dated  19.07.2018.  The 

representations  made  by  the  State  of  Pakistan  to  the  investors  in  the 

cellular sector have been  completely disregarded in the instant case. It 

appears to us from the facts narrated above that the Board at the relevant 

time was at loggerheads with the statutory regulator i.e. the Authority. 

The Chairman had ordered the investigation on the basis of some “source 

report” and it appears that prior inquiry was not conducted. There is also 

no  explanation  as  to  why  the  Bureau  had  requested  the  Ministry  of 

Defence to identify and nominate an expert when, in this case, in terms 

of clause (fa) of section 2 of the Act of 1996, the competent Ministry on 

behalf  of  the  Federal  Government  was  the  Ministry  of  Information 

Technology and Communication. It is also unexplained why the Ministry 

 
 
-: 52 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

of  Defence  sent  a  request  to  the  Board  for  nominating  an  expert.  The 

Board was itself an interested party, as appears from the above narrated 

facts. The purported expert was an employee of the Board and his report 

is  also  regarding  interpretation  of  statutory  provisions,  policies  of  the 

Federal  Government  and  the  expression  “Technology  Neutral”.  The 

Investigating Officer was asked how he calculated the purported loss of 

US$ 516 million.  He stated that it was based on the amount received as 

the highest bid for auction of the spectrum. He admitted that there was 

no  auction  of  spectrum  in  the  instant  case  and  that  permission  was 

granted for the use of the technology on the already acquired spectrum 

of the Cellular Company. It is obvious that the Investigating Officer nor 

the Bureau has proper appreciation of the difference between auction of 

spectrum  and  allowing  a  licensee  to  use  a  new  technology  on  already 

acquired  spectrum  on  the  basis  of  'Technology  Neutrality'  under  the 

Cellular Policy. The most astonishing aspect of the case in hand is that 

the entire case is based on the interpretation of the Cellular Policy of the 

Federal  Government,  while  the  latter’s  opinion  or  stance  has  been 

completely ignored or, rather, challenged. The facts of this case present 

a sorry state of affairs. The Board appears to be challenging the authority 

of  the  Federal  Government  as  well  as  the  statutory  regulator  i.e  the 

Authority while the Bureau and the Investigating Officer are bending over 

backwards  to  support  the  stance  of  the  Board.  The  Bureau  and  the 

Investigating  Officer  do  not  recognize  the  authority  of  the  Ministry 

explicitly nominated to represent the Federal Government under the Act 

of 1996 and, instead, they preferred to seek assistance from the Ministry 

of Defence. For reasons which are shrouded in mystery, the Bureau, the 

Investigating  Officer  and  the  Board  insist  on  interpreting  the  Cellular 

 
 
-: 53 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

Policy on their own in defiance of the stance of the Federal Government 

which has formulated the policy. There is no explanation why the license 

of the Cellular Company was allowed to be renewed in 2019 on the terms 

and  conditions  which  are  alleged  as  misuse  of  authority  leading  to 

purported  loss.  There  is  nothing  on  record  to  indicate  the  existence  or 

involvement of criminal intent, mens rea or any other factor highlighted 

in paragraph 22 above so as to attract the offences under the Ordinance 

of 1999.  

45. 

This Court cannot turn a blind eye to another crucial matter 

in the case in hand. The Cellular Company had admittedly acted pursuant 

to  representations  made  by  the  Federal  Government  through  the  De-

Regulation  Policy  and  the  Cellular  Policy  by  participating  in  the  bidding 

process  to  acquire  spectrum  and  a  “Technology  Neutral”  licence.  The 

status of the Cellular Company as a foreign investor is also acknowledged. 

The Bureau and the Investigating Officer in the instant case ought to have 

exercised  extreme  caution  because  any  abuse  of  executive  powers  or 

reckless  exercise  thereof  would  have  implications  in  the  context  of 

investor confidence and, resultantly, the economy. The documents placed 

on record also suggest  the interest of foreign dignitaries in the Cellular 

Company thus raising concerns regarding foreign policy interests of the 

country. The manner in which this case has been presented to us and the 

facts  and  circumstances  narrated  above  undoubtedly  highlights  how 

actions  taken  by  the  Bureau  could  have  serious  consequences  for  the 

economy, investment policies and foreign policy interests of the State. 

 
 
 
 
 
-: 54 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

46. 

The learned Additional Prosecutor General Accountability and 

the Investigating Officer, despite their able assistance and affording them 

several  opportunities,  were  not  able  to  demonstrably  and  sufficiently 

justify  ordering  the  arrest  of  the  Petitioners  and,  pursuant  thereto, 

restricting their fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The 

exercise of the executive power to order the arrest of the Petitioners in 

the  instant  case  was  arbitrary,  in  violation  of  the  principles  and  law 

highlighted in this judgment and could not be justified on the touchstone 

of the principles of proportionality and necessity. It also raises questions 

regarding professional expertise, proper training and qualification to deal 

with complex cases relating to white collar crime.  

47. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  we  allow  these  petitions. 

Consequently the Petitioners are admitted to confirmed bail, subject to furnishing 

bail bonds in the sum of Rs. 500,000/- (Rupees fife hundred thousand only) each 

with one or more sureties in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned trial 

Court. The Investigating Officer shall be at liberty to impose such conditions as he 

may deem necessary for ensuring the attendance of the Petitioners. 

48. 

Before  parting  we  consider  it  necessary  to  record  our  observations 

based on the manner in which the case in hand has been dealt with. There is no 

doubt in our minds that corruption is one of the biggest evils that can plague the 

governance  system  of  a  country.  Besides  affecting  economic development  it  also 

seriously  undermines  the  rule  of  law.  Although  it  affects  everyone,  but  the  most 

vulnerable  and  downtrodden  are  the  real  victims.    The  perception  of  corruption 

causes immense harm to the country's image and resultantly discourages investors 

from  investing.  Corruption,  therefore,  cannot  be  tolerated  in  any  form.  The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-: 55 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

Ordinance of 1999 has been promulgated with the object to deal with corruption 

and corrupt practices and, thus, its effective enforcement in order to achieve the 

intended  object  is  of  paramount  public  interest.  In  this  regard  the  Bureau  has  a 

pivotal  role  in  detecting,  investigating  and  prosecuting  cases  alleged  to  involve 

corruption and corrupt practices. An effective and efficient accountability process or 

mechanism  is  an  integral  part  of  a  democratic  system  and  a  precondition  for 

upholding  the  rule  of  law.  But  the  foundational  principle  or  requirement  for  an 

effective  and  credible  accountability  entity,  such  as  the  Bureau,  is  the  trust  and 

confidence of the people in its fairness, impartiality, professionalism and, above all, 

that it is free from discrimination. Arbitrary or indiscriminate exercise of executive 

powers vested in such entities, instead of achieving the public interest for which it 

has been established, could greatly harm other public interests. Arbitrary, reckless 

and unjustified exercise of executive power to arrest under the Ordinance of 1999 

can  have  extremely  harmful  consequences  for  the  governance  system  and  the 

economy.  The  recent  amendments  made  in  the  Ordinance  of  1999,  through  the 

exercise of powers vested in the executive under Article 89 of the Constitution, is a 

manifestation and acknowledgment that the manner in which the powers have been 

exercised has had an impact on the bureaucracy and the business community. It is, 

therefore,  an  acknowledgment  that  abuse  of  the  powers  may  be  adversely 

impacting the governance system as well as the economy. This further highlights 

the importance of exercising the executive power of arrest under the Ordinance of 

1999 justly, fairly, equitably and subject to the principles and law highlighted above. 

Across  the  board  accountability  in  a  transparent  manner  and  free  from 

discrimination and arbitrary exercise of powers is inevitable to meet the challenges 

faced due to the menace of corruption. Last but not the least is professional training, 

qualification and expertise of the investigators and prosecutors to deal with white 

collar  crimes.  We  have  no  doubts  regarding  the  dedication  and  integrity  of  the 

 
 
-: 56 :- 
W. P. No.769/2019 

investigators  of  the  Bureau  but  they  definitely  have  to  be  experts  and  trained 

professionals  to  deal  with  white  collar  crimes.  We  expect  that  the  Federal 

Government and the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) will consider to take appropriate 

measures  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  accountability  process  is  made  effective, 

transparent and fair and that the Bureau is equipped and strengthened to meet the 

challenges and achieve the object for which it has been established. We also expect 

from  the  Bureau  to  be  mindful  of  the  consequences  of  excessive  and  arbitrary 

exercise  of  power  of  arrest  relating  to  the  constitutional  rights,  economy, 

governance system and foreign affairs interests. The corrupt must fear the Bureau 

while the innocent and honest repose confidence that they would not be wronged 

and be dealt with fairly. Arbitrary and indiscriminate exercise of power to arrest is 

in itself abuse of authority having deleterious consequences as discussed above.                                                             

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                          
 
