ORDER SHEET
!N THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTi'ENT
W.P.No.2 41412017

Syed Usman Khalid
VS
Atta Muhammad and others
Order  with signature of Judge  and that  of parties or counse! where
necessary.

Date of order/
Proceedings
08.10.2019 Mr. Tahir Mehmood Abbasi, Advocate for the

peUtioner,
Mian Tahlr  lqbal, Advocate for respondent  No.1.

S. No. of
order  /
proceedinqs

Through the instant writ petition,  the
petitioner (Syed Usman Khalid), impugns the
judgment  and decree  dated 08.05.2017  passed  by
the Court of the learned Additional District Judge,
lslamabad, whereby the  appeal filed by
respondent No.1 (Atta Muhammad)  against the
order dated 30.11.2015  passed  by the Court of
the learned Rent Controller,  lslamabad  was
allowed and the eviction petition filed by
respondent  No.1 seeking the petitioner's eviction
from Shop/Office  No.8, First Floor, Shaukat  SPA,
Super Market, Makaz F-6, lslamabad  ("the rented
premises")  was allowed.  Vide the said order
dated 30.11.2015, the learned Rent Controller
had dismissed the eviction petition filed by
respondent  No.1.
2.  The learned  Rent Controller had dismissed
respondent No.1's eviction petition inter-alia on
the ground that the lease agreement  was valid till
03.03.2017, and since the rented  premises were in
a commercial building, therefore,  the ground of
personal  bonafide need was not available to
respondent  -No.1  during the subsistence of the
tenancy period  under the first proviso  to Section
17(4Xb) of  the lslamabad Rent Restriction
Ordinance,  2001 ("lRRO").

2

W.P.No.2414/2017

3. 
lt may also be mentaoned  that earlier vide
judgment dated 20.01.2016,  the learned  Appellate
Court had allowed respondent No.1's appea! and
passed  an eviction  order due to non-deposit  of
tentative  rent in time. Writ petition No.372l2016
filed by the petitioner against  the said judgment
dated  20.01.20,,16 was allowed by this Court vide
judgment dated 03.04.2017  and the matter  was
remanded to the learned  Appellate  Court for
deciding  respondent No.1's appeal afresh. ln the
said judgment dated  03.04.2017,  this Court had
observed thht since the lease  agreement  between
the petitioner  and respondent No.1 had expired
during the pendency  of the said writ petition, and
since respondent  No.1 was seeking  to evict the
petitioner from a  commercial  property,  the
learned  Appellate  Court could reconsider
respondent No.1's plea regarding his bonafide
need for the rented Premises.
4.  Vide impugned judgment and decree  dated
08.05.2017  -the learned Appellate Court allowed
respondent  No.1's appeal and the eviction  petition
primarily  on the ground that the lease agreement
between the petitioner and respondent  No.1 had
expired. The said judgment  and decree  has been
assailed by the petitioner in the instant writ
petition.
5.  Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted
that since the lease agreement between the
petitioner and respondent  No.1 expired  during  the
- of  Writ  petition  No.37212016'
pendency 
respondent  No.1 could file a fresh eviction  petition
against the petitioner  and take the ground of
expiry of the lease  agreement in such a petition;
and that the Appellate  Court could not allow the
eviction  petition  on the ground that the lease
agreement between the said parties had expired

3

W.P.No.241412017

since the ground of the expiry of the lease
agreement was not taken by respondent  No.1 in
his eviction petition. Learned counsel for the
petitioner prayed for the writ petition to be
allowed in terms of the relief sought  therein.  ln
making his submissions, learned  counsel for the
petitioner placed reliance on the judgments
reported as 1980 CLC 2021,  PLD 1964 8C 106 and
PLp 1978 Sq 220.
6.  On the other hand, learned counsel for
respondent No.1 submitted  that it is an admitted
position that the  lease agreement  dated
2O.O1.2011,  executed between the petitioner and
Syed  Zahid  Hussain  Kazmi  had a validity period  of
six years and the same expired on 03.03.2017;
that the expiry of a lease agreement is one of the
grounds on which  a tenant can be evicted  from
the rented premises; that the mere fact that the
lease agreeinent expired during the pendency  of
Writ petition No.372l2016  did not prevent the
Appellate  Court from allowing  the eviction petition
on  the said ground in  the  post-remand
proceedings; that the sole ground on which
respondent  No.1's plea of personal bonafide  need
did not find favour with the learned Rent
Controller  was that at the time when respondent
No.1's eviction petition was decided,  the lease
agreement  was still subsisting and the same was
with respect to a commercial  property; and that
now that the lease agreement has expired, the
petitioner  cannot continue  to  remain  in
possession  of the rented premises. Learned
counsel for respondent  No.1 prayed for the writ
petition  to be dismissed.
7. 
I have heard the contentions  of the learned
counsel  for the contesting parties and have
perused the record with their able assistance.

4

W.P.No.241412017

8. 
ln the case at hand, the tenancy  between the
petitioner and respondent  No.1 was for  a
specified period i.e.  from 01.01 .2}'l'l  to
03.03.2017.  Since the rented premises is a
commercial property,  the landlord was not
entitled,  prior to the expiry of the lease period, to
apply for the petitioner's  eviction on the ground of
the landlord's  personal bonafide need for the
rented  premises. This is by virtue of the provisoto
Section  17(4Xb)  of the IRRO which is reproduced
herein below:-

"(4) A landlord  may apply to the Controllerfor  an
order directing  the tenant to put the landlord in
possesslon,
a)....
b) in the case  of a commercial  building  or rented
land, if he requires it in good faith for his own
use or for the use of any member of his family:
Providbd that where the tenancy is for a
specified  period  agreed  upon between  the
tandlord and the tenant, the landlord shall not be
entitted to apply under this subsection  before
the expiry of such Period.o

9. 
ln the case of Arshad Ali VS Mst. Zubaidah
Biba (2008 SCMR 1457), the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of Pakistan,  while interpreting  the first
provisoto  Section 13(3)(iiXc) of the West  Pakistan
Urban Rent Restriction  Ordinance, 1959 which is
in pari materia  Io the flrst proviso lo Section
17(4Xb) of the IRRO, held as follows:-

'lJnder the law, even in the presence of dire
personal need of the landlord, he was debarred
from filing the eiectment petition before  the
expiry of the period of lease fixed in the
agreement..."

10. ln view of the above, the learned Rent
Controller was correct in holding that the ground
of personal bonafide  need of the landlord for the
rented premises during the subsistence of the
lease  was  not  available to 
the
tandtord/respondents  No.1.  However, since lease
agreement  expired during the pendency  of writ

5

W.P.No.2414/2017

petition  No.37212016, it is my view that in the post-
remand proceedings, the learned  Appellate Court
could pass an eviction order on the ground  of
respondent No.1's personal  bonafide need
coupled with the expiry of the lease agreement.
11. As regards the contention  of the learned
counsel for the petitioner that since the validity of
the lease period expired  during the pendency of
writ petition No.37212016,  respondent  No.1 should
have filed a fresh eviction  petition on the ground
of expiry of the lease agreement,  I find the said
contention  to be hyper  technical  in nature, and not
strong enough to interfere  with the eviction order
passed by -the learned Appellate  Court or to
retegate the parties to a fresh round of litigation
on such a technical  ground. This would not be in
the interests  of justice. ln holding so, I derive
guidance  from the law laid down in the case of
Fazal Muhammad  VS Muhammad  Shafi  (1983 CLC

261).
12. lt is an admitted position that the lease
agreement between the petitioner and respondent
No.1 has expired on 03.03.2017. One of the
grounds under  Section  17 of the IRRO on which a
tenant  can be evicted  from the rented premises  is
an infringement  by the tenant of the terms and
conditions  on which the rented premises  are held.
As mentioned above, the parties had agreed for
the lease period to be until 03.03.2017. By not
vacating  the rented premises after expiry of the
said lease agreement, the petitioner infringed  an
essentiat term/condition on which the rented
premises  were held, and therefore rendered
himself liable to be evicted from the rented
premises. The mere fact that respondent  No.1 had
been accepting rent at an enhanced  rate from the
petitioner beyond  03.03.2017 would not condone

6

W.P.No.241412017

the  petitioner's infringement of 
the
abovementigned  essential term/condition  of the
lease agreement.
13. This question has  been definitively
answered in the judgment dated 22.0.1t.2016,
passed  by this Court  in writ petition No.854/2015
titled "Muhammad Mushtaq  VS Muhammad Zubair
etc." wherein,  after reproducing Section 17(1)  &
(2) of the IRRO, it has been held in paragraph  8 as

follows:-

"The bare reading  of the provision  of law shows
that where the tenant infringes any condition on
which  the building or rented land is held by the
tenant that is a ground  for eviction. ln the lease
agreement  where it is specifically provided  that
tie lease shall expire  on a specific  date and the
tenant on the referred  date fails to deliver the
vacant  possession  of the demised property the
same may be considered as a breach  of
condition of the lease agreement.  ln this behalf
tandtord is required  to prove that it  was a
condition on which  the property  was leased out
to the tenant that on expiry of the lease
agreement  possession of the propefty  shall be
handed over to  him; whether the lease
agreement is in writing or oral or even where
after the expiry of written  lease agreement the
parties  continue  the arangement through  oral
agreement  the condition regarding  the expiry  of.
tie tease  may provide to the landlord a ground
for eviction  if it is proved that intention  of the
parties was to the effect. Learned counsel for
petitioner  during the course of arguments
referred to the definition  of tenant  as provided  in
Section 2 (J) of 2001 Ordinance  which  provides
that the tenant includes  any person which
continues to be in possession or occupation
after termination  of tenancy. Similarly in Section
6 of the Ordinance, it  is provided that no
tenancy  shall  be valid beyond  such period as the
tandlord and tenant may by mutual agreement
fix before or after commencement of the
Ordinmce. The effect of the referced provisions
alongwith  Section 17 (z)(ii)(b) ibid is that even
after expiry of the lease agreement  the tenant
continues  to qualify  as a tenant,  however,  there
has to be a specific expiry date of the lease
agreement and in case  of failure  by the tenant to
deliver  possession of the property  in question to
the landlord  then the same may amount  to
breach of condition of tenancy. The Honourable
Supreme  Court in case titled  Qaiser Javed Malik
VS Pervez Hameed  (2009 SCMR 846) held that

7

W.P.No.2414/2017

the plain reading of Section 6 of the Ordinance
commencing  with the use of word "subiect  to
the provision of Section l T"signifies  that the
provision  of Section  17 continues to apply  as a
ground for eviction of the tenant. lt  was
bbserved by the Apex Court that Section 6 of the
Ordlnance is in addition to the grounds for
eviction and is available exclusively  with respect
to the property situated within  territorial limit
where provision  of the Ordinance  apply.  The
Honourable  Supreme Court in the referred
judgment held that after expiry of lease the
tenbnt ts not entitted  to retain possession  of the
rented property  and can be evicted  on the basis
thereof. The referred decision of  the
Honourable Supreme Court is binding on this
court.  lJnder Sub Section I to Section 17 of the
Ordlnance  a tenant in possession  of the building
or rented  land shall not be evicted  from the
same except in accordance with provisions of
the section. The bare reading of the referred
provision  shows that the grounds  on which the
'eviction 
application can be filed by the landlord
are provided  in Section  17 and though there is
no ground  for eviction on the basis of expiry of
lease agreement, however, it is reiterated that
the effect of Section 6 of the Ordinance read
with Section  17 (2)(ii)(b)  ibid is that a tenant  may
be evicted if he fails to deliver the possession  of
the property after expiry of  the lease
agreement."
The said judgment of this Court has recently
been upheld  by the Hon'ble  Supreme Court in the
case of Waqar Zafar Bakhtawari  VS Haji Mazhar
Hussain Shah (PLD 2018 SC 81). ln the said
judgment, the Hon'ble  Supreme  Court, after
making reference  to Section 6 of the IRRO'  held as
follows:-

"77. Thus, as per the clear mandate of Section 6
ibid, sqch a tenancy  shall come  to an end after
the eipiry of the term of tenancy and if
thereafter the tenant holds such a property
without  the consent  of the landlord, it shall be a
clear viotatlon  and the infringement of the
condition of the tenancy,  on which  the property
was held by him, because  the condition of
tenancy is for a particular period of time either
by  the terms stipulated in  the tenancy
agreement  or by the afflux of time, which is
specified  in Section 6 (ibid.) itself.'

8

W.P.No.241412017

Furthermore, after making reference to
Section 17(2xiixb) of the IRRO, it was held as
follows:-

"Therefore, applying  the above  said definition  to
the expression "subiect to" a tenant, who holds
the property  beyond  the term of tenancy,  undel
Section 17(2)(ii)(b)  of the Ordinance,  2001  shall
be evicted from the premises which is held on
the condition for holding it for a specific period
of time if he continues to occupy  the rented
property  beyond  such period  without  the
'written consent"  of the landlord. Eviction  of the
tenant thus witl be on the grounds of violation of
the term of tenancy which will be seen as a
condltion  of the tenancy  agreement."

ln conclusion,  it was held as follows:-
"Thus, we conclude  that as after expiration of
the tenancy period, a tenant,  though  can
continue  to hold over the possession of the
rented premises, but his tenancy  is rendered
invalid, in that, it has come to an end and if there
is no express  consent of the landlord  to extend
the teiancy  period  the tenant  shall be guilty of
having infringed the conditions  of tenancy,
rendering  him liable to be evicted  under Section
17(2)(ii)(b) of the Ordinance, 2007."

14. Since the written  lease agreement between
the petitioner and respondent No.1 has long
expired, the learned Appellate Court below was
correct in allowing  respondent  No.1's  eviction
petition on the grounds of expiry of the written
lease agreement and personal  bonafide need.
15. For the foregoing reasons, I am of the view
that the learned Appellate  Court correctly allowed
respondent No.1's eviction petition. Resultantly'
this writ petition  is dismissed with no order as to
costs.

,p**,.

(MIANGUL HASSAN  AURANGZEB)

JUDGE

