ORDER SHEET
IN THE IS MABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLA]IiABAD
J U D IC IAL D EPART]uI  ENT
W.P.  No.377512019
Muhammad Ali Jibran Qamar
VS
The Learned  Judge  Family Court and others

S. No. oforder
/ proceedinqs

Date of order/
Proceedings
30.10.2019 Chaudhary Amjad Ali,  Advocate for  the

Order  with signature of Judge  and  that of parties or counsel
where necessary.

petitioner.

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner,  Muhammad  Ali Jibran  Qamar, impugns
the interlocutory order dated 15.10.2019  passed
by  the  learned Family Court, whereby
respondents No.2 to 5's application for the
amendment  of the plaint was allowed.
2.  Learned counsel for  the  petitioner
submitted  that the application for the amendment
of the plaint was filed more  than three  weeks after
the filing of the suit for dissolution of marriage  on
the basis of khula and that the amendment
sought to be made in the plaint was not
necessary.  Learned counsel for the petitioner
prayed for the writ petition to be allowed in terms

of the relief sought therein.
3. 
I have heard  the contentions of the learned
counsel for the petitioner  and have perused the
record  with his able assistance.
4.  Since the impugned order dated 15.10.2019
is an interlocutory order, I am not inclined to go
into the merits of the case lest it may prejudice
the petitioner's  case during  the trial.

As Section 14 (3) of the West Pakistan
Family Courts Act, 1964 expressly bars a right of
appeal or revision against an interim order
passed by a Family Court, the same cannot be
circumvented by challenging such an interim
order in the Constitutional  jurisdiction  of the High
Court. A party  aggrieved  by such an interim order

2

W.P.  No.3775/2019

has to wait until a Family Court passes a final
order and then to challenge  it in an appeal. This is
because  an interim  order merges into the final
verdict.  The purpose  behind  barring an appeal or
a revision against an interim order of the Family
Court is to avoid delays in disposal  of the cases
by the Family Court. Since the suit instituted by
respondents No.2 to 5 is for dissolution  of
marriage  on the basis of khula, recovery  of
maintenance  allowance and dowry articles, the
fina! decree that may be passed by the learned
Judge, Family  Court  would be appealable under
Section  14 of the West Pakistan Family Court Act,
1964. Reference in this regard  may be made to

the following case law:-
(i) 

ln the case of Syed Saghir Ahmad Naryi VS
Province of Sindh (1996 SCMR  1165), it has

been held as follows:-

"The statute excluding  a right of appeal
from the interim  order cannot be passed
by bringing  under attack such interim
orders in Constitutional  iurisdiction.  The
party affected has to wait till it matures
into a final order and then to attack it in
the proper exclusive  forum  created  for
the purpose of examining  such orders."
(ii)  ln the case Mumtaz Hussain  alias Butta VS
Chief Administrator of Auqaf.  Punjab (1976
SCMR 450),  it has been held as follows:-

"As the said Ordinance has taken away
the right of petitioner  to interim reliet
learned counsel submitted that this was a
ground  which entitled the petitioner to
prosecute  a  writ petition despite the
pendency of the proceedings  on the
District Court. The argument is
misconceived because the  writ
jurisdiction  of the superior  Courts cannot
be invoked in aid of injustice and in order
to defeat the express provisions of the
statutory law."

a
J

W.P.  No.3775/2019

(iii)  ln the case of Mst. Maham Shabbir VS
Salman Haider L2014  CLC 330), the Hon'ble
lslamabad High Court held as follows:-

o9. ... High Court in exercise  of its writ
jurisdiction  is not sitting  as a Court of
appeal, or  court of  revision.  lts
jurisdiction  to interfere on the point of
fact is limited. lnterlocutory order if does
not suffer  from any illegality,  malafide  or
is not in excess  of jurisdiction or lack of
exercise  of jurisdiction  or not based  on
misreading, misconstruing  or discarding
of the evidence and material on record
cannot be challenged in constitutional
jurisdiction. Nevertheless, the facts of
each case are to  be  considered
separately  and no uniform principle  can
be determined  for exercising the writ
jurisdiction."

lt  is  my view that the  exceptional
5. 
circumstances which could justify invoking the
jurisdiction of the High Court under  Article 199 of
the Constitution  would be when the order or
action assailed was palpably without jurisdiction,
malafide, void or coram non-judice.  The order
impugned in this petition is clearly interlocutory  in
nature and does not dispose of the entire  case
before the Family  Court.  The impugned order is
neither  without jurisdiction nor malafide, void or
coram non-judice so as to warrant interference  in
the Constitutional  jurisdiction  of this Court under
Article  199 of the Constitution.
6.  The order dated 15.10.2019, being purely
interlocutory in nature could not be subjected to
challen$e  by filing a Constitutional petition before
this Court as it would amount to defeating the
legislative intent behind  Section  14(3) of the West
Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964. Therefore, I am
not inclined to interfere  in the said interlocutory
order passed  by the learned Judge,  Family Court.
7.  Since I do not find the pre-requisites for
interference in the Constitutional  jurisdiction of

4

W.P.  No.3775/2019

this Court with the impugned order dated
,,15.1O.2O19  to be satisfied in the case at hand, the
instant writ petition is  dismissed as  not
maintainable. The petitioner will be at liberty  to
challenge the said order dated 15.10.2019 in an
appea!  against the final order passed by the
learned Judge, Family Court, if the occasion
arises for doing so. There  shall be no order as to

costs.

Sultan*

(MTANGUL

AURANGZEB)

JUDGE

