ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition No. 3506/2021 

Malik Muhammad Rafiq, etc.  

VS

  Public at large, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 
04.11.2022 

Order with signature of Judge and that of 
parties or counsel where necessary.  

The 

instant  petition  was  heard  on 

13.06.2022.  However  after  perusal  of  the 

record it appears that the petitioners have filed 

the  instant  petition  challenging  judgment  and 

decree  dated  21.09.2021  pursuant  to  which 

their  suit  for  declaration  of  rights  of  adopted 

parents was dismissed. The suit for declaration 

is of a civil nature suit and there exists a right 

of  appeal  against  the  judgment  and  decree 

passed therein but the petitioners instead filing 

an  appeal  filed  the  instant  petition  and  the 

office  treating  the  judgment  and  decree  as 

were issued by the Guardian Court entertained 

the  same  as  a  writ.  The  judgment  and  decree 

ought  to  have  been  treated  as  having  been 

passed  by  the  Civil  Court  in  relation  to  a  suit 

for declaration under Section 42 of the Act and 

not as a guardianship suit. The instant petition 

is  not  maintainable.  However,  to  meet  the 

ends  of  justice  and  to  decide  the  issue  on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.                          W.P No. 3506/2021 

merit,  this  Court  has  ample  powers  to convert 

a writ petition into an appeal or treat one kind 

of  proceedings  into  another.  In  this  regard 

reliance can be placed on Mian Asghar Ali VS 

Government  of  Punjab  and  others  (2017 

SCMR 118), wherein the following was held:  

“Power  to  convert  and  or  treat  one  kind  of 

proceeding  into  another  is  derived  from 

authority  to  do  ex  debito  justitiae,  which 

always  existed  and  have  always  been 

exercised  by  the  Court  not  only  to  advance 

the  cause  of  justice  but  also  to  prevent  the 

injustice.  No  fetters  or  bar  could  be  placed 

on  the  High  Court  and  or  this  Court  to 

convert  and  treat  one  type  of  proceeding 

into  another  and  proceed  to  decide  the 

matter  either 

itself  provided 

it  has 

jurisdiction over the lis that has fallen on its 

lap  for  adjudication  in  exercise  of  another 

jurisdiction  vested  in  the  very  Court  or  may 

remit the lis to the court/forum/ authority of 

competent  jurisdiction  for  decision  of  the  lis 

on its own merits. Courts have been treating 

and  or  converting  appeal  into  revisions  and 

vice  versa  and  Constitution  Petitions  into 

appeal  or  revision  and  vice  versa.  In  the 

case  of  Jane  Margrete  William  v.  Abdul 

Hamid  Mian  (1994  SCMR  1555),  C.M.A. 

under  section  151,  C.P.C.  filed  in  the  High 

Court, was treated as cross objection. In the 

case  of  Capital  Development  Authority  v. 

Khuda  Bakhsh  and  5  others  (1994  SCMR 

771),  where  the  High  Court  converted  the 

C.M.A. filed in a disposed off Writ Petition as 

a  separate  Writ  Petition  and  decided  the 

same accordingly, this Court held if the High 

Court was satisfied that circumstances of the 

case  justified  conversion  of  Miscellaneous 

 
 
 
 
3.                          W.P No. 3506/2021 

Application  filed  by  the  Respondent  in  a 

disposed  off  case  into  proceedings  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Pakistan, 

there  is  no  legal  bar  to  such  conversion  of 

proceedings.” 

2.  Since  the  jurisdiction  to  hear  an  appeal 

against the impugned judgment and decree is 

also  vested  in  this  Court,  therefore,  the 

instant  petition  is  to  be  treated  as  Regular 

First  Appeal.  The  office  is  directed  to  number 

the  petition  accordingly  and  fix  the  same 

before the court on 08.11.2022. 

  (BABAR SATTAR) 

                             JUDGE   

*M.A. Raza* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
            
