ORDER SHEET

IN  THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P. N0.1550/2019 

FAROOQ AHMED KHAN. 
VS 
LEARNED ADDITIONAL  DISTRICT  JUDGE,  ISLAMABAD 
(WEST),  ETC. 

Petitioner by 

Raja  Muhammad  Farooq, Advocate. 

Respondents  by  : 

Ch. Zakki  Rizwan,  Advocate. 
(For Respondent Nos. 3 to  7) 

Date  of hearing 

03.02.2020 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ, l.  Petitioner has filed  instant Writ  Petition 

assailing order  dated  25.10.2018,  passed  by  the  learned  District  &  Sessions 

Judge, West-Islamabad, whereby, the  learned Judge while deciding cross family 

appeals of the  parties,  modified the judgment  and decree dated 31.05.2019, to 

the  extent  of  reducing  the  annual  increase in  the  maintenance from  15%  to 

10%, and confirmed the  monthly maintenance of Rs.40,000/- for four  minors. 

2. 

Admitted facts of the case  are that  after  dissolution of  marriage between 

the  Petitioner  and  Respondent No.3,  by  way  of  Khula,  Respondent No.3  filed 

suit  for  maintenance and  recovery of  dowry  articles  before the  learned Senior 

Civil  Judge-III  (Guardian  Judge)  West-Islamabad  who,  vide  his  order  dated 

31.05.2018,  fixed  the  maintenance of  four  minor  children  at  the  rate  of  Rs. 

10,000/-  per  month  per  child  with  annual  increase  of  15%  w.e.f.  date  of 

judgment  as  against Rs.  1,00,000/-  per child claimed by Respondent No.  3.  The 

judgment  was  challenged through  filing  of  appeals by  both  the  parties  before 

the  Additional  District  Judge,  who  vide  impugned  order  dated  25.10.2018, 

upheld the  monthly  maintenance of  Rs.  10,000/-  per  child,  however,  reduced 

the annual increase from  15°/o  to  10%,  hence instant writ  petition. 

W.P.  No.1550/2019 

2 

3. 

Learned counsel for  the  Petitioner argued that  the  monthly  maintenance 

fixed  by the  Trial  as  well  as  Appellate Courts is  exorbitant  as  both  'the  Courts 

failed to  appreciate the  admitted fact that  the  Petitioner is  a  retired  person who 

is  solely  dependent  on  pension  of  Rs.  25,000/-  per  month.  Learned Counsel 

submitted  that  the  claim  of  the  ex-wife/Respondent  No.3  that  Petitioner  is 

earning  monthly  Rs.  70,000/-  is  factually  incorrect  and  the  onus to  prove this 

alleged  fact  lies  on  her,  whereas,  Petitioner  has  placed  on  record  all  the 

documents  relating  to  his  monthly  earnings  including  the  pension  pass  book 

before the courts.  Learned Counsel  contended that  the allegation that  Petitioner 

owned a  Suzuki Carry for  the  purposes of  running a  business of  pick and drop, 

is  also factually  incorrect  as  the  Petitioner has  sold the  said vehicle during  the 

execution proceedings, evidence of which was also produced before the  learned 

Appellate  Court.  Learned  Counsel  lastly  contended  that  it  is  not  possible for 

Petitioner to  comply  with  the  Courts' orders  because of  his  meager income of 

pension thus  prayed for decreasing the  monthly maintenance fixed  by the  lower 

courts. 

4. 

Learned counsel for  Respondent Nos.3 to  7  opposed the  arguments  of 

the  Petitioner  and  submitted 

that 

the 

lower  Courts,  after 

taking 

into 

consideration all  the facts and record, fixed the  maintenance at Rs.  40,000/-  i.e. 

Rs.  10,000/-  per child per month which  in  view of  present economic conditions 

is  still  not  sufficient.  Learned  Counsel  referred  to  cross  examination  of  the 

Petitioner  whereby  it  has  been  recorded that  he  "owns  a  hospital  and  not  a 

college"  and  contended  that  in  view  of  his  own  admission,  Petitioner  is  in 

position to  pay  the  maintenance and  being  a  father,  it  is  his  responsibility  to 

bear  the  expenses  of  his  children.  Learned  Counsel  in  support  of  his 

contentions  referred  the  case  law  reported  as  (2018 SC/llR 1991 L  (2010 

YLR 2313} and fPLD 2013 SC 557}. 

5. 

While  submitting  the  rebuttal  to  the  contentions  of  learned Counsel for 

the  Respondents, learned Counsel  for  the  Petitioner  referred  the  statement  of 

W.P.  No.1550/2019 

3 

Respondent No.3 recorded during trial,  wherein,  she  deposed that  "the  hospital 

belongs to  the  brother  of  the  Petitioner"  and  submitted  that  in  view  of  this 

admission by the wife  herself the  argument of learned Counsel for  Respondents 

regarding income of the  Petitioner from  hospital is  self-contradictory. 

6. 

Arguments  advanced on  behalf of  learned Counsel for  the  parties  have 

been heard and the  documents placed  on  record including the judgment/order 

of  the  learned Trial  as  well  as  Appellate Courts have also been examined with 

their  able assistance. 

7. 

Perusal  of  the  record  shows  that  the  Petitioner  is  aggrieved  with  the 

impugned judgment  dated  25.10.2018,  for  fixing  the  monthly  maintenance of 

four  minor  daughters  at  Rs.10,000/-  per  child  being  excessive  and 

disproportionate to  his  income as  according to  him he  is  unable to  pay the  said 

maintenance from  his  monthly  pension of Rs.  25,000/-.  In  this  regard Petitioner 

has  urged  that  he  has  no  other  source  of  income  except  the  said  pension. 

Perusal  of  the  judgment  shows  that  the  finding  of  the  learned  Trial  Court 

regarding Petitioner's monthly earning is  based  on statement/cross-examination 

of  Respondent No.3,  who  alleged  that  the  Petitioner's  per  month  income  is 

Rs.70,000/-, and  presumed that  beside pension he  owned a  hospital, a  college 

and Suzuki Carry for  running  business of  pick & drop,  whereas,  failed  to  take 

notice  of  the  evidence/documents  relied  upon  by  the  petitioner  and  the 

admission of  fact  of  Respondent No.3  made during  cross-examination,  before 

coming  to 

the  conclusion  of  determining 

the  monthly  maintenance  of 

Rs.10,000/-  each  child.  Relevant  portion  of  the  judgment  dated  31.05.2018, 

passed  by the  learned trial  Court is  as  follows: 

''ISSUE N0.1 

Whether the plaintiffs  are entitled  for recovery of maintenance allowance 
@Rs. 1,00,000/-  per month from December  2015 to onward? OPP 

10. 

The onus of proving  this issue was on the plaintiff No.1, she has prayed 

for maintenance allowance at the rate  of Rs.  1,00,000/- per month  for each of the 

minor,  the  contention  in  the plaint  had been supported  by  her  statement  through 

W.P. No.1550/2019 

4 

affidavit  It  is an admitted position  that all the four minors, plaintiff Nos.  2 to ~  are 

the  real  daughters  of defendant,  so  legally and  morally  he  is  obliged  to  maintain 

them.  The  contention  of  the  plaintiff  No.1  is  that  the  defendant  has  not  paid 

anything  as  maintenance  w.e.f.  December,  2015.  In  response  to  this  very 

contention  of  the  plaintiff  No.1  the  defendant  has  not  placed  on  record  any 

contrary plea,  he  has not  even agitated  that  any  maintenance  was every paid  by 

him.  In  the  circumstances, he  is  bound  to  make  the  payment  w.e.f.  December, 

2015  to  each of the  minors,  who are  admittedly  receiving education as is  evident 

from  receipts  of their  school fee made available before  court  as Ex.P2 and  EX.P6. 

The  question  of quantum  of maintenance allowance per  minor  has  always  been 

fixed as per the  financial position  of the  defendant  Though the plaintiff No.1 has 

asserted  that  he  is  owner  of a  hospital  receiving pension  and  is  also  running  a 

school  van,  therefore  he can afford  the maintenance allowance as per prayed  for, 

however  as per  her  own  admission during  the  cross-examination,  the  income  of 

defendant  is  Rs.70,000/-  per  month. 

In  view  of  this  admitted  position 

the 

maintenance  allowance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.1,00,000/-  per  month  for  each  of  the 

minor  cannot  be  ordered.  Keeping in  view  the  expenditures,  tnaured  upon  the 

schooling, transportation  and other  daily needs, this court  deems is appropriate  to 

fix  the  maintenance  allowance  of Rs.10,000/-  per  month  for  each  of  the  minor, 

which  the  defendant  shall  be  bound  to  pay  w.e.f.  15.12.2015  till  their  marriage, 

however  in  calculating arrears of maintenance allowance the  amount  paid  by  the 

defendant  as interim  maintenance shall be  deducted.  The  maintenance allowance 

shall  be  liable  to  15%  annual  increase  w.e.f.  date  of Judgment.  This issue  is 

decided in above terms." 

Furthermore, perusal of the  impugned order dated 25.10.2018,  reveals that  the 

learned  Appellate  Court  has  also  failed  to  take  into  account  the  Petitioner's 

means  to  support  his  children  as  being  necessary  for  fixing  the  monthly 

maintenance thus,  while  confirming  the  judgment  of  the  Trial  Court,  ignored 

the  key factors  to  ascertain the  petitioner's  ability  to  pay the  maintenance and 

fixed  the  same as  per  the  needs of  the  children.  Relevant paragraph  of  the 

judgment  passed by the  learned Appellate Court is  given as  under: 

"12. 

The Second Point  is  to  what  extent  Farooq is  capable of to  maintain  her 

daughters  from  his monthly  earnings. From the  evidence of Farooq it  transpired 

that  he has to maintain  his second wife too. Meaning thereby presently  he has to 

shoulder the burden of this two families; one from  first wife (Farkhanda) and  with 

the second wife. From the second wife, he does not have any issue/children and if 

his monthly  income is divided into  two families, bring his monthly  income half to a 

family  i.e.  Rs.  3~000/-  each of  the  two.  Since,  he  does not  have  any  children 

from  his  second  wife,  therefore,  that  family  is  consisting  of  two  members  viz. 

himself  and  second  wife.  Thus,  an  edge  to  the  family  of his growing  daughters 

can be given  when they are four in terms of family members and he is not shying 

W.P.  No.1550/2019 

5 

of his  responsibility  to  maintain  them.  I  found  him  capable as such.  Thus,  fixing 

PKR.  10,000/-  per month  per daughter  by  learned  trial  court  is  quite  reasonable 

making a  total  of PKR.  40,000/-  per month  when edge  to  this family  in  terms  of 

members is seen. As to  the annual increase of 15%,  it seems to be on the higher 

side, therefore,  is reduced to 10% per annum. Similarly, in above circumstances, I 

do not see that learned trial court  was wrong in fixing  the maintenance of the four 

daughters from  15.12.2015. '~ 

Plain  reading  of  the  impugned  judgment/order  of  the  learned  Courts  below 

clearly shows that  the  conclusions have been drawn  only  on  the  assertions of 

Respondent No.3,  who  claimed  the  maintenance  of  Rs.  100,000/-  per  child, 

(though  have been considered illogical by the  Trial  Court)  but  no  deliberations 

have been made on  the  means, sources and financial capacity of the  Petitioner. 

I  am  conscious of the fact that,  at this stage, while exercising powers under the 

Constitutional  Jurisdiction,  this  court  has  to  see  the  illegality,  irregularity  or 

invalidity  apparent  in  the  decisions arrived  at  by  the  Courts  below  and  that 

whether  the  decisions  have  been  made  after  thrashing  out  all  the  material 

evidence and statements  recorded during  the  trial,  whreas, the  factual  aspects 

of  the  matter  cannot  be  re-appraised in  writ  petition.  However,  in  the  interest 

of justice  I  have gone through  the  evidence and statements  attached  with  the 

petition,  which  revealed  that  the  statement  and  evidence  produced  by  the 

Petitioner  in 

respect  of  his 

income/pension  have  not  been  given  due 

consideration  and  as  such  the  impugned  orders  are  silent  to  the  extent  of 

determination  of  actual  source of  income of  the  Petitioner as  well  as  disputed 

version  of  the  parties  in  this  respect,  therefore,  it  would  be  appropriate  if 

matter  is  remanded back to  the  learned Appellate Court for  decision afresh.  In 

this  regard,  guidance  has  been  taken  from  the  judgment  of  Hon'ble  Lahore 

High  Court  reported  as  PLD 2018 Lahore 916,  and  it  would  not  be  out  of 

place  to  reproduce the observation therefrom: 

':4t  the  same  time  the  court  must  detennine  the  income  of  the  father  either 

through  proper  documentary  evidence or  on  the  basis  of  the  social  status  and 

earning  capacity  of  the  father.  In  order  to  ensure  that  proper  information  is 

before  the  court,  it may always require  the father  to produce  documents such as 

his salary slips or any bank statement  or property  document on the basis of which 

W.P. No.1550/2019 

6 

he is  able  to  show  his  monthly  income or earning  or his  financial  status.  In  this 

regard,  the  assets owned  by  the  father  are  relevant  as  it  contributes  towards 

establishing  the  financial  status  of the  father  that  has  to  be probed  into  by the 

court  and  based on attending  circumstances the  court  can condusively  establish 

the means through  which the father  will be able to maintain  the minors. It  is also 

important  to  take into  consideration any liability  of the  father,  that  is  whether  he 

is paying  any bank loan or debt,  whether he has remarried  or has other  children 

or  whether  his  parents  are  dependent  on  him.  In  this  way  the  court  can 

determine  the manner in  which the income of the fatbpr  is spent and balance the 

income  and  capacity  with  the  reasonable  requirements  of  the  minors  seeking 

maintenance. " 

10. 

In  this  regard,  it  is noted  that  Section 17(A)  of the  West Pakistan Family 

Courts Act,  1964 specifically provides  in  subsection (4)  that  for  the purposes  of 

fixing  maintenance,  the  court  may  summon  the  relevant  documentary  evidence 

from any organization, body or authority  to determine  the estate and resources of 

the defendant.  The purpose  of this provision is to facilitate  the court  to determine 

the  financial  position  of  the  father.  The  court  therefore  is  not  dependent  on 

documents  or  information  provided  by  the  father  and  can  call  for  relevant 

documents  or information  be it  from  the  relevant  department  or organization  or 

as the case requires, in order to determine the income of the father.·~ 

8. 

In  view  of  the  discussion made hereinabove, the  impugned  order  dated 

25.10.2018,  is  set-aside to  the extent  of determination  of  monthly  maintenance 

fixed  for  welfare  of  the  minor children and the  matter  is  remanded back to  the 

learned Appellate Court for  decision afresh, in  the  light of  observations made ln 

the  preceding  paragraphs;  by  proy_iding  opportunity  of  hearing  to  both  the 

parties in accordance with  law. 

9. 

The Writ Petitloostand&idisposetfof  in  above.terms; 

(LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

M.  JUNAIDUSMAN 

