JUDGMENT SHEET. 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.596 of 2016   
Soofia Munir & another 

VS           

Judge, Family Court (West), Islamabad & another  

Date of Hearing: 
Petitioners by: 

28.04.2016 
Syed Khawar Ameer Bukhari,  
Advocate 

Respondent No.2 by:  Mr. Sajid Mehmood Shad,  

Advocate 

__________________________________________________________________ 

 MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB, J:- Through the instant Writ 

Petition, the petitioners, Soofia Munir and her son, Zurain Bin Tahir, 

impugn  the  order  dated  27.11.2015,  passed  by  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court,  Islamabad,  whereby,  respondent  No.2’s  application 

under  Section  12  of  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890  (“G&W 

Act”), was  allowed.  

2. 

The  record  shows  that  petitioner  No.1  and  respondent  No.2 

(Khawaja  Tahir  Iqbal)  got  married  on  29.07.2007.  They  were 

blessed  with  a  son  (petitioner  No.2)  on  02.07.2009.  The  marriage 

turned sour and respondent No.2 contracted a second marriage. On 

20.06.2012,  the  petitioners  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower 

amount,  maintenance  allowance  and  dowry  articles  before  the 

learned  Judge,  Family  Court,  Islamabad,  against  respondent  No.2.  

The  suit  instituted  by  the  petitioners  was  decreed  ex-parte  on 

21.01.2013.  This  decree  was  set  aside  on  20.01.2015.  Thereafter, 

respondent  No.2  filed  a  written  statement  and  contested  the  suit.  

On  10.07.2015,  respondent No.2  filed  an  application under  Section 

12 of the G&W Act for the issuance of a schedule for meetings with 

his minor son. This application was opposed by petitioner No.1, who 

was  of  the  view  that  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  while 

adjudicating  upon  a  suit  for  the  recovery  of  dower  etc.  could  not 

entertain  and  decide  an  application  under  Section  12  of  the  G&W 

Act.  Vide order dated 27.11.2015, the said application was allowed 

by  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court,  who  ordered  that  respondent 

No.2  could  meet  his  minor  son  in  the  Court  on  every  1st  and  3rd 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

Saturday of each month from 10:30 am to 12:01 pm.  The petitioner 

No.1's  objection  to  the  maintainability  of  respondent  No.2’s 

application  under  Section  12 of  the  G&W  Act  was  dealt  with  in  the 

following manner:- 

 “5.  Perusal of the application showed that it is filed in the instant 
suit for recovery of dower etc. and that it has been filed U/S-12 of 
Guardian  and  Wards  Act.  However  the  fact  that  the  same 
application was presented in the instant suit, is enough to ascertain 
that the application for meeting with the minor was intended to be 
presented before this court for its decision in the instant suit.  It 
would be against the norms of justice if the instant application is 
dismissed on this mere technicality. Perusal of the record also 
showed that though the defendant paid the interim maintenance to 
the minor but he is not paying that regularly on monthly basis but 
paying in bulk, and interim maintenance for the month of the 
November is still due. 
 6.  Minor is admittedly the son of the applicant/defendant and 
being father, the defendant has every right to meet with minor son.  
Keeping in view the fact that outstanding interim maintenance has 
been  paid  by  the  applicant/defendant  and  the  fact  that 
applicant/defendant being real father has a right to meet his minor 
son, the instant application for meeting with the minor is allowed by 
condoning the technicality that the application was filed U/S 12 of 
the Guardians and Awards Act, 1925.”  

3. 

It is said order dated 27.11.2015, which has been impugned in 

the instant Writ Petition. 

4. 

Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that respondent 

No.2, in his written statement, did not seek any visitation rights; that 

on  08.09.2015,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  framed  the  issues; 

that  no  issue  was  framed  regarding  a  schedule  for  meetings 

between respondent No.2 and his minor son; that relief beyond the 

issues  could  not  have  been  granted  by  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court; 

that  respondent  No.2  could  have 

filed  a  separate 

suit/application  for  custody  under  the  provisions  of  the  G&W  Act; 

that  two  separate fora  are  provided  under  the law  for  dealing  with 

applications for recovery of dower etc. and for dealing with custody 

and visitation rights regarding a minor; that the learned Senior Civil 

Judge  had  not  entrusted  respondent  No.2’s  application  under 

Section 12 of  the G&W Act to  the learned Judge Family Court; that 

under  Section  9  of  G&W  Act,  an  application  with  respect  to  the 

guardianship  of  the  minor  is  to  be  filed  before  the  District  Court; 

that  the  District  Court    has  delegated/entrusted  the  power  to 

entertain and decide applications under the G&W Act to the Senior 

 
3 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

Civil Judge; that it is in the said capacity that the Senior Civil Judge 

marks  cases  under  the  G&W  Act  to  other  Civil  Judges;  that  the 

jurisdiction  of  a  Family  Court  is  determined  in  accordance  with 

Sections  4 & 5 of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  (“WP-

FC Act”); that the jurisdiction under the G&W Act and under the WP-

FC  Act,  cannot  be  amalgamated;  and  that  the  suit  instituted  by 

petitioner No.1 was not for dissolution of marriage. Learned counsel 

for  the  petitioners  prayed  for  impugned  order  dated  27.11.2015  to 

be set aside.  

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2, 

defended  the  impugned  order  dated  27.11.2015  by  submitting  that 

the  writ  petition  instituted  by  the petitioners  was  not  maintainable. 

He drew the attention of the Court to the second proviso to Section 

7(2)  of  the  WP-FC  Act,  and  submitted  that  respondent  No.2  could 

have,  in  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower  etc.,  filed  an  application  for 

visitation rights. He further submitted that Section 5, read with Item 

No.5  in  Part-I  of  the  Schedule  to  the  WP-FC  Act,  gave  the  Family 

Court the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon an application  for custody 

or  visitation  rights  regarding  a minor.  He further  submitted  that  as 

the impugned  order  dated  27.11.2015  was  interim  in  nature,  a writ 

petition  against  the  same  was  not  maintainable.  In  making  his 

submissions,  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  placed 

reliance on the cases of   Anne Zahra VS Tahir Ali Khilji (2001 SCMR 

2000),  Munir  Alam  VS  Civil  Judge/Family  Court  Lahore  (2009  CLC 

442),  Syed  Aqdas  Abbas  VS  Mst.  Samina  Shahbaz  (2010  CLC  32), 

Mst.  Maham  Shabbir  VS  Salman  Haider  (2014  CLC  330),  Aamir 

Shahzad  VS  Additional  District  Judge  Multan  (2015  CLC  632), 

Shamim    Akhtar  VS  District  Judge  (2016  MLD  242)  and  Major 

Muhammad  Khalid  Karim  VS  Mst.  Saadia  Yaqub  and  others  (PLD 

2012 SC 66).  

6. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. 

7. 

The  impugned  order  dated  27.11.2015  was  passed  by  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  on  respondent  No.2’s  application 

under Section 12 of the G&W Act, which reads as follows:-  

4 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

“12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and 
interim protection of person and property. (1) The Court may direct 
that the person, if any, having the custody of the minor shall 
produce him or cause him to be produced at such place and time 
and before such person as it appoints, and may make such order 
for the temporary custody and protection of the person or property 
of the minor as it thinks proper. 
(2) If the minor is a female who ought not to be compelled to appear 
in public, the direction under sub-section (1) for her production 
shall require her to be produced in accordance with the customs 
and manners of the country. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall authorize:-- 
(a) the Court to place a female minor in the temporary custody of a 
person claiming to be her guardian on the ground of his being her 
husband, unless she is already in his custody with the consent of 
her parents, if any; or 
(b) any person to whom the temporary custody and protection of 
the property of a minor is entrusted to dispossess otherwise than 
by due course of law any person in possession of any of the 
property.” 

8. 

The  import  of  Section  12  of  the  G&  W  Act  has  been  well 

explained  by  the  Hon'ble  Islamabad  High  Court  in  the  case  of  Mst. 

Maham  Shabbir  VS  Salman  Haider  (2014  CLC  330),  in  following 

terms:- 

“11.       Section 12 of the Guardians and Wards Act empowers the Courts 
to direct a person to produce a person before the Court and then the 
Court can pass order for the temporary custody of the minor. It has to be 
kept in view that this Order is only regarding temporary custody, which is 
usually passed at the time when the evidence is not produced before the 
Court. This order must be passed keeping in view the welfare of the 
minor, but at the same time complete judgment without recording 
evidence must be avoided. For example, a suckling baby has to be given 
to his or her mother. Even without passing any final judgment regarding 
custody of the minor. Order under section 12 of the Guardians and Wards 
Act should not become the order passed under section 25 determining 
the rights of the parties in respect of the custody of minor. Difference 
between order under section 12 as well as section 25 of the Guardians 
and Wards Act must be kept in view.” 

9. 

Sections 5 (1), 7 and 25 of the WP-FC Act read as follows:-  

“5. Jurisdiction.—(1) Subject to provisions of the Muslim Family 
Laws Ordinance, 1961, and the Conciliation Courts Ordinance, 
1961,  the  Family  Courts  shall  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  to 
entertain,  hear  and  adjudicate  upon  matters  specified  in 
the Schedule Part I of the Schedule.”(Emphasis added) 

10. 

Item  No.5  of  Part-1  of  the  Schedule  to  the  said  Act  reads,  as 

follows:- 

“5. Custody of children, and the visitation rights of parents to meet 
them”. 

11.  The  controversy  raised  by  the  petitioners  can  be  adequately 

put to rest in the light of the dictum of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of 

 
 
 
 
 
5 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Major  Muhammad  Khalid  Karim  VS  Mst. 

Saadia Yaqoob (PLD 2012 SC 66). The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the 

said  case  has  interpreted  Sections  5  &  7  of  the  WP-FC  Act,  1964, 

and Sections 9 and 25 of the G&WA, and held as follows:-  

“Under Section 5 of the Act 1964, the Family Court has the 
exclusive jurisdiction to entertain, hear and adjudicate (emphasis 
supplied) all the matters which fall within the first schedule to the 
Act;  this  admittedly  includes  the  custody  and  guardianship 
matter.”  

12.  The  second  proviso  to  Section  7(2)  permits  claims  regarding 

custody  of  children  and  visitation  rights  of  parents  to  meet  their 

children,  to  be  filed  along  with  or  in  a  suit  for  dissolution  of 

marriage.  No  doubt,  the  suit  instituted  by  the  petitioner  No.1  was 

not  for  the  dissolution  of  marriage.  Nevertheless,  Section  5  of  the 

WP-FC  Act,  inter- alia,  provides  that  the  family  courts  shall  have 

exclusive 

jurisdiction  to  entertain,  hear  and  adjudicate  upon 

matters  specified  in  Part-1  of  the  Schedule  to  the  said  Act.  Item 

No.5  of  Part-1  of  the  Schedule  to  the  said  Act  reads  “custody of 

children, and the visitation rights of parents to meet them”. In view 

of  these  provisions,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  did  have  the 

jurisdiction  to  entertain  and  adjudicate  upon  an  application  for  the 

visitation rights filed by any of the parents to meet their minor child. 

It  matters  not  whether  such  an  application  is  routed  through  the 

Court of  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge  or  filed  directly  in  proceedings 

already  pending  before  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court.  Such 

proceedings before the learned Judge, Family Court may well be for 

the  recovery  of  dower  etc.  The  law  does  not  bar  an  application 

under  Section  12  of  the  G&W  Act,  to  be  filed  in  proceedings  other 

than  that  for  the  dissolution  of  marriage.  Even  otherwise,  Courts 

must endeavor to harmonize the provisions  of the same statute. As 

there  is  a  specific  prescription  in  the  WP-FC  Act  (Section  5  read 

with  Entry  No.5  of  Part-I  of  the  Schedule  of  the  WP-FC  Act),  giving 

the  Family  Court  jurisdiction  over  “custody of children, and the 

visitation rights of parents to meet them”,  the  same  must  be  given 

effect to in letter and spirit.  

13.  Now  as  regards  the  argument  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioners  that  respondent  No.2  should  have 

instituted  an 

 
 
 
 
 
6 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

independent action before the District Court under the provisions of 

the  G&W  Act  for  custody  or  visitation  rights  regarding  his  minor 

child. Section 25 of the WP-FC Act reads as follows:- 

“25. Family Court deemed to be a District Court for purposes of 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.--A Family Court shall be deemed 
to be a District Court for the purposes of the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890, and notwithstanding anything contained in this Act shall, 
in dealing with matters specified in that Act follow procedure 
prescribed in that Act.” 

14.  The  argument  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  runs 

contrary  to  said  Section  25  Ibid,  and  the  law  laid  down  by  the 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Anne  Zahra  VS 

Tahir  Ali  Khilji  (2001  SCMR  2000)  where  Section  25  of  the  WP-FC 

Act has been interpreted in the following terms:-  

“By virtue of section 25 of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 
every  Family  Court  has  been  designated  as  District  Court, 
therefore, there is no Guardian Judge as such under the Guardians 
and Wards Act whereas the Family Court under the said Act 
competently seized of a matter relating to matters of minors shall 
be deemed to be a District Court.” 

15.  In the said case, it has also been held as follows:- 

“The West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964 has an overriding 
effect in so far as the matters included in the Schedule, therefore, 
initially it is the Family Court which has to be approached in 
respect of matters relating to custody of minors being one of the 
listed items in the Schedule …” 

16.  Consequently, I find the contention of the learned counsel for 

the  petitioners  that  respondent  No.2  should  have 

filed  an 

application  under  Section  12  of  the  G&W  Act  before  the  Court  of 

Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad, who in turn should have marked it to 

the learned Civil Judge hearing the petitioners’ suit for recovery of 

dower etc., to be hyper technical and against the avowed object to 

the  WP-FC  Act  viz.  The  expeditious  disposal  of  the  family  disputes 

by  a  special  forum  created  by  the  law.  In  the  case  of  Major 

Muhammad  Khalid  Karim  VS  Mst.  Saadia  Yaqub  and  others  (PLD 

2012 SC 66), it has been held as follows:-  

“It seems that on account of delays, in the adjudication of this class 
of cases, which possibly was due to the complexity of procedure 
and  the  rush  of  work  in  such  courts,  but  undoubtedly  was 
adversely affecting the family union and comity, the legislature in 
order to prevent the above enforced the act, 1964. It is so clear 
from the preamble of the Act that this law was enforced with a vivid 
object to take out the matters falling within the ambit thereof from 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

the ordinary regime qua dispensation of justice, and for the 
disposal of such matters, special forum was created in which the 
rigors of procedural implications and requirements of the Evidence 
Law (Qanum-e-Shahadat Order, 1984) were either dispensed with 
or were simplified; with an addition of a statutory mechanism, 
enabling the parties for an amicable settlement of their disputes, 
through the courtesy of the Court was provided. …”  

17.  Furthermore,  in  the  case  of  Aamir  Shahzad  VS  Additional 

District  Judge Multan  (2015  CLC  632),  the object  of  the WP-FC  Act 

has  been  explained  by  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  in  the 

following terms:-  

“7.         It is a settled principle of law that purpose of enacting the 
special law regarding the family disputes is to advance justice and 
to avoid technicalities which are hindrance in providing ultimate 
justice to the parties. It is pertinent to mention here that West 
Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  was  promulgated  for  the 
expeditious  settlement  and  disposal  of  disputes  relating  to 
marriages and other family affairs and special procedure was 
provided to achieve this object ...” 
8.         The purpose of enacting Family Courts Act, 1964 is to 
frustrate the technicalities for the purpose of justice between the 
parties in the shortest possible manner. All that the Family Courts 
Act, 1964 has done is that it has changed the forum, altered the 
method of trial and empowered the Court to grant better reliefs. 
The provisions of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 as well as Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, 1984 are not applicable in stricto sensu to 
proceedings before the Family Court by virtue of section 17 of the 
Act, 1964. Family Court has to regulate its own proceedings in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act, 1964; and in doing so it 
has  to  proceed  on  the  premises  that  every  procedure  is 
permissible unless a clear prohibition is found in law …” 

18.  Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that he was fully 

abreast  of  the  law  that  interlocutory  orders  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge Family Court could not be interfered with in the constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  this  court,  but  clarified  that  the  petitioners  have 

assailed  the  Order  dated  27.11.2015  on  the  ground  that  it  was  in 

excess of the jurisdiction of the learned Judge Family Court.  

19. 

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Maham  Shabbir  VS  Salman  Haider  (2014 

CLC 330), the Hon'ble Islamabad High Court held as follows:-  

“9. … High Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction is not sitting as a 
Court of appeal, or court of revision. Its jurisdiction to interfere on 
the point of fact is limited. Interlocutory order if does not suffer 
from any illegality, malafide or is not in excess of jurisdiction or 
lack  of  exercise  of  jurisdiction  or  not  based  on  misreading, 
misconstruing or discarding of the evidence and material on 
record  cannot  be  challenged  in  constitutional  jurisdiction. 
Nevertheless,  the  facts  of  each  case  are  to  be  considered 
separately  and  no  uniform  principle  can  be  determined  for 
exercising the writ jurisdiction.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

W.P No.596 of 2016   

20.  As  explained  hereinabove,  I  do  not  find  any  jurisdictional 

infirmity in the learned Judge, Family Court, Islamabad, entertaining 

and  deciding  an  application  under  Section  12  of  the  G&W  Act  in  a 

suit  for  recovery  of  dower  etc.  Resultantly,  the  petition,  being 

devoid of merits is dismissed, but in the circumstances of the case, 

there shall be no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2016 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

             (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan*  

                     (JUDGE) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
