HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P. No. 3635 of 2014 

M/S Attock Petroleum Ltd Rawalpindi 
VS
Additional Commissioner Inland Revenue 

S.No. of order/ 
Proceeding 

Date of 
hearing 

Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or 
counsel, where necessary. 

05-08-2014   Mr Mian Tauqeer Aslam Advocate for the petitioner. 

Mr Tariq Mehmood Khokhar Deputy Attorney General. 
Mr Malik Faisal Rafique Deputy Attorney General. 
Mr Talat Abbas Khan Standing Counsel. 
Mr Malik Zahoor Standing Counsel. 
Mr Chaudhry Haseeb Standing Counsel. 
Mr Kh. Imtiaz Standing Counsel. 
Mr Syed Nayyab Gerdezi Advocate (on Court call). 

At  the  very  outset  a  question  has  arisen  as  to 

whether this Court has jurisdiction to hear and entertain the 

petition, which has been filed by invoking Article 199 of the 

Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  on  the 

ground  that  through  a  Notification  issued  by  the  Federal 

Government,  Article  245  of  the  Constitution  has  been 

invoked  and,  therefore,  in  the  light  of  sub-Article  3, 

jurisdiction vested under Article 199 has been ousted. It was 

also  brought  to  the  notice  of  this  Court  that  it  has  been 

widely publicized in the print media that since Article 245 of 

the  Constitution  has  been  invoked,  therefore,  during  the 

period  for  which  it  remains  enforced,  this  Court  shall  have 

no  jurisdiction  to  exercise  powers  under  Article  199  in 

relation  to  any  area  in  which  the  Armed  Forces  of  Pakistan 

are  for  the  time  being,  acting  in  aid  of  civil  power  in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
                                       -2- 

pursuance  of  Article  245  of  the  Constitution.  It  was 

contended  that  such  wide  publication  has  created  a 

perception  that  the  right  to  access  to  the  Court  and  the  

fundamental  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  shall 

remain suspended regardless of the nature of grievance. 

2. 

On  the  notice  of  this  Court,  the  learned  Deputy 

Attorney General Tariq Mehmood Khokhar made appearance 

and  placed  on  record  Notification  dated  24th  July,  2014, 

whereby  it  appears  that  on  the  request  of  the  Chief 

Commissioner,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  the  Federal 

Government in exercise of its powers under  Article 245 has 

exercised  its  powers  and  has  been  pleased  to  authorize 

deployment of 350 troops of Pakistan Army, subject to law, 

to act in aid of the civil power of Islamabad Capital Territory, 

to  discharge  such  functions  as  specified  for  a  period  of  90 

days. The Notification dated 24th July, 2014 does not specify 

any  reason  other  than  mentioning  about  some  request  of 

the Chief Commissioner of the Islamabad Capital Territory. It 

is  further  informed  that  invoking  Article  245  of  the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  has 

been challenged before this Court in Writ Petition No.3642 of 

2014 which is fixed before another Bench for tomorrow. The 

learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  has  placed  reliance  on 

“Niaz Ahmed Khan VS Province of Sindh  (P.L.D.  1977 

[Karachi]  604,  Amanat Hussain VS Mst. Misri Bibi  (P.L.D. 

1977  [Lahore]  840),  Darwesh M. Arbey VS Federation of 

Pakistan & others  (P.L.D.  1980  [Lahore]  206,  Federation  of 

 
  
                                       -3- 

Pakistan  &  another  VS Malik Ghulam Mustafa Khar  (P.L.D. 

1989  S.C.  26),  in  support  of  the  contention  that  powers  of 

this  Court  to  exercise  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  shall 

remain  suspended  or  ousted  during  the  period  specified  in 

the Notification dated 24th July, 2014. It was contended that 

such ouster is complete and makes no distinction regarding 

grievances relating to acts or omissions of the Armed Forces 

acting  in  "aid  of  civil  power"  in  pursuance  of  a  direction 

under  Article  245  (1)  or  those  which  relate  to  the  civil 

executive  authorities  having  no  nexus  with  the  said 

direction.  By  implication,  the  ouster  being  complete,  the 

court  has  no  jurisdiction  to  exercise  powers  even  in  such 

matters such as petitions seeking bails, family disputes, rent 

matters, environmental issues etc.  

 3.        In the cases cited by the learned Deputy Attorney 

General,  the  facts  and  circumstances  were  altogether 

different  and,  therefore  distinguishable..  Furthermore,  in  all 

the cases the importance of the right of “access to justice to 

all”  as  a  fundamental  right  has  been  recognized  and  it  has 

been unequivocally held that the right could not be exercised 

in  the  absence  of  an  independent  judiciary  providing 

impartial,  fair  and  just  adjudicatory  framework  i.e.  judicial 

hierarchy. By now it is settled that the phrase “to act in aid 

of  civil  power”  used  in  Article  245  (1)  of  the  Constitution 

does not include the power to substitute the existing judicial 

system or to establish a parallel  system.  The civil executive 

authorities  do  not  cease  to  function  or  go  in  oblivion.  The 

 
 
                                       -4- 

phrase  “subject  to  law”  in  relation  to  acting  in  “aid  of  the 

civil  power”  has  also  been  interpreted,  which  reaffirms  that 

the  ouster  of  jurisdiction  of  the  Court  to  exercise  powers 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  is,  neither  naked  nor, 

can  the  citizens  be  deprived  of  enforcing  their  fundamental 

rights.  

4. 

In  all  fairness  the  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General 

while assisting this Court, admits that it is for the Courts to 

interpret and decide the jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 

Constitution. The learned counsel in Writ Petition No.3642 of 

2014 along with the President of the District Bar Association 

Islamabad,  also  assisted  the  Court.  The  learned  Deputy 

 Attorney  General  suggests  that  the  petitions  fixed  in  this 

Court be adjourned till the  Writ Petition No.3642 of 2014 is 

decided  by  this  Court.  However,  as  pointed  out  that  the 

matter has already been given wide publication through the 

print  media  thereby  adversely  affecting  the  enforcement  of 

fundamental rights and the right to access to justice in case 

of  persons  aggrieved  of  the  actions/inactions  of  the  civil 

executive  authorities.  The  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General 

has not been able  to  persuade this Court that  the ouster is 

complete  and  extends  to  grievances  other  than  the  acts  or 

omissions  committed  by  the  Armed  forces  acting  in  "aid  of 

civil  powers"  in  pursuance  of  directions  of  the  Federal 

Government  under  Article  254  (1). 

It 

is  such  an 

interpretation  which  has  inevitably  created  the  perception 

that the ouster is complete under sub-Article 3 of Article 245 

 
 
                                       -5- 

of  the  Constitution,  and  thereby  having  the  consequences   

of denying access to justice and the Courts for enforcement 

of  their  fundamental  rights,  particularly  where  the  acts 

challenged  before 

this  Court  have  no 

relationship 

whatsoever  with  the  functions  of  the  Armed  Forces,  while 

acting  in  aid  of  civil  power.  Furthermore,  the  Notification 

dated  24th  July,  2014,  is  silent  regarding  any  plausible 

reason  for  invoking  Article  245.  However,  the  matter  is 

subjudice  in  W.P.3642  of  2014,  and  therefore,  propriety 

requires that no observation is made with regard thereto.  

5. 

By now it is a settled law that even in case of ouster 

clauses,  it  is  for  the  Courts  to  determine  and  decide  their 

respective jurisdiction. Any perception that the jurisdiction of 

this Court under Article 199 or the right to access to justice 

or  enforcement  of 

fundamental 

rights  have  been 

automatically  suspended,  is  not  in  public  interest  and 

undermines the independence of judiciary.  

6. 

It  is  further  alarming  that  the  such  perception  has 

been  created  despite  the  fact  that  the  matter  remains 

subjudice  before  this  Court.  Nothing  has  been  placed  on 

record  which  would  persuade  this  Court  to  come  to  a 

conclusion 

that  sub-Article  3  of  Article  245  of 

the 

Constitution has ousted jurisdiction in such cases having no 

relationship  whatsoever  with  the  directions  issued  under 

Article  245  (1)  of  the  Constitution.  The  learned  Deputy 

Attorney  General  has  also  not  been  able  to  persuade  this 

Court that the Armed Forces, which are called in “aid” during 

 
 
 
                                       -6- 

natural calamities, interalia, during floods or earthquake, and 

in which the Armed Forces render  appreciable services, can 

in any manner tantamount to ousting the jurisdiction of the 

Court under Article 199 of the Constitution. 

7. 

In  all  petitions  listed  for  today,  the  petitioners  have 

invoked  the  jurisdiction  of  this  court  for  enforcement  of 

fundamental rights which have no nexus or any relationship 

with the acts or omissions of the Armed Forces acting in "aid 

of  civil  powers"  in  pursuance  of  Article  245  (1)  of  the 

Constitution. If the arguments raised by the learned Deputy 

Attorney  General  are  accepted, 

it  would 

result 

in 

immeasurable  and  gross  miscarriage  of  justice,  which  could 

never  have  been  the  intention  of  the  framers  of  the 

Constitution. 

It  would  also  severely  undermine 

the 

independence of judiciary by denying the right to access to 

justice  and  the  courts  for  enforcement  of  fundamental 

rights.                  

8. 

After  hearing  the  learned  counsel  at  length  and  with 

the able assistance of the learned Deputy Attorney General, 

this  Court  is  not  persuaded  that  the  jurisdiction  to  exercise 

the powers vested in this Court under Article 199 have been 

completely  ousted  under  Article  245  (3),  extending  to  such 

grievances  having  no  nexus  with  the  functions,  acts  or 

omissions of the Armed Forces acting in aid of civil powers in 

pursuance  of  directions  issued  under  Article  245  (1)  of  the 

Constitution.  There  is  no  petition  fixed  for  today  which  has 

challenged  any  act  or  omission  in  relation  to  or  connected 

 
 
 
                                       -7- 

with  the  Armed  Forces  acting  in  aid  of  civil  powers  in 

pursuance  of  Article  245  (1)  of  the  Constitution.  This  Court 

has,  therefore,  not  made  any  observation  in  this  regard  as 

no  such  matter  is  under  consideration  or  before  this  Court. 

Even otherwise, as pointed out, the vires of the notification 

dated  24th  July  2014  shall  be  considered  by  this  Court  in 

Writ  Petition  No.3642  of  2014  along  with  the  question  of 

ouster of jurisdiction of this Court in such matters where the 

acts and omissions of the Armed Forces acting in aid of civil 

powers  in  pursuance  of  the  direction  issued  under  Article 

245  (1)  have  or  may  be  challenged  by  invoking  Article  199 

of the Constitution.     

9. 

Therefore,  this  Court  has  no  hesitation  in  concluding 

that  despite  issuance  of  an  Executive  Order  through 

Notification dated 24th July, 2014, this Court has jurisdiction 

to proceed and exercise its powers vested under Article 199 

of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  in 

case  of  such  petitions  where  the  grievance  relates  to 

acts/orders or omissions having no nexus with or relating to 

the Armed Forces acting in aid of civil powers under Article 

245 (1) of the Constitution. This order shall not prejudice the 

proceedings before another Bench in WP No. 3642 of 2014.    

10.  Having  concluded  that  this  Court  has  jurisdiction  to 

exercise  powers  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  the 

petitions fixed for today are, therefore, taken up.  

 
 
 
 
 
                                       -8- 

Main Case. 

The  learned  Counsel  contends  that  the  impugned 

order  dated  14.07.2014  is  non-speaking  and  has  been 

passed in violation of the settled principles of law laid down 

by  the  honourable  Supreme  Court.  The  application  for 

interim relief has been arbitrarily dismissed and on the very 

face  of  the  order  it  is  perfunctory.  It  is  further  contended 

that  several  other  similar  petitions  are  pending.    This  Court 

has already taken up  a number of petitions and on the last 

date  of  hearing  senior  officers  of  the  Federal  Board  of 

Revenue  had  appeared,  and  have  consented  to  submit  a 

final  report  before  the  next  date  of  hearing.  The  said  Writ 

Petitions are fixed by the order of this Court on 18.09.2014, 

whereby the same issue is under consideration. The petition 

may  also  be  relisted  on  18.09.2014  alongwith  Writ  Petition 

No.3078/2014.  

C.M. No.1 of 2014 

Notice. In the meanwhile no further recovery shall be 

made till 18-09-2014. 

C.M. No.2 of 2014 

Dispensation  sought  for  is  allowed  subject  to  all  just 

and legal exceptions. C.M. stands disposed of. 

*Luqman/ 

(ATHAR MINALLAH) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
