Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P No.1489 of 2019 

Intasar Ahmed Khan 

VS

Naila Ruby, etc. 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

Date of Decision 

: 

: 

: 

 Mr. Muhammad Adnan, proxy counsel. 

 Nemo. 

25-01-2023 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.-  Through  this  writ 

petition, the petitioner namely, Intasar Ahmed Khan has assailed the 

order,  dated  13.12.2018,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge-West,  Islamabad  in  appeal  whereby  ex-parte  judgment  and 

decree,  dated  25.4.2017  as  well  as  the  order,  dated  09.11.2016, 

passed  by  the  learned  Civil/Family  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  were 

assailed.  

2. 

The learned counsel for the petitioner was not present in 

the  hearing  as  he  has  been  appointed  as  Law  Officer,  however,  the 

proxy  counsel  has  been  given  two  opportunities  on  27.10.2022  as 

well as today but no justified answer has been given for engagement 

of a new counsel. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 2 
W.P. No.1489/2019 

3. 

In such scenarios this Court is bound to decide the matter 

in  accordance  with  law  especially  when  the  matter  is  still  pending 

with the learned Judge Family Court since 2014. 

4. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  petition  are  that  the 

respondent Naila Ruby has filed a suit for recovery of maintenance on 

15.11.2014  against  the  petitioner  on  the  grounds  that  she  was 

married  to  the  petitioner  on  12.08.2008  and  due  to  acute  disparity 

they  were  living  separately.  The  petitioner  had  not  paid  any 

maintenance  since  January  2009.  Though  column  No.19  of  the 

Nikkah Nama contains a maintenance of Rs.30,000/- per month to be 

given to the respondent/plaintiff. 

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  petitioner  has  taken  the  stance 

that  the  suit  is  barred  by  law  and  he  denied  the  relationship  of 

husband  and  wife  among  the  parties  on  the  ground  that  the  Nikkah 

executed  between  the  parties  placed  on  record  is  a  forged  Nikkah 

Nama.  The  suit  was  ex-parte  decreed  vide  judgment  and  decree, 

dated  25.04.2017,  even  right  to  produce  evidence  by  the  petitioner 

was  closed  on  05.04.2017  and  earlier  to  that  his  right  to  cross 

examine the plaintiff’s witnesses was closed on 09-03-2017. Ex-parte 

judgment  and  decree  was  assailed  before  the  appellate  court,  which 

has  allowed  the  appeal  and  set-aside  the  judgment  and  decree  vide 

the impugned order, dated 13.12.2018 in the following manner:-  

“Admittedly  and  by  perusal  of  record  it  is 

found  that  the  suit  of  the  plaintiff/respondent  was 

dismissed  due  to  non-prosecution  but  in  the 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.1489/2019 

subsequent date it was restored when the appellant 

did not appear before the Court. It is the contention 

of  the  appellant  that  respondent  is  not  a  wedded 

wife  of  him  and  is  a  member  of  land  grabbers  by 

using  such  sort  of  fake  agreements  and  Nikkah 

Nama 

and 

that 

after 

the 

suit 

of 

the 

plaintiff/respondent was dismissed he proceeded to 

England on 06.08.2016 for his treatment and since 

that  time  he  never  had  come  back  to  Pakistan. 

Benefit  of  it  was  taken  by  respondent  and  on  a 

fabricated  address  his  notices  were  issued  then 

advertisement  was  made  in  a  newspaper,  which 

was  never  published  at  England,  nor  any  email  on 

his ID was sent. By perusal of record the appellant 

has  not  moved  any  application  before  the  learned 

trial  Court  to  set  aside  the  ex-parte  decree  passed 

against him and during arguments no objection was 

made  by  the  learned  counsel  of  the  responden.t  It 

is  most  preferably  to  move  the  application  for 

setting  aside  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  before 

the  learned  trial  court  and  learned  trial  Court  is 

directed  to  decide  it  on  merit  if  filed  by  the 

appellant.  Meanwhile,  the  file  be  consigned  to 

record.  A  copy  of  this  order  alongwith  lower  court 

record,  be  sent  to  the  learned  trial  court  for 

 
Page - 4 
W.P. No.1489/2019 

information  and  compliance  whereas,  the  instant 

file be consigned to record.” 

6.  

While  considering  the  above  order  it  appears  that  the 

judgment and decree was not set-aside and the petitioner was given 

an  opportunity  to  file  an  application  to  set-aside  the  ex-parte 

judgment  and  decree  before  the  trial  court  but  the  petitioner  has 

challenged  the  said  order  before  this  Court  in  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction.  As  such  the  judgment  still  hold  the  field  and  the 

petitioner  has  not  paid  single  penny  to  the  respondent/plaintiff  as 

maintenance,  therefore,  at  this  stage  this  Court  is  not  inclined  to 

interfere  in  the  impugned  order  and  the  petitioner  is  directed  to 

appear  before  the  learned  trial  court  after  filing  an  application  for 

setting  aside  ex-parte  proceedings  if  he  desire  and  contest  his 

grounds  for  setting  aside  of  the  decree  accordingly.  However,  if  he 

chooses  to  proceed  accordingly  it  is  expected  from  the  trial  court  to 

decide  the  matter  within  the  period  of  (03)  three  months  under 

intimation  to  this  Court.  No  illegality  has  been  observed  in  the 

impugned order and the appeal was rightly dismissed. No question of 

interference  is  made  out  in  constitutional  jurisdiction,  therefore, 

instant writ petition is dismissed accordingly.          

 (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
 JUDGE 

Asif Mughal/- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
