ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Jail Appeal No.207/2020 
Muhammad Walayat VS The State 

Jail Appeal No.201/2020 
Chanzeb VS The State 

and 

Murder Reference No.03/2020 
The State VS Walayat Hussain & another 

Appellants by: 

M/s Basharat Ullah Khan, Raja Aamir Shahzad and 
Shuja Ullah Gondal, Advocates. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed, State Counsel. 
Ms. Qurat-ul-Ain Ayesha, Advocate for complainant 

Date of Hearing: 

14.02.2022. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this  single  judgment,  we 

intend  to  decide  the  captioned  jail  appeals  and  murder  reference  arising  out  of 

judgment  dated  20.11.2020,  passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-II  / 

Judge  MCTC  (East),  Islamabad,  in  case  FIR  No.23,  dated  20.03.2015,  under 

Sections  302/324/34  PPC,  P.S.  Nilore,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  appellants 

Walayat  Hussain  and  Chanzeb  have  been  sentenced  to  death  under  Section 

302(b)  PPC  along  with  compensation  of  Rs.300,000/-,  in  failure  whereof,  they 

shall suffer further imprisonment for six (06) months, however benefit of Section 

382-B Cr.P.C. has been extended to the appellants.    

2. 

Brief  and  consolidated  facts  are  that  Safeer  Ahmed  (complainant) 

submitted  a  complaint  for  registration  of  a  criminal  case  against  the  appellants 

alleging that on 20.03.2015, at about 05:00 p.m., when he was present in his house 

along  with  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  (sister),  Jahangir  Ahmed  (brother-in-law),  Mst. 

Raqeeba Bibi (mother) as well as with Munir Ahmed and Muhammad Jahangir 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 2 

(brothers),  appellant  Chanzeb  while  armed  with  .30  bore  pistol  as  well  as  his 

father  Walayat  Hussain  (appellant),  armed  with  12  bore  rifle  and  Muhammad 

Ashraf armed with hatchet, appeared on their rooftop, whereby the latter raised 

lalkara  to  complainant’s  brother  Muhammad  Jahangir  to  come  out  in  order  to 

teach  him  a  lesson  for  supporting  Mst.  Amina  Bibi,  whereafter  both  the 

appellants started indiscriminate firing, as a result whereof the complainant and 

his family members tried to save themselves by hiding behind the walls, per se, 

such firing attracted complainant’s another brother, Amjad, who was working as 

a  laborer  in  vicinity,  rushed  towards  the  house,  whereupon  appellant  Chanzeb 

using  his  .30  bore  pistol  made  fire  shots  on Amjad,  hitting  him  on  his  chest,  as 

such, the appellant  Chanzeb also made  fire shot on  complainant’s sister-in-law, 

Mst. Farhat Jabeen, hitting her on her left side chest, whereas appellant Walayat 

Hussain made  fire  shot on complainant’s sister, Mst. Farida Bibi, hitting her  on 

her leg and another fire shot on complainant’s mother, Mst. Raqeeba Bibi, hitting 

her  on  her  left  foot,  whereafter  the  accused  persons  fled  away  from  the  scene 

while  making  aerial  firing.  The  injured  persons  were  taken  to  hospital,  but 

complainant’s  brother  Amjad,  sister  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  and  sister-in-law  Mst. 

Farhat  Jabeen  succumbed  to  injuries.  The  said  complaint  was  converted  into 

aforesaid  FIR  No.23/2015,  whereafter  the  accused  persons  were  arrested  and 

formally  charged,  to  which  they  pleaded  not  guilty  and  claimed  trial.  After 

recording  of  pro  and  contra  evidence,  the  learned  trial  Court  vide  impugned 

judgment  sentenced  the  appellants  to  death  as  Ta’zir.  Hence,  the  captioned 

appeals and murder reference.  

3. 

Learned counsel for respective appellants contended that there is a delay 

in lodging of the FIR as the occurrence had allegedly taken place at about 05:00 

p.m.,  whereas  the  FIR  has  been  registered  at  about  9:00  p.m.,  which  manifests 

consultation and deliberation in involving the appellants in the instant case; that 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 3 

neither  any  empty  has  been  recovered  from  rooftop  from  where  the  appellants 

had  allegedly  made  fire  shots,  nor  any  bullet  on  any  part  of  the  walls  of 

complainant’s house has been proved by the prosecution; that there are material 

contradictions and discrepancies in the statements of prosecution witnesses, even 

in  the  statement  of  complainant,  who  stated  that  he  had  handed  over  the 

complaint  to  police  in  police  station,  whereas  the  Investigating  Officer 

acknowledged that he had received the complaint in hospital, even otherwise, all 

the prosecution witnesses are blood relatives and inimical to the appellants; that 

the medical evidence is not in line with the prosecution story, even the medical 

evidence  as  well  as  the  forensic  evidence  are  in  contradiction  with  the  ocular 

account;  that  neither  any  detail  regarding  the  motive  is  given  nor  Mst.  Amina 

Bibi  appeared  during  the  investigation  or  before  the  learned  trial  Court  in 

support  of  the  motive;  that  the  case  as  established  by  the  prosecution  is  full  of 

dents and doubts, benefit of which always goes in favour of accused persons, but 

the learned trial Court ignoring all such lacunas passed the impugned judgment 

in a hasty manner, which is not sustainable as per available record.   

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

complainant  in  support  of  the  impugned 

judgment  contended  that  the 

complainant having lost three (03) members of the family could not rush towards 

police station for registration of FIR, rather the natural course demands that the 

loved  ones  be  saved  and  treated;  that  five  eyewitnesses,  including  one  injured 

witness,  appeared  before  the  Court  and  deposed  in  line  with  the  prosecution 

story,  who  otherwise  remained  consistent  in  their  testimonies,  as  such,  the 

eyewitnesses could not be considered interested witness due to their relationship 

with the deceased persons, per se, the defence has not denied the occurrence in 

unequivocal  terms,  rather  tried  to  puzzle  the  prosecution  witnesses  in  order  to 

create dents in the prosecution case; that the empties coupled with the led bullets 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 4 

and  pallets  recovered  from  the  dead  bodies  have  matched  with  the  weapons 

recovered from the appellants; the learned trial Court has rightly appreciated the 

overall  circumstances  of  the  case  and  sentenced  the  appellants  in  accordance 

with law.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  complaint  Exh.PA  was  filed  by  PW-1 

Muhammad  Safeer  (complainant)  to  the  S.H.O.  alleging  that  on  20.03.2015,  his 

sister  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  and  brother-in-law  Jahangir  Ahmad  came  to  his  house 

where he along with his other brother Muhammad Jahangir and Munir Ahmad 

as  well  as  his  sister-in-law  Mst.  Farhat  Jabeen  and  mother  Mst.  Raqeeba  Bibi 

were sitting in their home, as such, all of a sudden Muhammad Ashraf (acquitted 

accused) while armed with a hatchet, Chanzeb (appellant) while armed with .30 

bore pistol and Walayat Hussain (appellant) while armed with 12 bore shot gun 

having magazine, appeared at the rooftop in a manner that Muhammad Ashraf 

raised Lalkara to complainant’s brother Muhammad Jahangir to  come out as we 

have  to  teach  a  lesson  for  supporting  Mst.  Amina  Bibi,  as  a  result  whereof 

Walayat Hussain and  Chanzeb  appellants  started firing at their  house, whereas 

the  complainant’s  brother  took  shelter  towards  the  house.  The  complainant’s 

brother i.e. Amjad (deceased) after hearing the firing came towards the house as 

he  was  working  in  a  nearby  street,  on  whom  Chanzeb  (appellant)  with  his  .30 

bore pistol made a straight fire upon him hitting him on his chest, as such, when 

the complainant party learnt about Amjad’s injury, they clamored while running 

towards Amjad in order to save him, but Chanzeb (appellant) made another fire 

shot  on  complainant’s  sister-in-law  i.e.  Mst.  Farhat  Jabee  hitting  her  on  upper 

side  of  chest,  whereas  Walayat  Hussain  (appellant)  fired  from  his  gun  on 

complainant’s  sister  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  hitting  her  leg  followed  by  another  fire 

shot on complainant’s mother  Mst. Raqeeba Bibi hitting her on right foot. After 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 5 

the  incident,  the  complainant  and  others  took  the  injured  to  the  Polyclinic 

Hospital  in  cot,  but  complainant’s  brother  Amjad,  sister-in-law  Mst.  Farhat 

Jabeen and sister Mst. Fareeda Bibi succumbed to injuries.  

7. 

The statement recorded by the complainant has further been supported by 

PW-2 Muhammad Jahangir, who is husband of Mst. Farhat Jabeen as he narrated 

the  same  story  as  referred  in  Exh.PA.  Similarly,  PW-3  Munir  Ahmad 

(complainant’s  brother),  who  also  claims  to  be  an  eyewitness  and  narrated  a 

similar  stance, as such,  the stance of  PW-4 Jahangir Ahmad,  who is husband of 

Mst. Fareeda Bibi, is also in line with the principal allegations of the complainant, 

while the last witness i.e. Mst. Raqeeba Bibi (mother) appeared as PW-5 and gave 

the  same  details.  The  five  eyewitnesses’  account  spells  out  some  minor 

contradictions  in  their  testimonies,  whereas  on  minute  scanning  of  record, 

following admitted facts emerges in this case: 

i) 

PW-1  to  PW-5  are  family  members,  who  were  present  at  the 

place of occurrence, whereas the incident took place outside the 

house as per site plan Exh.PR. 

ii) 

All  three  accused  persons,  Chanzeb,  Walayat  Hussain  and 

Muhammad  Ashraf  are  also  relatives  of  complainant  party  and 

they are neighbours. 

iii) 

As per complaint, the firing was made from rooftop in courtyard 

of complainant’s house by the accused party at the first instance, 

from  where  no  crime  empty  was  recovered  as  per  PW-18 

Investigating Officer. 

iv) 

Deceased  Amjad  was  not  at  home,  who  otherwise  rushed 

towards  his  house  from  a  neighboring  street  after  hearing  the 

firing. 

v) 

Chanzeb (appellant) allegedly made three (03) fire shots with his 

.30 bore pistol upon the deceased Amjad in a close range having 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 6 

no  exit  wounds  i.e.  first  on  the  front  of  right  chest  on  third 

intercostals  space  with  slight  blackening  and  charring  marks, 

second  on  left  arm  lateral  aspect  with  slight  blackening  and 

charring  marks  and  third  on  5  c.m.  below  axilla  left  side  with 

slight  blackening  and  charring  mark.  All  three  pellets  were 

recovered from the dead body and handed over to the police by 

the doctor.  

vi) 

Chanzeb  (appellant) also  made fire  shot  with his .30 bore pistol 

on  Mst.  Farhat  Jabeen  (wife  of  Muhammad  Jahangir),  which 

landed on right side of chest below axilla with slight blackening 

and  charring  marks  having  no  exit  wound.  The  deceased  Mst. 

Farhat Jabeen also received a bruise mark on left lumber aspect. 

The  pellet  was  also  recovered  from  her  dead  body,  which  was 

handed over to the police. 

vii) 

Complainant’s sister Mst. Fareeda Bibi also received 12 bore shot 

gun  injuries  at  the  hands  of  Walayat  Hussain  (appellant)  on  (i) 

posterior aspect of mid thigh on right leg, (ii) on posterior aspect 

of mid thigh on left leg, (iii) on lateral aspect of right calf with no 

blackening,  (iv)  on  medial  aspect  of  right  ankle  with  no 

blackening  and  (v)  bruise  with  entry  wound  over  the  medial 

aspect of right leg.  

viii) 

PW-5  Mst.  Raqeeba  Bibi  (mother)  also  received  firearm  injuries 

at the hands of Walayat Hussain  (appellant) on left foot, but no 

MLR to her extent is available.  

ix) 

Muhammad  Ashraf  (acquitted  accused)  while  armed  with 

hatchet has only been attributed with the role of Lalkara. 

x) 

Muhammad Aslam (S.H.O.) has recovered  four firearm empties 

of  .30  bore  pistols  and  nine  12  bore  shot  gun  cartridges  from 

place  of  occurrence  having  been  collected  from  two  different 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 7 

locations  in  presence  of  witnesses  through  memo  Exh.PZD  on 

same day of occurrence.  

xi) 

No  motive  has  been  set  up  by  the  prosecution,  though  the 

complaint  reveals  that  Ashraf  (acquitted  accused)  raised  lalkara 

that  Jahangir  come  out  as  we  have  to  teach  a  lesson  for 

supporting Amina Bibi. 

xii) 

No  evidence  to  the  extent  of  Amina  Bibi  or  a  dispute  to  her 

extent  has  been  brought  on  record  by  either  party  or  by  the 

Investigating Officer.  

xiii) 

PW-18  Muhammad  Aslam  Kalyar  acknowledged  that  four 

firearm  empties  of  .30  bore  pistols  and  nine  12  bore  shot  gun 

cartridges were recovered from the place of occurrence. 

xiv) 

The Investigating Officer has not seen firing marks on the house 

of complainant. 

xv) 

Nothing  has  been  recovered  from  accused  Muhammad  Ashraf 

(acquitted accused) in this case.  

xvi) 

Investigating  Officer  reached  Polyclinic  Hospital  on  20.03.2015, 

at about 8 p.m., when all injured persons were dead, except Mst. 

Raqeeba Bibi, who sustained minor injuries. 

xvii)  MLR of Mst. Raqeeba Bibi was not prepared on 20.03.2015 by the 

MLO. 

xviii) 

Investigating  Officer  did  not  mention  or  note  the  number  of 

wounds in column No.10 of the three inquest reports. 

xix) 

A  written  complaint  was  received 

in  hospital  from  the 

complainant at 8:30 p.m.  

xx) 

Six  eyewitnesses  were  present 

in  hospital  before 

the 

Investigating  Officer,  who  recorded  their  statements  under 

Section 161 Cr.PC. 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 8 

xxi) 

As  per  Investigating Officer,  Muhammad  Jahangir  son  of  Boota 

PW  made  dishonest  improvement  against  the  role  of  accused 

Chanzeb. 

xxii) 

On  23.03.2015,  Muhammad  Ashraf  (acquitted  accused)  was 

arrested. 

xxiii) 

On  30.05.2015,  appellants  Walayat  Hussain  and  Chanzeb  were 

arrested.  

xxiv) 

On  02.06.2015,  .30  bore  pistol  (Exh.P10)  and  12  bore  shot  gun 

(Exh.P11)  were  recovered  from  old  house  of  Chanzeb  appellant 

situated  in  Chirah  on  his  pointation  vide  recovery  memo 

Exh.PZE. 

xxv) 

xxvi) 

All fire empties were sent on FSL on 14.05.2015 for examination. 

FIR  under  Section  13/20/65  of  the  Arms  Ordinance  was 

registered.  

xxvii)  On  02.06.2015,  appellant  Walayat  Hussain  made  disclosure  and 

led the police party for recovery of .30 bore pistol Exh.P12 and 12 

bore  shot  gun  Exh.P13  from  his  house,  which  were  taken  into 

custody through recovery memo Exh.PG. 

xxviii)  PW-14 Malik Amir Shahzad / Draftsman prepared the scale site 

plan (Exh.PR) on the pointation of complainant and in presence 

of Muhammad Aslam Kalyar / Investigating Officer. 

xxix) 

On  25.06.2015,  PW-12  Muhammad  Riasat  (Moharrar  Malkhana) 

received  two  sealed  parcels  of  two  pistols  and  two  rifles  from 

Muhammad  Aslam  /  Investigating  Officer  to  keep  the  same  in 

Malkhana,  which  were  handed  over  to  Naveed  /  Constable  for 

onward  transmission  to  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Laboratory, 

Lahore, on the same day. 

xxx) 

On 14.05.2015, PW-10 Muhammad Naveed (Constable) received 

three  (03)  parcels  containing  goli  sikka  having  been  stamped  by 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 9 

CMO Polyclinic Hospital, empty of 12 bore shot gun as well as of 

.30  bore  pistol  along  with  road  certificate 

for  onward 

transmission 

to  F-10  Laboratory 

Islamabad,  which  were 

deposited on same day.  

xxxi) 

PW-7  Umar  Hayat  /  ASI,  duty  officer  of  Police  Station  Nilore 

received  the  formal  complaint  from  Imran  /  Constable,  drafted 

by the Investigating Officer, which was registered and converted 

into  FIR  No.23,  dated  20.03.2015,  under  Sections  302/324/34 

PPC, P.S. Nilore, Islamabad, at about 8:55 pm. 

xxxii)  Dead  bodies  were  taken  to  the  home  on  the  next  morning  by 

PW-1 Muhammad Safeer (complainant) from hospital. 

xxxiii)  PW-1 complainant  / eyewitness acknowledged that Amina Bibi 

is  his  niece  and  Muhammad  Ashraf  is  his  uncle.  The  houses  of 

complainant’s  brother  Muhammad  Jahangir  and  his  uncle 

Muhammad  Ashraf  (acquitted  accused)  are  adjacent,  whereas 

the  house  of  complainant  is  at  some  distance.  Same  is  the  case 

with the house of Muhammad Ashraf.  

xxxiv)  PW-1  complainant  acknowledged  that  no  dispute  ever  arose  or 

existed  amongst  Muhammad  Ashraf  (acquitted  accused)  or  his 

biradari / fraternity, who is the oldest in his biradari / fraternity. 

xxxv)  Not  a  single  question  has  been  asked  from  PW-1  complainant 

qua the incident.  

xxxvi)  Houses  of  all  four  brothers  of  complainant  are  in  same  line. 

House  of  appellants  Chanzeb  and  Walayat  Hussain  is  on 

western side of complainant’s house.  

xxxvii)  PW-1  complainant  acknowledged  that  complaint  (Exh.PA)  for 

registration of FIR was given by him on 20.03.2015, at about 4 / 5 

p.m. in Police Station Nilore. 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 10 

xxxviii)  PW-1  complainant  had  not  seen  Amjad  (deceased)  coming 

towards  the  place  of  incident  and  his  presence  was  notified  by 

the people from outside that he was coming from his workplace 

towards his house. 

xxxix)  PW-2  Muhammad  Jahangir  i.e.  second  eyewitness  of  the  case, 

received the last worn clothes of deceased Amjad, Mst. Fareeda 

Bibi and Mst. Farhat Jabeen.  

xl) 

The  first  part  of  incident  had  taken  place  in  the  house  of  PW-2 

Muhammad Jahangir and as per his stance  the accused persons 

made fire shot from their roof.  

xli) 

PW-2  Muhammad  Jahangir  acknowledged  that  they  had  no 

enmity  with  Muhammad  Ashraf  (acquitted  accused)  and  all 

family members, including his brother and sisters, were present 

along with his mother on the day of incident in the house.  

xlii) 

PW-2 Muhammad Jahangir acknowledged that  he had  not seen 

when Amjad (deceased) was hit from fire of accused persons, as 

such,  he  came  out  of  house  after  hearing  the  firing  where  he 

found Amjad in injured condition. 

xliii) 

PW-2  Muhammad  Jahangir  further  acknowledged  that  bullet 

marks on their walls were seen by the police.  

xliv) 

PW-3  Munir  Ahmad  i.e.  another  eyewitness and  real  brother  of 

deceased, who has  introduced two blows of  pistol butt on head 

of Mst. Farhat Jabeen at the hands of Chanzeb (appellant), which 

is not in the medical evidence. 

xlv) 

PW-3 Munir Ahmad divided the incident into two parts i.e. first 

part  is  firing  from  the  roof  and  second  in  the  street  after  10 

minutes.  

xlvi) 

PW-3  Munir  Ahmad  also  acknowledged  that  they  have  no 

enmity with accused persons. 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 11 

xlvii) 

PW-4  Jahangir  Ahmad  i.e.  complainant’s  brother-in-law,  also 

acknowledged  that  he  had  no  enmity  with  accused  Walayat 

Hussain, Chanzeb or Muhammad Ashraf prior to the incident. 

xlviii) 

PW-5  Mst.  Raqeeba  Bibi  i.e.  mother  of  complainant  and 

deceased,  acknowledged  that  she  lives  with  the  complainant. 

Walayat Hussain (appellant) is real nephew of her husband. 

xlix) 

PW-5  Mst.  Raqeeba  Bibi  also  narrated  the  firing  of  Walayat 

Hussain (appellant) from the roof.  

l) 

PW-5 Mst. Raqeeba Bibi acknowledged that she had no previous 

enmity  prior  to  the  occurrence,  even  no  litigation  was  pending 

between the parties.  

li) 

She also acknowledged that  no  motive was  existed  prior to this 

occurrence.  

lii) 

NFSA report (Exh.PZI) reveals that the crime empties recovered 

from spot matched with the weapon recovered on pointation of 

appellants Walayat Hussain and Chanzeb. 

liii) 

The  crime  projectile  pallets  recovered  from  dead  body  of 

deceased  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  was  fired  from  12  bore  shot  gun 

matched with other crime projectile.  

liv) 

Similarly,  the  three  projectiles  recovered  from  dead  body  of 

Amjad  have  also  been  matched  with  12  bore  shot  gun  of 

Chanzeb appellant. 

8.  While scanning the admitted facts referred above, we are of view that the 

incident  took  place  into  two  parts  i.e.  in  the  first  part,  it  was  alleged  that  the 

accused party made firing in courtyard of complainant’s house from their  roof, 

though no  one was injured in that  portion of occurrence, even no sign of firing 

was confirmed from courtyard by the Investigating Officer, even not a single fire 

empty from rooftop of accused person house was recovered. In the second part 

 
 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 12 

of the occurrence, Amjad (deceased) received fire-arm injuries outside the house, 

who was not present in the first part of the occurrence and as per claim of PW-1 

complainant,  Amjad  (deceased)  after  hearing  the  firing  came to the  house  from 

nearby vicinity, but he was done to death outside the house allegedly by accused 

persons. The second part of the incident took place outside the house on a katcha 

rasta, where Amjad (deceased) was allegedly done to death in front of katcha rasta 

of  accused  persons’  house,  whereas  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  and  Mst.  Farhat  Jabeen 

received fire arm injuries allegedly at the hands of accused persons opposite the 

katcha  rasta  across  the  small  field,  whereby  the  second  katcha  rasta  leads  to  the 

complainant’s  house.  The  detailed  cross-examination  of  the  defence  on 

eyewitnesses  has  not  achieved  any  fruitful  result  in  their  favour  to  dispel  the 

consistency  of  events  narrated  by  the  eyewitnesses,  though  two  of  witnesses 

have not seen the receiving of injuries by Amjad (deceased). However, the most 

surprising factor surfaced on record is the non-introduction of the motive by the 

complainant,  rather  it  was  introduced  by  the  accused  person,  however  no 

witness  or  evidence  has  ever  been  brought  on  record  as  to  why  such  a 

murderous  assault  had  taken  place,  whereby  three  persons  were done  to  death 

while  one  was  injured.  The  detailed  cross-examination  of  eyewitnesses’  by  the 

accused  persons  reveals  that  all  the    eyewitnesses  acknowledged  that  they  had 

no enmity with accused persons on any account prior to the said occurrence, but 

the  defence  side  time  and  again  introduced  certain  defences  in  the  cross 

examination of eyewitnesses, which are as under: 

a)  The  suggestion  made  to  PW-1  by  defence  side  has  been  controverted  in 

the  manner  that,  “it  is  incorrect  to  suggest  that  we  all  four  brothers  equipped 

with arms 12 bore rifle and .30 bore pistols trespassed on to the house of accused 

persons to commit murder of accused Walayat”. 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 13 

b)  PW-1 (complainant) also controverted the suggestion that, it is incorrect to 

suggest  that  we  have  captured  the  cattle,  goats,  cows,  buffalos  and  precious 

articles  of  Walayat’s  and  Chanzeb’s  house,  including  gold  ornaments,  cash 

amount, cheque books of accused, pension book of accused and  the whole articles 

belongs to Walayat and Chanzeb’s family and were in use of their family. 

c)  While  cross  examining  PW-2  Muhammad  Jahangir,  the  accused  persons 

suggested  a  defence  to  him,  but  same  was  controverted  in  the  manner 

that,  it  is  incorrect  to  suggest  that  we  all  were  assembled  and  preparing  to 

commit  murder  of  accused  Wilayat  on  that  day  at  my  house.  It  has  also  been 

controverted  by  PW-2  Muhammad  Jahangir  that,  it  is  incorrect  that  we 

attacked the house of present accused on the day of incident to commit murder of 

accused Wilayat because he was alone male member at that time in his house. It is 

incorrect to suggests that  the ladies of the house locked accused Wilayat in room 

to save his life.  

d)  PW-2 Muhammad Jahangir also denied the suggestion that,  it is incorrect 

to  suggest  that  we  have  captured  the  cattle,  goat,  cows,  buffalos  and  precious 

articles  of  Wilayat’s  and  Chanzeb’s  house  including  gold  ornaments,  cash 

amount, cheque books of accused, pension book of accused and the whole articles 

belongs to Wilayat and Chanzeb’s family and were in use of their family.   

e)  PW-2  Muhammad  Jahangir  further  denied  the  suggestion  that,  it  is 

incorrect  to  suggest  that  deceased  and  injured  suffered  injuries  from  their  own 

friendly firing.  

f)  PW-3  Munir  Ahmad  has  been  suggested  with  a  defence  by  the  accused 

side, but same was denied in the manner that, it is incorrect to suggest that 

my brother Jahangir Ahmad fired two accused Walayat instead of his own brother 

and sisters came in front of him and received injuries.  

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 14 

g)  PW-4  Jahangir  Ahmad  i.e.  husband  of  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi  (deceased)  has 

been  suggested  with  defence  by  the  accused  side,  though  same  was 

controverted in the manner that, it is incorrect to suggest we attacked house of 

Walayat  and  Chanzeb  to  kill  Walayat  Hussain,  because  the  whole  Mohalla  and 

village  gathered  and  due  to  that  our  friendly  firing  was  carried  out  by 

Muhammad Jahangir and injured his brother, sister and my wife. It is incorrect to 

suggest that before first episode my wife Fareeda Bibi, Mst. Farhat Jabeen Jabeen 

and some other women rushed to the house of Walayat Hussain and attacked on 

the  wife  of  Walayat  Hussain  and  severally  beaten  her  and  upon  her  crying  the 

whole Mohallah was gathered.  

h)  PW-5  Mst.  Raqeeba  Bibi  i.e.  mother  of  deceased  and  complainant,  has 

been put a suggestion by the accused, but same was denied in the manner 

that, it is incorrect to suggest that Jahangir PW was making aerial firing with 12 

bore shot gun. It is incorrect to suggest Mst. Farhat Jabeen was hurt due to  the 

fire shots made by Jahangir.  

9.  While  going  through  the  above  referred  defences  put  forward  by  the 

appellants  and  acquitted  accused  during  the  cross  examination  of  eyewitnesses 

suggested  a  pattern,  which  is  not  consistent  with  the  defence  version  recorded 

under Section 340 Cr.P.C. nor any clarity is visible from the suggestions, though 

this aspect demonstrates that the incident and presence of both the parties were 

admitted,  however  when  all  three  accused  persons  have  been  confronted  with 

the  evidence  in  their  statements  under  Section  342  Cr.PC.,  Walayat  Hussain 

(appellant) took the following plea:  

Q.No.3 

It is in the evidence that on 20.3.2015, complainant at the 

house  of  Jahangir  with  other  family  members  and  close 

relatives / guests were sitting together in their home when 

all  you  three  accused  persons  appeared  on  the  rooftop  of 

your house? What do you have to say about this? 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 15 

Ans. 

It  is  incorrect.  Actually  Jahangir,  his  brother  Safeer, 

Muneer,  Amjad  (deceased)  son  of  Jehangir  Mohsin,  both 

sons of Muneer namely Husnain and Saqlain, the uncle of 

Jahangir namely KHalil Ahmed, his son Rustam and ladies 

Fareeda Bibi, Amna Bibi and Mst. Farhat Jabeen Jabeen etc. 

suddenly  attacked  my  house  whereupon  my  wife  Zamurd 

Bibi,  daughter  Saiqa  Parveen  and  daughter  in  law  Forin 

Bibi locked me in a room and put lock outside the room. The 

raiders were armed with deadly weapons. I was alone with 

three  ladies  (my  wife  Zamurd,  daughter  Saiqa  Parveen 

daughter in law Foreen  Bibi). I  was  unarmed at home,  no 

other  male  member  was  present  at  home.  The  co-accused 

Ashraf and Chanzaib were not present at home.  

10.  On the other hand, Chanzeb (appellant) denied the entire incident, rather 

not acknowledged his presence in the occurrence, except that his father (Walayat 

Hussain)  being  only  male member  was present in  his  house when complainant 

party made an attack on their house.  

11. 

Besides  the  statements  under  Section  340  Cr.P.C.,  the  accused  persons  in 

order to prove their own case also recorded their statements under Section 340(2) 

Cr.PC, whereby Muhammad Ashraf (acquitted accused) appeared as DW-1 and 

took the plea that he was in village Kirpa to sell woods when he heard about the 

incident,  even  he  attended  the  funeral  and  allowed  the  complainant  party  to 

bury their deceased in his landed property. He also admitted his residence in the 

neighborhood of complainant party.  

12.  On the other hand, Walayat Hussain (appellant) appeared as DW-2 in his 

own defence and acknowledged in the following manner:  

“One Amjad, Mst. Farhat Jabeen, Mst. Fareeda Bibi and 2/3 other females 

started  kicking  the  door  of  my  room  in  the  meanwhile  the  other  person 

namely Jahangir s/o Boota Khan, Mohsin s/o Jahangir, Jahangir s/o Nazar, 

Munir s/o Boota Khan, Rustam s/o Khalil, Khalil s/o Muhammad Hussain 

and  Shan  s/o  Muhammad  Jahangir  while  armed  with  weapon  started 

straight  firing  at  my  house,  and  due  to  their  firing  the  deceased  and 

 
 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 16 

injured  received  injuries  and  they  themselves  took  all  the  injured  to  the 

hospital. They did not inform the police; they themselves took the injured 

from  my  house  and  took  them  to  the  hospital.  I  have  not  committed  any 

offence  and  the  complainant  party  themselves  caused  injuries  to  all  the 

injured persons and due to their firing the three persons were murdered. I 

am  not  involved  in  this  incident.  We  are  innocent.  They  have  planted 

recovery of 12. Bore and repeater against me and I am ready to take oath 

that neither I made any firing from 12. Bore or from repeater. This is only 

false case against us. When the people of locality gathered they escaped me 

from the place.   

13.  DW-2  Walayat  Hussain 

(appellant)  was  cross  examined,  who 

acknowledged the attack as well as the timing of the incident as  about 6:10 pm. 

He also admitted that he was not injured in the attack nor produced any witness 

of the attack.  

14. 

Similarly, DW-3 Chanzeb (appellant) took the plea of alibi and contended 

that he was working with contractor Shahzad in Ali Pur Farash, but he failed to 

produce any such witness to justify his defence. 

15. 

Putting  in  juxtaposition  the  above  referred  defence  evidence  with  the 

evidence  of  prosecution,  it  has  clearly  been  established  that  the  defence  has  no 

straight line of versions, nor they are able to suggest anything to witnesses in a 

correct  manner,  even  otherwise,  the  suggestions  made  to  all  five  PWs  by  the 

defence  side  are  contrary  to  the  stance  taken  in  statements  recorded  under 

Section  342  Cr.PC  having  been  totally  different  from  the  version  recorded  on 

oath  in  terms  of  Section  340  (2)  Cr.PC  by  the  three  accused  persons,  therefore, 

their entire version stands discarded as they are unable to remotely suggest their 

own  version  in  terms  of  Articles  121  and  122  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order, 

1984, as such, Article  121 of the Order  states that  when a person  is  accused  of  any 

offence the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any 

of  the  General  Exceptions  in  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,    1860,  or  within  any  special 

 
 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 17 

exception or proviso contained in any other part of the same Code, or in any law defining 

the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances, 

whereas Article 122 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 reads that, when any fact 

is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden to proving that fact is upon 

him, like in this case all the appellants / accused have to shoulder the burden of 

proof  qua  their  facts  they  brought  on  record  in  contemplation  of  Article  122  of 

the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  as  held  in  PLD  2002  Karachi  152  (Mayzone 

Pak International VS The State). Similarly, they have failed to bring their case in 

exception on the basis of right of private defence in terms of Sections 96, 97 and 

100 PPC. It is also settled law that when specific defence has been taken, the onus 

to discharge the plea is transferred upon the accused person, though all the three 

DWs i.e. the accused have acknowledged that they have no evidence to produce, 

which remotely suggest that they had been attacked, even two of the appellants 

have taken the plea of alibi, but they failed to prove such aspect. In such scenario, 

the plea taken by the appellants stand discarded based on the principle settled in 

PLD 2015 SCMR 145 (Muhammad Raheel alias Shafique VS The State). 

16.  Now  adverting  towards  the  medical  evidence,  which  clearly  establishes 

that all three deceased namely Amjad, Mst. Farhat Jabeen and Mst. Fareeda Bibi 

died due to fire arm injuries made through 12 bore shot gun and .30 bore pistol, 

allegedly  used  by  the  appellants  Walayat  Hussain  and  Chanzeb  i.e.  father  and 

son,  respectively,  even  two  of  the  eyewitnesses  had  not  seen  the  occurrence  to 

the  extent  of  first  part  of  incident  in  which  Amjad  (deceased)  received  the  fire 

arm injuries, but the complainant version could not be discarded in presence of 

the available evidence, though certain discrepancies have been noted in shape of 

improvements made in the account of prosecution evidence, but the same do not 

remotely suggest the falsity of the incident narrated in this case by the witnesses, 

whereby three persons were done to death on katcha rasta in front of their house, 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 18 

even  the  autopsy  reports  of  deceased  Amjad  Hussain  and  Mst.  Farhat  Jabeen, 

prepared  by  PW-13  Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar  Malik  and  PW-17  Dr.  Henna  Azmat, 

suggested one commonality that both deceased received the fire arm injuries on 

chest,  even  pellets  (metallic  foreign  body)  were  recovered,  as  such,  the  doctors 

have also referred blackening and charring marks in the autopsy reports Exh.PM 

and  Exh.PS.  Both  the  doctors  have  been  cross  examined  at  length,  but  nothing 

fruitful  has  been  achieved  by  the  accused  persons,  per  se,  the  blackening  and 

charring  marks  could  only  be  seen  when  the  weapon  is  discharged  from  close 

range  as  settled  by  the  Modi’s  Medical  Jurisprudence  and  Toxicology  in  the 

following manner: 

“If  a  fire-arm  is  discharged  very  close  to  the  body  or  in  actual  contact, 

subcutaneous  tissues  over  an  area  of  two  or  three  inches  around  the 

wound  of  entrance  are  lacerated  and  the  surrounding  skin  is  usually 

scorched  and  blackened  by  smoke  and  tattooed  with  unburnt  grains  of 

gunpowder or smokeless propellant powder. The adjacent hairs are signed, 

and the clothes covering the part are burnt by the flame. If the powder is 

smokeless, there may be a grayish or white deposit on the skin around the 

wound. If the area is photographed by infrared light, a smoke halo round 

the wound may be clearly noticed. Blackening is found, if a fire-arm like a 

shotgun is discharged from a distance of not more than three (03) feet and 

a revolver or pistol discharged within about two feet.” 

17. 

The above referred view of Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology 

has also been endorsed by the superior Courts in PLD 2002 SC 786 (Muhammad 

Tufail VS The State), 2018 PCr.LJ Note 52 (Nooro alias Noor Muhammad Sehar 

VS The State) and 1971 PCrLJ 1108 Karachi (Mir Muhammad, etc. v. The State), 

therefore, we are of the view that both Amjad and Mst. Farhat Jabeen (deceased) 

received fire arm injuries from close range by Chanzeb accused, which is in line 

with the evidence of eyewitnesses and same could not be discarded, though the 

learned  counsel  for  appellants  raised  a  question  that  the  distance  mentioned  in 

site  plan  Exh.PZC  suggested  otherwise,  but  in  our  view  the  site  plan  has  been 

 
 
 
  
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 19 

prepared  after the incident on the recalling of facts by any of the eyewitness or 

by  the  complainant,  as  the  case  may  be,  which  might  have  created  certain 

discrepancies as it is very difficult to suggest in such type of incident, in which 

events  had  been  changing  on  a  spur  of  moment,  when  both  the  families  and  a 

number  of  people  were  fighting  in  open  area,  therefore,  we  have  to  take  the 

commonality  of  facts  narrated  by  the  eyewitnesses  in  their  statements,  who 

remained  consistent,  even  the  eyewitnesses  have  not  been  cross  examined  with 

particularity  by  the  defence  witness,  which  is  otherwise  suggestive  of  the  fact 

that incident has been acknowledged and admitted in this case. The recoveries of 

weapons  of  offence  are  fully  established  against  the  accused  side,  fire  empties 

were  sent  to  expert  prior to recoveries of  weapons  of  offence,  which  have  been 

found matched through the report Exh.PZI. 

18. 

Besides  the  above  referred  evaluation  of  evidence,  this  Court  has  also 

gone through the judgment of the learned Trial Court  and it has been observed 

that the learned Trial Court has appreciated the entire case in a proper  manner, 

whereby  appellants  Walayat Hussain and Chanzeb have resorted to firing with 

their  weapons  12  bore  shot  gun  and  .30  bore  pistol  and  murdered  Amjad,  Mst. 

Fareeda Bibi and Mst. Farhat Jabeen for no justiciable reason nor any motive has 

been suggested in this case, rather it is a case of no motive where parties had no 

dispute  or  enmity  on  record.  In  such  scenario,  the  plea  taken  by  the  appellants 

side has already been discarded, who failed to explain their reasonable conduct 

in which they had allegedly been attacked as per their own stance, but failure of 

such  defence  version,  which  is  considered  adverse  to  the  accused  side,  proves 

their presence and acknowledgment of events, hence the learned Trial Court has 

rightly  acquitted  Muhammad  Ashraf  (accused)  of  the  charges  as  he  has  not 

caused any injury to any of the deceased person in this case nor he had used the 

hatchet,  even  no  witness  has  attributed  any  injury  to  him.  The  appellants 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 20 

Walayat Hussain and Chanzeb have been attributed with death of three persons 

separately  on  two  counts  and  one  count,  respectively,  which  is  in  line  with  the 

medical evidence. Some consultation and deliberation have also been suggested 

in the evidence of prosecution, but it will not affect the entire prosecution case as 

the event took place before the sunset and all accused persons and eyewitnesses 

were known to each other, therefore, there is no probability of mistaken identity. 

In  such  scenario,  the  murderous  assault  has  been  attributed  to  the  appellants 

Walayat  Hussain  and  Chanzeb,  who  have  been  found  guilty  of  offence,  where 

the prosecution proved their case beyond any shadow of doubt. 

19. 

Before  going  into  the  portion  of  sentence,  there  are  certain  mitigating 

factors,  which  persuaded  this  Court  to  disagree  with  the  portion  of  death 

sentence awarded by the learned Trial Court, firstly, on the ground that there is 

no motive in this case and even till date no one has come up with any justiciable 

reason  as  to  why  what  ignited  the  situation,  which  resulted  into  death  of  three 

persons,  such  aspect  reveals  that  something  very  important  is  missing  and 

without the same capital sentence could not be awarded, and, secondly, the NFSA 

report  Exh.PZI  reveals  that  three  top  bullets  recovered  from  body  of  Amjad 

Hussain  are  pallets  of  smooth  bore,  which  have  not  been  explained  by  the 

witnesses, therefore, this Court is of the view that  the death sentence could not 

be awarded, rather the rule of abundant caution is to be applied. 

20. 

In view of above, impugned judgment of  conviction, dated 20.11.2020,  is 

hereby maintained and the captioned Jail Appeal No.207/2020 (Muhammad Walayat 

VS  The  State)  and  Jail  Appeal  No.201/2020  (Chanzeb  VS  The  State)  are  hereby 

DISMISSED. However, the death sentence awarded to Muhammad Walayat and 

Chanzeb  is  hereby  converted  into  LIFE  IMPRISONMENT  in  terms  of  Section 

302(b) PPC. Rest of the portion qua the compensation awarded by learned Trial 

Court  under  Section  544-A  Cr.P.C.  is  also  maintained  with  benefit  of  Section 

 
 
 
Jail Appeal No.207/2020, Jail Appeal No.201/2020 & M.R. No.03/2020 

Page | 21 

382-B  Cr.P.C.  Accordingly,  the  captioned  Murder  Reference  No.03/2020  (The  State 

VS Walayat Hussain & another) is answered in NEGATIVE. 

(SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ)                  (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
                JUDGE                                    

      JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 17.03.2022. 

                JUDGE                                    

      JUDGE 

Khalid Z. 

 
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
