ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Appeal No.97/2013 
Mst. Shakeela Bibi 
VS
Muhammad Ramzan & 02 others 

Appellant by: 

Ch. Muhammad Javed Gujjar, Advocate.  

Respondents by: 

Mr. Yasir Shakeel, Advocate. 
Mr. Sadaqat Ali Jahangir, State Counsel. 
Muhammad Amin, Naib Court, Assistant 
Commissioner (Saddar) with record 

Date of Decision: 

03.03.2021. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  criminal 

appeal,  the  appellant  has  called  in  question  judgment  of  the  learned 

Assistant  Commissioner  (Saddar)  /  Sub-Divisional  Magistrate,  ICT, 

Islamabad,  dated  29.07.2013,  whereby  Muhammad  Ramzan  (Respondent 

No.1) has been acquitted under Section 249-A Cr.P.C.  

2. 

Succinctly,  Mst.  Shakeela  Bibi  (appellant)  entered  into  contract  of 

marriage  with  Muhammad  Ramzan  (Respondent  No.1)  on  12.08.1996.  In 

September, 2011,  when respondent No.1  brought Mst. Rabia (Respondent 

No.2)  to  his  house  as  a  second  wife,  the  appellant  protested  the  same, 

whereupon appellant filed a complaint under Sections 5 & 6 of the Muslim 

Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 having allegations that respondent No.1 got 

married  without  prior  consent  of  the  appellant  or  from  the  Arbitration 

Council  and  Nikahnama  produced  by  respondent  No.1  is  not  registered. 

Accordingly,  the  learned  trial  Court  summoned  respondents  No.1  &  2, 

against whom a charge was framed, however during pendency of the trial, 

said respondents filed application under Section 249-A Cr.P.C., which has 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.97/2013 

Page | 2 

been  accepted  vide  impugned  order  dated  29.07.2013.  Hence,  instant 

criminal appeal.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  appellant  contends  that  the  appellant  has 

brought  on  record  material  facts  and  documents  before  the  learned  trial 

Court,  but  the  same  have  not  been  taken  into  account  while  passing  the 

impugned  order,  even  no  evidence  of  the  complainant  side  has  been 

recorded  before  passing  of  the  impugned  judgment,  which  suffers  from 

misreading  and  non-reading  of  facts  and  evidence  brought  on  record  by 

the  appellant;  that  the  learned  trial  Court  has  accepted  the  application 

under Section 249-A Cr.P.C. without any lawful justification while vide the 

impugned order, which is liable to be set-aside.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

respondents  No.1  &  2  contend  that  respondent  No.1  had  produced  an 

affidavit  portraying  that  the  appellant  has  no  objection  over  respondent 

No.1’s  contracting  second  marriage  and  the  appellant  was  well  aware  of 

the  second  marriage,  even  otherwise,  the  Nikahnama  produced  by 

respondent No.1 shows the entries of names of appellant and four children 

born  from  the  marital  bond  of  respondent  No.1  and  appellant;  that  the 

learned  trial  Court  has  rightly  appreciated  the  facts  and  circumstances  of 

the case and acquitted respondent No.1 of the charge.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  Mst.  Shakeela  Bibi  (appellant)  filed  a 

complaint  under  Section  5/6  of  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961 

against  her  husband,  Muhammad  Ramzan  (respondent  No.1),  before  the 

Chairman  Arbitration  Council,  which  had  been  referred  to  learned 

Divisional  Magistrate,  ICT,  Islamabad,  having  jurisdiction  in  this  regard, 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.97/2013 

Page | 3 

with  the  allegation  that  respondent  No.1  has  brought  Mst.  Rabia  / 

Respondent No.2 to his house and started living with her without having 

any  legal  right,  as  such,  the  appellant  reported  the  matter  to  S.H.O.,  P.S. 

Golra  Sharif, 

Islamabad,  whereupon 

respondent  No.1  submitted 

Nikahnama  executed  with  respondent  No.2,  dated  10.08.2010,  in  his 

evidence,  though  same  was  alleged  to  have  not  been  registered  with  the 

Arbitration  Council,  Islamabad  or  with  the  Nikah  Registrar.  The  main 

grievance  of  the  appellant  in  this  appeal  is  that  the  learned  Trial  Court 

without  recording  evidence  has  acquitted  respondent  No.1  primarily  by 

assuming  that  an  affidavit  was  executed  by  the  appellant,  whereby 

permission of second marriage was granted to respondent No.1 as well as 

on the basis of a photograph of the appellant with respondents No.1 & 2, 

though  both  the  said  documents  were  not  exhibited  in  evidence  and  the 

premature acquittal of respondent No.1 in terms of Section 249-A Cr.P.C. is 

not legally justiciable.  

7. 

Undeniably, 

respondent  No.1  entered 

into  marriage  with 

respondent  No.2  on  the  basis  of  Nikahnama  he  had  produced  before  all 

forums  acknowledging  his  second  marriage  with  respondent  No.2, 

however it is admitted position that formal order of Chairman Arbitration 

Council qua permission of contracting second marriage is neither available 

on record nor had respondent No.1 ever applied under the Muslim Family 

Laws  Ordinance,  1961  qua  such  permission.  The  learned  Trial  Court  has 

considered  the  affidavit,  though  a  photocopy,  showing  that  the  appellant 

has no objection over contracting second marriage by respondent No.1. As 

such,  the  status  of  affidavit  has  been  settled  in  the  suit  for  declaration  / 

jactitation  of  Nikah,  titled  “Mst.  Shakeela  Bibi,  etc.  VS  Muhammad  Ramzan, 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.97/2013 

Page | 4 

etc.”, decided by the Court of Ms. Ayesha Shabbir, Civil Judge, Islamabad, 

whereby  the  appellant  had  challenged  the  Nikahnama,  dated  10.08.2010, 

with the claim that same is forged and is liable to be cancelled with further 

prayer  that  respondent  No.2  is  not  legally  wedded  wife  of  respondent 

No.1.  The  suit  had  been  dismissed  vide  judgment  and  decree,  dated 

19.04.2016,  whereby  the  validity  of  affidavit  regarding  permission  of 

Nikah of respondent No.1 with respondent No.2 has been settled in Paras  

30, 31 & 32 of the judgment, which are as under:  

30.  Record  shows  that  plaintiff  No.1  and  defendant  No.1  was 

married  to  each  other  on  12.08.1996.  According  to  the  plaintiffs 

defendant No.1 brought defendant No.2, in his house in the month of 

July  2010  and  when  they  were  asked  about  their  relationship, 

defendant  No.1  prepared  a  forged  affidavit  regarding  permission  to 

contract  second  marriage  as  well  as  Nikahnama  regarding  his  2nd 

marriage. According to the plaintiffs defendant No.1 and defendant 

No.2  are  not  legally  wedded  couple  and  they  are  resided  together 

without any relationship.  

31. 

To  prove  the  above  contentions  plaintiffs  were  given 

opportunity  to  adduce  evidence.  Surprisingly  all  the  plaintiffs 

appeared  in  the  witness  box  but  they  failed  to  explain  as  to  how 

defendant  No.1  had  prepared  alleged  forged  affidavit  regarding 

permission and Nikahnama. Moreover the examination in chief of all 

the  three  witnesses  of  police  station  are  silent  about  the  manner  in 

which  forgery  had  been  committed.  It  is  an  admitted  preposition  of 

law  that  when  forgery  of  any  document  is  alleged  to  be  committed 

then  the  person  who  alleged  the  forgery  is  required  to  prove  it 

through  evidence.  In  the  instant  suit  case  firstly  all  the  plaintiffs 

during  their  cross-examination  had  admitted  the  fact  that  plaintiff 

No.1  had 

filed  a  complaint  before  the  Court  of  Assistant 

Commissioner  with  the  contention  that  defendant  No.1  had 

contracted  2nd  marriage  without  the  permission  of  plaintiff  No.1. 

Moreover PW-2 in his cross-examination had admitted the fact that 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.97/2013 

Page | 5 

a  marriage  between  defendant  No.1  and  2  was  held  in  year  2011, 

similar  is  the  case  with  PW-3  who  also  admitted  the  marriage 

between the defendants in cross-examination.  

32.  After the admission of the plaintiffs regarding the marriage of 

the defendant No.1 with defendant No.2, the remaining stance of the 

plaintiffs  become  doubtful.  Moreover  plaintiff  No.1  had  not  denied 

her thumb impression on affidavit produced  on record. Besides  that 

she had not made any effort to question the genuineness of Exh.D9 

while  requesting  the  court  to  verify  her  thumb  impression  on  the 

affidavit.” 

8.  While considering the above referred findings of the learned Family 

Court,  there  is  nothing  left  in  favour  of  appellant,  especially  when  it  has 

been declared by the competent court of law that appellant had admitted 

the second marriage as well as her thumb impression on affidavit Exh.D9, 

hence  the  execution  of  affidavit  is  admitted,  per  se,  such  finding  on  the 

pivotal issue has persuasive value to be noted and recorded by a criminal 

court under safe administration of justice.  

9. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  contents  of  affidavit,  which  are  as 

under:  

 مبیا اافلح روا ںہو ئشیہار کی دا

 بآ لسلاا ضلع و تحصیل یفشر ہلڑگو نہکخااڈ كاسر یسر سکنہ ممضار محمد جہور بی بی شکیلہ ۃمسما ہک

نم

ق سے داد حکم لدو ممضار محمد یمسم
 کو  ء

 با
 ۔ا

 ب رار

1996

 خہرمو سے محمد 

ِحشر حنکا کا ہمظہر من کہ یہ ۔

نمبر1

 ۔ںہو تیکر

 ۔ہے ہتاچا ا

بکر یدا

ش یسرود ممضار محمد ر

 ہشو کا ہمظہر من با کہ یہ ۔

 یدا

ش یسرود کی ر

 ہشو پنےا مجھے روا ۔ھے ہار کر ادا قحقو ےمیر روا ۔ہے ر

 ہشو امیر کہ جو ممضار محمد یمسم

 کہ یہ ۔

نمبر2

نمبر3

 ۔ںہو ہتیچا ا

بکر ر

ئاد یٰعود ئیکو کا نفقہ و ما

ب فخلا کے ر

 ہشو پنےا میں ہی نہ روا نہیں ضاعترا ئیکو سے

 ۔ھے 

سرد لکلا

 ب بقمطا کے یقینو علم ےمیر مبیا لاا

 ب جہرمند امیر اذ

ل 

10. 

This  Court  is  mindful  of  the  fact  that  the  above  referred  affidavit 

was executed on 15.07.2010 while the second marriage of respondent No.1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.97/2013 

Page | 6 

with  respondent  No.2  was  registered  on  10.08.2010  after  due  permission, 

per  se,  while  considering  the  above  referred  overwhelming  evidence  the 

learned  Trial  Court  has  rightly  applied  the  provision  of  Section  249-A 

Cr.P.C.,  where  probability  of  conviction  is  not  visible  in  this  case,  rather 

further  proceeding  in  the  matter  would  amount  to  wasting  the  precious 

time of the Court and abuse of process of law. The appellant has failed to 

place  any  justiciable  reason  to  interfere  with  the  findings  of  the  learned 

Trial  Court,  even  otherwise,  the  marriage  between  appellant  and 

respondent  No.1  had  dissolved  in  the  year  2015  and,  as  such,  the  entire 

case at this stage is only to be considered as a process to  drag respondent 

No.1  in  unnecessary  litigation  and  to  satisfy  the  ego  of  the  appellant,  per 

se,  the  Courts  shall  not  act  as  a  tool  for  accomplishment  of  personal 

vendetta,  therefore,  instant  appeal  is  not  maintainable  and  the  same  is 

hereby DISMISSED. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

                                  JUDGE 

Khalid Z. 

 
 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
