JI.JDGMENT SHEET
IN THE ISI-AIVIABAD  HIGH COURT
ISLAIVIABAD

CASE NO.

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.332-2OI9

Wazir Ahmed Khiliee  & fuiother
VS
The State & fuiother

Appellants  by
Respondents  by

Date of hearing

Raia Shatzad Anwar,  Advocate
Dr. Waseem Ahmed Qureshi, Special Prosecutor,  AI.[F
with Sheraz, InspectorfiO, ANIF.
L5.04.2020

AAIVIER FAROOQ  J.  WAZir AhMCd Khiljee and Khan

Muhammad  (tfre appellants) were tried in case FIR No.05 dated

L2.01.2079 under section 9-C/75 CNSA,  1997 ,  Police  Station

ANF/RD, Rawalpindi and were convicted of the charges  leveled

against  them. Wazir Ahmed Khiljee was awarded eisht years and six

months rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.40,000/-  and in default

thereof, simple  imprisonment  for seven monthsi  Khan Muhammad

was awarded  seven years and six months rigorous  imprisonment

with fine of Rs.35,000/- and in default thereof, simple imprisonment

for six months and fifteen days. Both the appellants  were afforded

benefit  under section  382(b) Cr.P.C.

2.  Learned  counsel for the appellants, inter alia, contended  that

conviction  and sentence  awarded to the appellants  is not tenable  in

the facts and circumstances  of the casei in this behalf, it  was

contended that prosecution has failed to prove  safe custody  of the

Crl. App.  No.332-2019

2

samples taken from the alleged narcotic  substancei that the

prosecution  witnesses PW-l &  PW-m both stated  that

samples/parcels  were sealed in white color cloth, whereas forensic

report submitted  by National  Institute of Health (NIH) states that the

samples  were received  in dark brown semi-solid mass packed in

polythene sealed in a khaki envelope. It was further contended that

there is considerable difference in quantity of contraband  narcotic

substance  weighed by the investigation  authorities  and when

weighed in the court. It was subr,rrtted that difference  in the weight,

which was lesser when contraband substance  was weighed  in the

court, shows that it was not the same  as was when allegedly  taken in

custody.

3.  Learned  counsel for the appellants further contended that case

of the prosecution, as made out, is not tenable  inasmuch as officers

of ANF raided the house of the appellants and took them in custody

and narcotic  substance was planted  and, valuable  items belonging to

the appellants' family, were also taken in possession  and were not

accounted for and in this behalf, even FIR was got registered  and the

matter is pending. In support of contentions,  learned  counsel for the

appellants placed reliance on cases reported as 'Muhammad  Akram

VS The State' (1994 SCMR 277),'Abdul  Ghani and others VS The

State and others' (2019 SCMR 608), 'Zahir Shah alias Shat VS The

State through  Advocate-General, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa'  (2019 SCMR

Crl. App. No.332-2019 
200D,'Mst.  Razia Sultana VS The State and another' (2019  SCMR

3

1300) and 'Faizan  Ali VS The State' QO79 SCMR  1649).

4.  Learned Special Prosecutor,  ANF inter alia contended  that safe

custody of contraband  narcotic  substance has duly been proved

inasmuch as the parcels were received by the officer and were

transmitted under valid road certificate and the appellants  are trying

to take advantage of minor discrepancies in the statements  of

witnesses. It was further contended that story of the prosecution

remains un-shattered  and unimpeachable. It was submitted  that

difference in weight

inconsequential  for the case of defence

1S

inasmuch as it is trite law that if recovery  is duly proved,  but there is

a difference in weight, it only affects quantum of sentence  and not

the conviction.

5.  Arguments  advanced by learned  counsel for the parties  have

been heard and the documents,  placed on record,  examined with

their able assistance.

6.  The case of the prosecution, against the appellants,  is that on

12.01.2019,  at about 5:00 a.m., Inspector Gohar Nabi Baig along with

staff of ANF, were keeping the area of Ibne-a-Seena  Road  near

PIMS Hospital,  Islamabad  under surveillance,  when on  spy

information,  they were tipped that the drug paddlers could be

conducting  transaction in the vicinityl at about 5:15 a.m., raiding

party reached at spot when two vehicles Toyota Aqua bearing

crl. ApP.No.332-2019

4

Registration  No.AKT -261 and Honda Civic bearing Registration

No.ADA-TB7  were parked on the road sidei Inspector/IO  along with

the uniformed  officials, intercepted  the vehicles and the drivers were

asked to walk out of the samei the cars were searchedi  upon

disclosure  and pointation  of. Wazir Ahmad Khiljee (appellant No.1),

search  of vehicle Toyora  Aqua  was made and it was found that in the

trunk (dicky) of vehicle, at the place of spare tyre, five packets of

charas wrapped in Khaki insulation tape and polythene bag were

found;  in the dashboard,  one packet of ICE packed in polythene  bag,

one packet of cocaine (white  in color)  wrapped in polythene bag and

one packet  of 2O-tablets wrapped in polythene  bag (yellow in color)

were recovered;  charas was weighed  at spot and found each packet

containing  1200/1200  srams (total six kilograms)  along with packing

material;  10-grams  from each packet was separated for chemical

analysis and sealed  in five parcels  while the remaining charas was

sealed in another parcel along with packing materiali total six parcels

of charas were prepared  and sealed; likewise,  recovered ICE was

weighed and found to be 25-grams,  out of which,  lO-grams  was

separated for the purposes of chemical analysis and was sealed  in

sample parcel while the remaining  was sealed in another parcel;

recovered  cocaine was weighed at the spot and found lS-srams, out

of which,  S-grams was separated  for chemical analysis  and sealed  in

one sample parcel, while the remaining  cocaine was sealed in

Crl. App.  No.332-2019

5

another parcel; 2O-tablets were found 1l-grams and were sealed in

one parceli all the items along with cars, were taken in custody and

recovery memo was prepared. Khan Muhammad  (appellant  No.2),

who was driver of Honda Civic Car was searched and upon his

pointation, five packets of charas wrapped in khaki insulation  tape

and polythene bagi upon search of dash board of said vehicle, one

packet of cocaine  (white in color) wrapped  in polythene bag, one

packet of 17-intoxicated tablets wrapped in polythene  bag (yellow  in

color) were recoveredi  recovered  charas was weighed at spot and

found each packet containing 1000/1000  grams (total five kilograms

along with packing  material)i  1O-grams from each packet was

separated for the purposes of chemical analysis  and sealed in five

sample  parcels while the remaining  charas  was sealed in another

parcel along with packing materiali total six parcels of charas  were

prepared and sealed; recovered cocaine (white in color)  was

weighed  at the spot and found 1O-grams, out of which, S-grams

were separated  for chemical analysis and sealed in one sample

parcel while the remaining cocaine along with packing material  was

sealed in another  parcel;  on weighing  the recovered intoxicated 77-

tablets, found 10-grams and sealed in one sample parcel for

chemical  analysisi  recovery  memo of all the items  along with car was

prepared.

crt. App. No.332-2019 
7.  The prosecution, in order to prove its case, led Azhar ur

6

Rehman,  Head Constable,  ANF Rd, North, Rawalpindi as PW- 1,

Shahid-ur-Rehman,  H/C ANF, PS Gilgit as PW-z, Muhammad

Zulfiqar Constable  ANF RD, North Rawalpindi as PW-S, Inspector

Gohar Nabi Baig, ANF as PW-4 and Constable Atif Shahzad,  PS ANF

Dina as PW-S. The statements  of the appellants were also recorded

under section 342 Cr.P.C. as well as statement  of other defense

witnesses  and documentary  evidence  was also tendered in affidavit

In this behalf, FIR is Ex.PA, FIR registered by defence against the

officers of ANF is Ex.DW-A,  memo of recovery is Ex.(PB)  and (PD),

articles  recovered  from the persons of the appellants  were also

exhibited  along with complaint and site plan.

8.  The thrust of the arguments by learned counsels for the

appellants  is that safe custody has not been proved by the

prosecution  inasmuch as it has been stated in the evidence  of PW-I

and PW-3 that samples were parceled  in white cloth, whereas

chemical  analysis report does not depict the same. Azhar-ur-

Rehman PW- 1, who received the recovered alleged narcotic

substance  and other material from Investigating Officeri in his

examination-in-chief, deposed nothing  regarding color of the parcel,

however,

ln

cross-examination,  he  stated that  all  case

properties/samples were sealed in white color cloth. Likewise,

Muhammad Zulfiqar PW-3 who took the samples  from Moharar Mall

Crl. App. No.332-2019

7

Khan for onward transmission  to forensic laboratory  for chemical

analysis of samples  of narcotic  substance  categorically stated  that

the parcels remained intact in his possession and he took the same

from Moharar  Mall Khana i.e. Azhar ur Rehman PW-1 and delivered

the same to the Office of National  Institute of Health (NIH),

Islamabad. In cross-examination,  he stated that parcels were sealed

in white cloth.

9.  The Chemical Analysis report stipulates that the samples  were

in polythene sealed in a khaki envelope but the above witnesses

have stated in evidence that the samples were in white cloth. The

referred ambiguity has been clarified by the Investigating  Officer in

his evidence.  During his cross-examination,  the defence  requested

to re-examine  recovered  narcotic substance which was allowed  by

learned trial court and cross-examination  of the Investigation officer

divulges that at the request of defence  counsel, the narcotic

substance  was de-sealed  (Exb.P13 and Exb.PG),  which was in white

cotton  stitched  bag. He further clarified  the position in statement that

samples/parcels  were  put in Khaki sealed envelope, then in

polythene  bag and then white cloth as they were quite a few. It

seems that since parcels were large in number, for ease of

convenience,  they were put in  white cotton bag and which

accordingly, PW- 1 and PW-III deposed, however,  when same  were

received by NIH, since white parcel was not sealed as submitted  by

Crl. App. No.332-2019 

8

I

the Investigating Officer, they did not mention the same and only

mentioned that samples received  were in a polythene  bag sealed in

Khaki envelope. The defence, through ambiguity in the statement  of

Investigation Officer, has tried to place dent in the case of the

prosecution,  which as such, is not made out. Likewise, it is trite law

that where recovery of the narcotic  substance  is duly proved, the

difference in weight is immaterial in as f.ar as conviction of

appellants  is concerned. During the cross examination of PWS the

defense requested that the possessed narcotic substance  be weighed

again, which  was allowed.  In this behalf Parcel P/1GN was de-sealed

which contained five packets wrapped  in Khakki insulation tape and

polythene bag having cut on each and every packet corner.  On

weighing  the contraband substance it was found packet number 1

contained  1015 grams, packet  number 2 1079 grams, packet number

3 1048 grams, pakcet number 4 1069 grams and packet  number 5

1059 grams.  Moreover,

ln stitched bag there was 27 grams in

powder form. The learned trial court observed that cuts on each four

packets material found as in powder  form and the fifth packet  was in

solid form containing 1095 grams and due to it being solid the cut in

the slab was visible. On de-sealing  P/13 (white  cotton stitched bag)

five packets wrapped in khaki insulation tape and polythene  bag

having cut on each and every  packet corneri packet number t  had

836 grams,  packet number 2 851 grams,  packet number 3 850 grams,

Crl. AFp. No.332-2019 

9

packet number 4 896 grams and packet number 5 976 erams. Though

there is difference in the quantity recovered initially and when

weighed again in the court, the same could be due to faulty scale or

the contraband substance  having dried since lapse of time, however,

the possession  of contraband substance  has been duly proved by the

prosecution  by producing  in evidence, memo of recovery, which was

duly witnessed by Muhammad  Naveed and Atif Shehzad  Constables.

Atif Shehzad  Constable  appeared  as PW-S and reiterated  in evidence

the factum of recovery  and possession.  Reliance  is  placed on

Muhammad Khan VSThe State (2008 SCMR 1616),  Abdu1

Rasheed  VS The State (2009 SCMR 306), Ameer Zeb VSThe

State (PLD 2072 Supreme Court 380) and Muhammad  Yasir VS

The State (2017 P. Cr. LJ 1077). AII the material evidence was

confronted  to the appellants. In defence,  they led evidence  to

substantiate  that story, made out by the prosecution, is not correct

and is tainted with malafide  and is concocted, however, CCTV  which

allegedly recorded the episode of  weighing the contraband

substance,  was held to be inadmissible  and no exception thereto  can

be taken. The defence  failed to substantiate  its version of the facts.

In view of above, learned trial court has rightly concluded  that

prosecution has duly proved its case and established the same

beyond reasonable  doubt. Appellants did not raise any argument

regarding the quantum of sentence.

Crl. App. No.332-201, 
10. In view of above, no interference  is warranted in the impugned

'O

judgment, hence instant appeal is without merit and is accordingly

di

ed.

(

Announced in Open Court on 08-07-2020

(JIJDGE)

Zawar

GAIVIER

JUDGE

JIJDGE

