ORDER SHEET

IN THE IS

BAD HIGH COURT,
ARTMENT

TUDICIAL

BAD.

Criminal Misc. No. 738/8/2019.

Muhammad  Abbas  Siddique & another

VS

The State,  etc.

S. No. of
orde{

Date of
orde{

Order with signature  of ]udge and  that of parties or
counsel  where necessary.

28.11..2019

Mr.  Sajjad Haider Malik, Advocate  alongwith
petitioners.
Barrister  Ayesha Siddique Khary  State Counsel.
Abdul  Qadir, husband  of complainant  in person.
Mukhar Ahmed,  ASI, I'.S. Karachi  Company,
Islamabad.

Through this Crl. Misc. petition,  the petitioners

Muhammad  Abbas Siddique and Muhammad  Bilal

Siddique  have applied for pre-arrest bail in case FIR

No.403,  dated 1.4.03.2019,  U / S 337-A(i)  / 337-F(i) / 354/

452 PPC, P.S. Karachi  Company, Islamabad  lodged  on

the complaint of respondent  No.2  Mst. Kaneez l;atima,

who  alleged  that her husband Molana  Abdul Qadir has

an altercation  with Abbas and his brother Bilal in

Masjid, who later on assaulted the complainant  and her

daughters  at her home  in which complainant's clothes

were torn and she and her daughters were iniured,  who

received  injuries at the hands of petitioners.

2. 

Learned  counsel  for thc petitioners contends

that instant  FIR has been  lodged  with malafide,  no such

incident took place in the home as stated by the

complainant  and both thc parties are close relatives

inler-se;  that complainant  and her husband  intencl to

Crl. Misc.  No.738lB/2019

2

dispossess the petitioners alongwith their family  from

the house which  is fointly in the possession of both the

parties; that civil litigation is pending between  the

parties before the Courts of law and as such the very

registration  of FIR is based on mal#ide

3. 

Conversely,  learned State Counsel alongwith

complainant's  husband  contend  that petitioners  have

been nominated with specific role, who are real

nephews  of complainant's  husband; that ocular account

is corroborated with medical  evidence, even torn shirt of

complainant  is with police  and sticks which were used

by the petitioners have yet to be recovered,  therefore,

petitioners are not entitled for concession  of bail.

4. 

5. 

Arguments heard, record perused

Tentative assessment  of record reveals  that both

the petitioners  have  been nominated as accused in case

FIR No.403,  dated 14.03.2019,  U/S 337-A(i)/337-F(i)/

354/452  PPC,  P.S. Karachi  Company,  Islamabad,lodged

on the complaint of respondent No.2, who has

nominated both  the accused with specific role of causing

injuries to complainant  as well as her daughters  and

also alleged that clothes  of complainant  have been torn

during the said incident  by the petitioners.

6. 

The MLR  available on record reflects  that

complainant Mst. Kaneez Fatima  and her daughter

Momina Qadir received  injuries,  although thc injuries

are Shajjah-e-Khaffah and Shajjah-e-Damia  but It pima-

facie lir:Jr.ed the petitioners with the alleged  occurrence

Crl. Misc.  No.738/8/2019

3

and role ascribed in the complaint  to the petitioners. The

torn shirts of Kalsoom  Bibi and Amina  Bibi have  also

been  recovered  by police  vide recovery  memo  dated

1,4.11,.2019,  which further  linked  the petitioners  with the

alleged  crime of Section 354 PPC as such the element  of

malafide  and further  inquiry is not visible on record. By

granting pre-arrest  bail at this  stap;e  would  hamper  the

investigation  agency  and I.O of this case shall be

precluded from the recovery of weapon of offence,

therefore, in this backdrop, instant pre-arrest  bail

application is hereby dismissed and ad-interim  pre-

arrest bail granted to the petitioners  by this Court vide

order dated  21..11..2019 is hereby  re.called.

Zehid

IUDGE

