JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

Civil  Revision  No.  377 /2018. 

Muhammad  Zafar  Malik 

VS

Federation  of Pakistan,  etc. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr.  Muhammad  Akram  Malik,  Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Barrister  M. Mumtaz  Ali, AAG. 
Ms. Maimana  Khattak,  Advocate  alongwith 
respondent  No.4. 
M. Mohsin  Pasha,  Joint  Estate  Officer. 

Date  of Decision: 

18.02.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  J:-  Through 

this  Civil  Revision, 

the 

petitioner  has  assailed  the  order  dated  28.06.2018, passed  by  learned  Civil  Judge, 

1st  Class  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  execution  petition  filed  by  petitioner  was 

dismissed  and  the  said  order  was  further  upheld  by  the  learned  Appellate  Court 

vide  order  dated  06.09.2018, passed  by  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends 

that  petitioner  was  former 

Assistant  Director  in  FDE and  is presently  represented 

through  Mst.  Gohar  Bano 

(widow 

sister  of  deceased  being  dependent 

family  member); 

that 

late 

Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  was  allottee  of House  No.331-E,  G-6/ 4,  Islamabad  vide 

allotment 

letter  dated  14.02.2014  on  the  basis  of  judgment  &  decree  dated 

] 8.02.2010,  passed  by  learned  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad,  however 

the  possession 

was  nut  delivered  to  the  late  decree-holder; 

that  in  execution  of  the  said  decree 

the  Executing  Court  has  dismissed 

the  same  being  infructuous  mainly  on  the 

ground  that  decree-holder  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  died  on  14.06.2017; that  on 

C.R  No.377  /2018 

2 

the  death  of  decree-holder  the  decree  stands  and  rights  accrued  to  the  decree  

holder stands  devolved  in the favour  of legal heirs; that Mst. Gohar  Bano, widow 

sister  of  deceased  falls  within  the  definition  of  family  in  terms  of  Rule  2(£)  of 

Accommodation  Allocation Rules, 2002; that  learned  Executing Court  as well as 

Appellate  Court  have  wrongly  observed  that  allotment  right  sustains  in the  life 

of allottee and  the effect of PM Assistance Package has not been considered  in its 

true  perspective  which  gives  a  special  acknowledgement  of  right  to  retain  the 

allotted  quarter  till  the  age  of  superannuation  of  the  deceased  by  family 

members; that  both  the  courts  below have  not  exercised jurisdiction  vested  in it 

and 

the  question  of  retention  of  government  house  has  wrongly  been 

appreciated. 

3. 

Conversely,  learned  AAG  alongwith  Estate  officer contends  that  decree 

passed  in  favour  of  late  allottee  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  shall  remain  intact, 

however,  question  of  retention  of  the  accommodation  is  contingent  to  the 

possession  and  as  such  allottee  was  not  in  possession  of  the  accommodation 

although  decree  has  been  challenged  by  respondent  No.4  in  terms  of  Section 

12(2) CPC but  at the same time suit house  had  been allotted  to respondent  No.4, 

who was not made  party  to the suit filed by Muhammad  Zafar Malik and  decree 

is yet to be adjudicated  upon  the pending  application. 

4. 

Learned counsel for respondent  No.4 contends  that concurrent  findings  of 

the  Courts  below  could  not  be  interfered  in  the  revisional  jurisdiction,  even, 

complete  record  has  not  been  appended  with  this  case  and  only  those  family 

members  are  entitled  for  the  accommodation  of  the  late  allottee  who  are 

dependent  and  living  with  the  allottee  in  the  same  accommodation  but  in  this 

case suit  accommodation  was  not  in  possession  of the  allottee  and  as  such  the 

execution of decree is not  possible; that  Ministry of Housing  &  Works and  Estate 

office allotted  the  suit  quarter  to  respondent  No.4  on  09.09.2006 but  despite 

C.R  No.377 /2018 

3 

having  knowledge  of this  fact late  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  has  not  impleaded 

the  respondent  No.4  in the  suit  and  managed  the  decree  in collusive  manner  by 

way of misrepresentation  and  fraud  and as such application  U /S  12(2) CPC is yet 

to be adjudicated  on this score. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused. 

Perusal  of record  reveals that  suit quarter  No.331-E, G-6/ 4, Islamabad  was 

allotted  to  respondent  No.4  on  09.09.2006, which  was  occupied  by  respondent 

No.4  on  10.02.2009 from  the  Inquiry  Office  of  the  CDA  as  per  occupation 

vacation  report,  however,  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  has  filed  a  civil  suit  for 

declaration,  mandatory  and  permanent  injunction  on  01.03.2008 with  the  prayer 

that  he  is  entitled  for allotment  of quarter  against  25% hardship  quota,  however. 

said.suit  was  decreed  in his favour  vide judgment  & decree  dated  18.02.2010 and 

Late Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  has  filed the  execution  application  on  17.05.2012, 

however,  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  died  on  14.06.2017 without  getting  the 

possession  in  the  execution  of decree  whereas  the  allottee  respondent  No.4  has 

filed an application  U /S  12(2) CPC which is yet to be adjudicated  on merit. 

7. 

The  primary  question  raised  in  this  civil  revision  is  whether  after  the 

death  of late Muhammad  Zafar Malik allottee on the basis of judgment  & decree, 

execution  proceedings  stand  abetted  or  continue  whereas  learned  Executing 

Court  dismissed  the  proceedings  as  having  become  infructuous  and  the  said 

order  was  maintained  by  the  Appellate  Court.  In  order 

to  resolve  the 

controversy,  I  have  confronted  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  who 

contends  that  petitioner  Gohar  Bano,  widow  sister  of  deceased  Muhammad 

Zafar  Malik  falls  within  the  definition  of family  in  terms  of  Section  2(£)  of  the 

Accommodation  Allocation  Rules, 2002 and  as  such  PM  Assistance  Package  is 

applicable  to the late  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik case who  died  during  service and 

C.R  No.377  /2018 

4 

as  such  PM  Assistance  Package  dated  04.12.2015 extends  the  rights  in  the 

following manner:- 

----  ·-- 

ITEM 
Accommodation 

··----- 

------ --·---  -------------+----------------! 

SECURITY  RELATED  DEATHS 

-------------------~-----------------, 
IN SERVICE  DEATHS 
Retention  of  Government  Retention  of  Government  house  or 
house  or  payment  of  rent  of  payment  of hired house  till  the  age 
hired  house 
till  age  of  of superannuation. 
superannuation. 

8. 

The above  referred  rights  referred  in  the  O.M dated  04.12.2015 spells  out 

the  minimum  requirement  for  the  accommodation  is  "retention  of government 

house",  whereas  the  term  retention  if  considered  in  the  light  of  dictionary 

meaning,  says  continuation  to  or  continue  to  have  something,  therefore,  the 

simple  meaning  of  term  retention 

if  considered 

in  the  favour  of  allottee 

Muhammad  Zafar  Malik,  it has  to  be justified  on  record  that  the  decree-holder 

was  in  possession  of the  same  although  his  execution  application  was  pending 

for  the  purpose  of possession  which  was  not  decided  due  to  pending  litigation, 

even otherwise  Rule 15(1) of Accommodation  Allocation  Rules 2002 regulate  the 

procedure  of allotment  and  retention  in  case of death  of allottee  during  service. 

The  said  rule  states  that  in  case of death  of allottee,  the  family  of the  allottee 

shall  be  entitled  to  retain  the  accommodation  under  their  occupation  for  a 

period not  exceeding one year  on payment  of normal  rent,  as  such  Mst.  Gohar 

Bano widow  sister of deceased  Muhammad  Zafar Malik was  not  in possession  of 

suit  accommodation,  hence,  Accommodation  Allocation  Rules,  2002 as  well  as 

PM Assistance  Package  are not  applicable  in this  case coupled  with  the  fact that 

mere allotment  of house  or decree  for allotment  without  obtaining  possession  of 

allotted  accommodation  does not  confers any  right  in favour  of family  members 

for obtaining  possession  of any accommodation  allotted  to an employee  who  has 

passed  away  without  obtaining  possession  of official accommodation.  Moreover, 

allotment  of house  or entitlement  for allotment  of official accommodation  is not 

inheritable  right  under  Accommodation  Allocation  Rules,  2002.  Learned 

C.R  No.377 /2018 

5 

Executing  Court  as  well  as  Appellate  Court  has  rightly  appreciated 

the  matter 

concurrently  and  it  is  settled  law  that  concurrent  findings  of  the  Courts  below 

could  not  be  interfered  by  the  High  Court  at  revisional  stage.  Reliance  is  placed 

upon  2018  YLR  1950  (Muhammad  Rafique  VS  Province  of  Punjab 

through 

District  Collector  Vehari).  It is also  trite  law  that  findings  and  facts  recorded  by 

the  appellate  Court  based  upon  appraisal  of  evidence  could  not  be  interfered  in 

terms  of Section  115 CPC  merely  because  different  view  was  possible  to be  taken. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  2001  SCMR  798  (Abdul  Qayyum  VS  Mushk-e-Alam). 

The  scope  of revisional  jurisdiction  is limited  in which  Court  cannot  set  aside  the 

facts  recorded  by  the  courts  of  competent 

jurisdiction, 

the  same  cannot  be 

interfered  by  the  High  Court  in  exercise  of its  revisional  jurisdiction,  unless  such 

findings  suffer  fro°'  controversial  defects,  illegality  or  material 

irregularity. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  2010  SCMR  5  (Muhammad 

Idrees  VS  Muhammad 

Peruaiz). 

9. 

I  have  gone  through 

the  concurrent  findings  of  the  Courts  below  and  as 

such  there  is no  illegality  and  the  orders  have  been  passed  within  four  corners  of 

law  and  as such  right  of late  Muhammad  Zafar  Malik  seized  to  exist  to  the  extent 

of retention  of  government  accommodation  as  decree  in  his  favour  could  not  be 

satisfied  at  this  stage,  therefore, 

instant  civil  revision 

is  misconceived  and  the 

same  is hereby  dismissed. 

(MOHSIN  AKHTARI</AYANI) 
JUDGE 

