Form  No:  HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal  Appeal  No.  274  of  2019 

Waris  Hussain 

VS 

The  State 

Appellant  by 

Mr Jan  Muhammad  Khan.  Advocate. 

Respondents  by 

Mr Azhar  Hussain  Mughal,  Advocate. 

Mr Fahad Ali,  State  Counsel. 
Mr Muhammad  Iqbal,  S.I.  with  record. 

Dates  of  Hearing 

07-02-2022 

Athar  Minallah.  C.J.-  We  will  decide  the  appeal  and 

answer 

the  Murder  Reference  No.24/2019 

titled  "The  State  v. 

Waris Khan alias  Mooda"  through  this  consolidated  judgment. 

2. 

Raja  Shoaib  Khan  son  of  Raja  Aitbar  Khan  (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  "Complainant")  PW-11,  submitted  a  written 

complaint  (Exh.PJ)  and  pursuant  thereto,  FIR No.62,  dated  06-06- 

2016  (Exh.PD)  was  registered.  It  was  alleged  that  on  06-06-2016, 

at  about  02:00  a.m.,  the  Complainant  and  other  family  members 

woke  up  due  to  loud  noise  from  the  room  of  the  latter's  younger 

Page-  2 

Crl Appeal  No.274/2019 

brother,  Shabraiz  (hereinafter referred to as the  "Deceased"). He 

was  witnessed  having  a  scuffle  with  Waris  Hussain  son  of  Ghulam 

Mustafa  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "Appellant").  When  the 

latter  saw  other  family  members,  he  fired  a  shot  from  a  pistol  in 

his  possession.  The  Deceased  received  a  firearm 

injury  on  his 

chest.  The  Complainant  and  other 

family  members 

tried 

to 

apprehend  the  Appellant  but  the  latter  managed  to  escape  from 

the  crime  scene.  Another  brother  of  the  complainant,  Raja Tabraiz 

(PW-12)  was  also  present  at  the  crime  scene.  The  Deceased was 

taken  to  the  Polyclinic  Hospital  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

"Hospital")  but  he  succumbed  to  the  firearm  injury  while  on  the 

way.  The  motive  was also described  in  the  complaint  and  recorded 

in  the  FIR. 

3. 

Iftikhar  Ali,  Constable  (PW-8)  was  performing  duties  at 

the  entrance  of  the  police  station.  He  was  informed  regarding  the 

commission  of  the  offence  by  the  person  who  was  taking  the 

Deceased to  the  Hospital  in  a  taxi.  He  then  informed  Mohammad 

Iqbal,  Sub  Inspector 

(PW-13)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

"Investigating  Officer").  The 

latter  alongwith  other  police 

officials  reached  the  Hospital.  He  received  the  written  complaint 

(Exh.PJ)  and  prepared  the  Inquest  Report  (Exh.PA).  Applications 

for  conducting  autopsy  and  keeping  the  body  of  the  Deceased in 

the  mortuary  were  submitted,  Exh.PL and  Exh.M,  respectively.  The 

Investigating  Officer  then  visited  the  crime  scene.  He prepared  un- 

scaled  site  plan  (Exh.PN).  He  collected  blood,  a  spent  cartridge, 

two  unused  bullets  and  a  "sika"  i.e.  fired  bullet.  All  these  items 

Page-  3 

Crl Appeal  No.274/2019 

were  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memos,  Exh.PO,  Ex.PP, 

Exh.PQ and  Exh.  PR,  respectively. 

4. 

The  autopsy  was  conducted  by  Dr  Durdana  Kazmi, 

Medico-Legal  Officer  (PW-1)  and  pursuant  thereto  she  recorded 

her  findings  in  the  postmortem  report  (Exh.PB).  The  description  of 

injuries  on  the  basis  of  external  examination  was  recorded  as 

follows.- 

"External appearance 

i. 

Healthy,  young  well-built  male  about  30  years  of 

age.  He  was  naked  from  above  and  was  wearing 

black color shalwar soaked in blood. 

Following injuries  found the body of the deceased; 

i. 

Entry  wound 3.5 x  3.5 cm just  medial  to  left  nipple 

tattooing  around wound and edges inverted. 

ii. 

Exit  wound  2  x  2  cm  at  the  base  of  scapula  with 

everted  edges. 

iii. 

Abrasion  on  right  side  of  forehead,  bruise  just 

above and below the right eye of the face. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

Bruise on the right forearm. 

Rigor mortis  developed. 

Scalp, skull and vertebrae normal." 

5. 

Malik  Amir  Shahzad,  Draftsman  (PW-3),  after  visiting  the 

crime  scene,  prepared 

the  scaled  site  plan 

(Exh.DG).  The 

Appellant  was  arrested  on  07-06-2016  and  on  10-06-2016,  he  led 

the  Investigating  Officer  to  the  recovery  of  the  crime  weapon  i.e. 

30  bore  pistol.  The  crime  weapon  was  taken  into  possession  vide 

recovery  memo  (Exh.P-W).  The  sealed  parcels  containing 

the 

spent  cartridge,  unused  bullets  and  the  used  bullet,  respectively 

Page ~4 

Crl Appeal  No.274/2019 

were  sent  to  the  National  Forensic  Science  Agency  (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  "Agency") on  14-06-2016.  The  sealed  parcel 

containing  blood  stained  cotton  was  sent  to  the  Punjab  Forensic 

Science  Agency,  Lahore  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "Punjab 

Agency").  On  22-06-2016, 

the  sealed  parcel  containing 

the 

recovered  crime  weapon  was also sent  to  the  Agency. 

6. 

The  Agency  vide  report,  dated  19-07-2016 

(Exh.PAA) 

recorded 

its  opinion. 

It  confirmed 

that  the  spent  cartridge 

recovered  from  the  crime  scene  had  matched  the  firearm  crime 

weapon.  Likewise,  the  Punjab  Agency  vide  report,  dated  16-06- 

2016  (Exh.PAB) confirmed  that the  blood  on the  cotton  was that of 

human. 

7. 

It  is  noted  that  the  Appellant's  wife  Ms  Zareen  Bibi,  was 

medically  examined  by  Dr  Durdana  Kazmi  (PW-1)  on  08-06-2016 

and the  latter was of the  opinion  that  her  injury  was "simple". 

8. 

Charge  was  framed  on  29-09-2016,  and  in  response  the 

Appellant  did  not  plead  guilty.  Fourteen  witnesses  entered  the 

witness  box  on  behalf  of  the  prosecution.  The  Appellant  preferred 

not  to  be  examined  under  oath  and,  therefore,  his  statement  was 

recorded  under  section  342  of  Cr.P.C. After  recording  of  evidence 

and  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial  proceedings,  the  learned  trial 

court  vide  judgment,  dated  23-07-2019,  convicted  and  sentenced 

,...  the  Appellant  in the  following  terms. 

"For  the  reasons stated,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion 

that  the prosecution has fully proved its  case against the 

Page-  5 

Crl Appeal  No.274/2019 

accused facing trial to the guilt and thus, I  have found the 

accused facing  trial  namely  Waris  Hussain  alias  Mooda 

guilty  of  the  offence  of  committing  Qatl-e-Amd  of  the 

deceased Shabraiz and  no  mitigating  circumstance could 

be  pointed  out  on  the  record.  Therefore,  the  accused 

facing  trial  is  hereby convicted under section 302(b)  PPC 

and  sentenced  to  normal  punishment  of  death  with 

payment  of  compensation amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  (one 

lac)  under  Section 544-A  Cr.P.C. to  be paid  to  the  legal 

heirs of the  deceased. The amount  of compensation shall 

be  recoverable  as  an  arrears  of  land  revenue  and  it  is 

further  directed  that in default  of payment  or of recovery 

as aforesaid, the convict shall suffer further imprisonment 

for a period  of  06 months (S.I.)  u/s  544-A  of  Cr.P.c. and 

in  default  thereof he shall suffer six  months  S.I.  He shall 

be  hanged  by  the  neck  till  he  is  dead.  The  reference 

under  Section  374  is  sent  for  the  confirmation  of  death 

sentenced and the  sentence of death,  however,  shall not 

be  executed  till 

it 

is  confirmed  by 

the  Honorable 

Islamabad High Court." 

9. 

Mr  Jan  Muhammad  Khan, 

learned  counsel  for 

the 

Appellant  has  argued  that;  recovery  was  doubtful;  deposition  of 

the  Complainant cannot  be relied upon because he had given false 

evidence  under  oath;  the  Complainant  had  changed  his  stance 

when  he  entered  the  witness  box;  the  site  plan  contradicts  the 

ocular  account  and  does  not  support  the  medical  evidence;  the 

most  crucial  witness  was  the  Appellant's  wife  but  she  was  not 

produced  by  the  prosecution;  motive  was  not  proved;  no  road 

certificate  was  brought  on  record;  the  Inquest  Report states  that 

eyes and  mouth  of  the  Deceased were  open, which  raises doubts 

regarding 

the  prosecution's  story; 

the  depositions  of 

the 

Page-  6 

Crl Appeal  No.274/2019 

prosecution  witnesses  are  not  confidence  inspiring; 

reliance  has 

been  placed  on  the  cases  titled  "Sajjan  Solangi  v.  The  State" 

[2019  SCMR 872]  and  "Muhammad Asif v.  The State" [2017  SCMR 

486]. 

10. 

Mr  Azhar  Hussain  Mughal,  learned  counsel  for  the 

Complainant  has  contended  that  the  prosecution  had  established 

its  case beyond  a  reasonable  doubt;  the  discrepancies  pointed  out 

by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Appellant  were  not  material.  The 

learned  State  Counsel has adopted  the  arguments  of  the  latter. 

11. 

We  have  heard  the  learned  counsels  and  with  their 

able assistance,  the  record  has been carefully  perused. 

12. 

The  Appellant  was  married  to  the  Deceased's sister. 

The  Complainant,  another  witness  (PW-12),  and  the  Deceased 

were  siblings.  They  all  were  present  at  the  crime  scene  on  the 

fateful  morning  when  the  gruesome  crime  was  committed.  The 

ocular  account  was  deposed  by  two  witnesses,  PW-11  and  PW-12, 

respectively.  Their  testimonies  have  been  found  to  be  consistent, 

trustworthy  and  confidence  inspiring.  The  ocular  version  deposed 

by  two  witnesses  was  corroborated  by  recovery  of  the  crime 

weapon  and  then  its  matching  with  the  spent  cartridge,  which  was 

taken  in  possession  from  the  crime  scene.  There  is  nothing  on 

record  to  raise  a  reasonable  doubt  regarding  safe  custody  of  the 

sealed  parcels  containing 

the 

recovered 

items  or 

their 

transportation  to  and  delivery  at  the  Agency  or the  Punjab Agency, 

Page - 7 
Crl Appeal  No.274/2019 

as  the  case  may  be.  The  medical  evidence  further  supports  the 

ocular  account  deposed  by  two  prosecution  witnesses.  There  is  no 

plausible  explanation  why  the  Complainant  and  another  witness 

would  have falsely  deposed against  the  Appellant  who  was  married 

to·  their  sister.  There  is  no  force  in  the  argument  of  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  Appellant  that  the  Appellant's  wife  was  a  crucial 

witness  and  since  she  did  not  enter  the  witness  box,  therefore, 

guilt  was  not  proved  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  As already  noted, 

the  trustworthy  testimonies  of  two  witnesses  regarding  ocular 

account  and  its  corroboration  through  reliable  evidence  had proved 

the  guilt  of  the  Appellant  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  We  are, 

therefore,  satisfied 

that  the  prosecution  had  proved 

its  case 

beyond  a  reasonable  doubt. 

13. 

For  the  above  reasons,  the  appeal  has  been  found 

to  be  meritless  and, 

therefore, 

it  is  accordingly  dismissed. 

Consequently  the  Murder  Reference  No.24/2019  titled  "The  State 

v.  Waris Khan alias  Mooda"  is  answered  in the  awrmative. 

(CHIEF \If STICE) 

(SARDAR EJAZ ISHAQ KHAN) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in the  open  Court  on --~.---- 

uiqmen  Khan/. 

JUDGE 

(CHIEF  J~T)tE) 

