ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       CIVIL REVISION NO. 260 of 2014 

Khalid Iqbal and others. 

VS 

  Shahid Iqbal and others.  

 PETITIONERS BY:       M/s  Attique  ur  Rehman  Kiani  and  Imran 
Haider, Advocates.   

 RESPONDENTS BY:  M/s  Tahir  Afzal  Abbasi  and  Shahzad  
Kiyani, Advocates.  

DATE OF HEARING: 

04.03.2021. 

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  This  Civil  Revision  has  been  filed 

impugning  the  order  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 

Islamabad dated 27.05.2014.  

2. 

The  essential  facts  of  the  case  are  that  respondents 

filed  a  civil  suit  on  15.07.1987  seeking  declaration  against  the 

petitioners  to  the  effect  that  the  respondents  were  owners  in 

Hissadari  possession  of  village  common  land  measuring  416 

kanals bearing khewat No.4, khatooni No.5, khasra No. 199 and 

174  to  the  effect  of  1/24th  share.  In  the  suit,  respondents  had 

averred  that  a  predecessor-in-interest  of  the  petitioners  Qaim 

Khan father of Gustasab Khan (who was the father of petitioner 

No.1)  fraudulently  got  a  statement  recorded  purportedly  being 

that of one Khan Zaman (Predecessor-in-interest of respondents, 

being  the  father  of  one  Ihtabar  who  was  the  grandfather  of  the 

respondents)  in  Jammabandi  of  village  Hoter-be-Charagh  in  the 

year 1904-05 to the effect that said Khan Zaman had no interest 

in such property. The crux of the averments in the suit were that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

a predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners and the respondents 

namely  Buk  owned  property  in  village  Hoter-be-Charagh  and 

Chhattar.  That  the  said  Buk  had  a  son  Kala  who  died  issueless 

and  consequently  the  property  of  Buk  ought  to  have  been 

devolved on Buk’s brother Hussain who was alive at the time of 

Buk’s  death  but  the  said  property  instead  devolved  on  Khan 

Zaman,  and  Qaim  through  the  aforementioned  fraudulent 

statement  recorded  in  the  name  of  Khan  Zaman  assumed  the 

control of the property that belonged to Buk. The case in the suit  

is, therefore, built on two limbs (i) Buk’s property could not have 

been devolved on Khan Zaman at the time of death of Buk and 

Kala probably in 1898 as Khan Zaman’s father and Buk’s brother 

Hussain  was  alive  at  that  time  and  consequently  Khan  Zaman 

did not possess the legal character to acquire such property and 

subsequently  alienate  such  property  in  favour  of  Qaim  in  1904-

05,  and  (ii)  such  property  originally  belonged  to  Buk  legally 

devolved on Hussain in 1898 and subsequently on Khan Zaman 

in  1908  when  Hussain  died  and  consequently  mutation  No.  12 

sanctioned  on  29.03.1908  in  relation  to  property  in  village  

Hoter-be-Charagh  and  mutation  No.8  dated  29.03.1908  in 

relation to property in village Chhattar, which did not include the 

afore  described  suit  property  as  that  belonging  to  Khan  Zaman 

ought  to  be  corrected  as  such  exclusion  in  the  aforementioned 

mutations  was  a  consequence  of  fraud  committed  by  Qaim,  the 

processor-in-interest of the petitioners, against Khan Zaman the 

predecessor-in-interest of the respondents.  

3. 

Learned  counsels  for  the  parties  stated  at  the  outset 

that they have submitted written arguments and as this is an old 

 
  
 
-3- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

matter  and  the  questions  before  the  Court  in  this  revision 

petition  are  questions  of  law,  they  would  be  satisfied  if  the 

petition can be decided on the basis of their written arguments. 

It is settled law that hearing oral arguments is not a mandatory 

requirement  under  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (“CPC”). 

In view of the principles of natural justice and provisions of CPC, 

it  is  for  the  court  to  provide  the  parties  with  an  opportunity  of 

being heard and to assist the court. In the event that the parties 

elect  not  to  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  to  present  oral 

arguments, it is the duty of the court to adjudicate the matter in 

view of the pleadings and the record on file. In the instant case 

this Court has the benefit of written arguments and consequently 

this petition is being decided in view of the pleadings, the record 

on  file  and  the  written  arguments  submitted  on  behalf  of  the 

parties.     

4. 

To  adjudicate  the  suit,  the  learned  Civil  Court  framed 

seven issues, which are as follows: 

1.  Whether the suit is not maintainable? OPD. 

2.  Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action? OPD. 

3.  Whether the suit is frivolous? OPD. 

4.  Whether this Court has no jurisdiction? OPD. 

5.  Whether the suit is time barred? OPD. 

6.  Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary 

parties? OPD. 

7.  Whether  the  plaintiffs  and  defendants  No.2  to  6  are 

owners  in  possession  to  the  extent  of  ½  share  and 

they  are  entitled  to  permanent  injunction  as  prayed 

in the plaint? OPD.  

 
  
 
-4- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

5. 

The learned Civil Court by judgment dated 27.09.2010 

dismissed  the  suit.  The  findings  of  the  learned  Civil  Court  in 

relation to the relevant issues are as follows: - 

Issue No.1. 

It is also evident from the record of plaint that the plaintiffs 

have  claimed  that  their  predecessor  Hussain  Baksh  and 

Fattah  had  lands  in  village,  Hotar  Be  Charagh  Chattar  and 

Phulgran,  but the  plaintiffs  have  controverted  the  dispute  of 

distribution of inheritance to the extent of Hotar Be Charagh, 

so  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  that  whether  the  plaintiffs’  side 

have  got  excessive  land  in  other  villages  or  actually  they 

were  deprived  of  from  the  inheritance  of  their  predecessors 

back  in  1908.  The  plaintiffs  did  not  even  mention  that  who 

acquired the land and how much compensation was given to 

defendants No.1-A to 1-H or to their ascendant, however the 

fact  of  acquisition  of  disputed  property  confirms  that  the 

plaintiffs  are  out  of  possession  and  they  cannot  sue  for 

possession of their share in Shamilat. 

Issue No.2. 

The  plaintiffs  are  demanding  ½  share  out  of  the  share  of 

defendants No.1-A to 1-H in the Shamilat land of Chattar, on 

the basis of said fraud as was committed in Mauza Hotar Be 

Charagh, but the plaintiffs did not mention any owned land in 

Mauza  Chattar  through  which  they  become  entitled  to  get 

share in Shamilat of Chattar. The plaintiffs cannot claim/sue 

on  the  same  cause  of  action  which  has  already  been 

satisfied/ceased  to  be  exist  between  the  parties  vide 

judgment dated 01.06.1995. 

The  plaintiffs  cannot  be  allowed  to  bring  disputes  of  their 

inheritance  and  matters  connected  thereto,  in  piece  meal. 

The plaintiffs have mentioned in plaint that their predecessor 

had  properties  in  Hotar  Be  Charagh,  Chattar  and  Phulgran 

and they have brought the whole dispute before the Court of 

Murree and have got the dispute of inheritance decided from 

the Court. Now they have no cause of action left against the 

defendants  regarding  ownership  of  inherited  properties,  so 

far as the right to possession of common land is concerned, 

the Revenue Authorities have jurisdiction to resolve the issue 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-5- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

through  partition  of  the  same/Shamilat.  Calculation  of 

expected  share  in  Shamilat  on  the  basis  of  owned  land  and 

handing over possession to the owners as per “Wajibul Arz is 

the  vested  responsibility  of  Revenue  Authorities  U/S  145  & 

146, Land Revenue Act, 1967. The plaintiffs have no cause of 

action  against  the  contesting  defendants  i.e.  No.1-A  to  1-H, 

hence the issue is decided in affirmation. 

Issue No.5. 

On  the  other  hand,  counsel  for  the  plaintiffs  argued  that  in 

case  of  inheritance  suits  wrong  entries  gives  new  cause  of 

action and Article 120 of Limitation Act applies in the case, in 

this  regard  he  placed  reliance  on  2000  SCMR  1574,  1993 

CLC 625 and 1999 MLD 2146. Since limitation in the case is 

common  question  of  law  and  fact,  therefore,  needed 

evidence,  but  the  defendants  No.1-A  to  1-H  did  not  adduce 

and  confidence  inspiring  evidence  in  this  regard,  hence  the 

issue is decided in negative. 

Issue No.6. 

Arguments of the counsel for the defendants proves the fact 

that  the  Revenue  Authorities  and  concerned  Collector  are 

necessary  parties  to  the  suit  and  without  knowing  their 

contention  the  dispute  cannot  be  justly  adjudicated  upon, 

hence the issue is decided in affirmative. 

Issue No.7. 

The  disputed  land  is  415  Kanals  and  16  Marlas  of  Shamilat 

land,  as  per  plaint  the  land  has  already  been  acquired  in 

1972,  but  the  plaintiffs  have  not  impleaded  the  necessary 

parties in the suit, so actual position regarding possession of 

the  disputed  land  and  status  could  not  come  before  the 

Court.  Moreover,  the  plaintiffs  did  not  produce  in  their 

evidence  the  main  document  which  shows  the  right  in 

Shamilat  land  i.e.  the  statement  of  customs/Wajib-ul-Arz  of 

the  defendants.  It  is  admitted  fact  that  Shamilat  land  could 

have  consist  of  pastures,  well,  mosque  etc.  which  could  not 

be  partitioned,  in  the  present  case  the  plaintiffs  did  not 

provide any such details. The onus to prove the issue was on 

plaintiffs but they could not discharge the same and failed to 

prove their ownership on the disputed property to the extent 

of  their  share  and  entitlement  to  possess  the  respective 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-6- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

shares in Shamilat especially when the land has already been 

acquired. 

6. 

The  learned  Additional  District  Judge  set-aside  the 

judgment  of  the  learned  trial  court  and  his  findings  on  the 

relevant issues are as follows: - 

Issues No.1 & 2. 

The  plaintiff  have  crossed  all  the  DW1  focusing  on  the  fact 

that  the  instant  suit  is  similar  in  nature  to  the  suit  filed  for 

Hoter  Be  Charagh  which  fall  within  territorial  jurisdiction  of 

Murree. Since the plaintiff contention that the predecessor of 

defendant  No.1  had  played  fraud  in  revenue  record  and 

struck  out  the  name  of  the  predecessor  of  the  plaintiff  and 

due  to  which  Civil  Court  Murree  decision;  the  plaintiff 

succeeded  to  acquire  their  due  share  in  Hoter  Be  Charagh. 

However,  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  not  accepted  this 

arguments  of  the  appellants/plaintiffs  had  it  non-suited  the 

plaintiff  by  invoking  provision  U/o  2  Rule  2  CPC  that  the 

plaintiff  failed  to  challenge  the  disputed  property  of  instant 

suit  in  his  earlier  suit  filed  by  the  plaintiff  at  Murree, 

therefore,  he  was  barred  to  file  suit  regarding  said  property 

at Islamabad. This observation is against the law on subject 

since Civil Court at Murree lack the jurisdiction on the subject 

matter  of  instant  suit  as  it  falls  within  Islamabad.  Therefore 

the  findings  of  the  learned  trial  Court  on  issues  No.1  &  2  is  

set-aside,  hence 

the 

issue 

is  decided 

in 

favour  of 

appellants/plaintiffs. 

Issue No.5. 

Limitation does not run in inheritance matters. Therefore, by 

not challenging inheritance entries by the predecessor of the 

plaintiffs,  does  not  preclude  the  plaintiff  to  file  the  instant 

suit, hence the issue is rightly answered in negative. 

Issue No.6. 

The revenue authorities were not necessary impleaded party 

in the suit by the plaintiff. However, non-joinder of necessary 

party  does  not  entail  dismissal  of  suit,  therefore,  even 

otherwise  is  the  issue  is  answered  in  affirmative,  it  has  no 

bearing on the original controversy of parties. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-7- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

Issue No.7. 

The  plaintiffs  have  also  produced  copy  of  judgment  dated 

passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge  Murree.  Where  the 

controversy  to  the  extent  that  the  impugned  statement  of 

Khan Zaman in Ex.P4 was declared null and void and due to 

which the plaintiff had got their share in the suit property at 

Murree, hence, it is decided by competent Court of Law that 

the  impugned  mutation  in  name  of  Ghustasab  Khan  while 

depriving  the  predecessor  of  the  plaintiff  in  the  property  at 

Be Charah was against the facts. 

Perusal of pleadings and evidence of parties there is nothing 

on  record  that  there  exists  any  custom  in  the  village  or 

family to devolve the property on cousin instead of real uncle 

(Hussain). 

7. 

Before  discussing  legality  and  merit  of  the  impugned 

judgment,  let  us  consider  the  law  on  (i)  the  question  of 

limitation, (ii) the relevance of a judgment delivered by another 

court  in  a  case  with  overlapping  facts,  and  (iii)  the  standard  of 

proof  required  to  establish  fraud  as  done  in  the  instant  case  to 

declare  a  transaction  that  purportedly  took  place  in  1904-05  to 

be null and void.   

8. 

On  question  of  limitation,  it  has  been  held  by  the 

learned appellate court that it simply doesn’t apply in inheritance 

cases.  The  law  on  limitation  in  general  and  more  specifically  on 

whether it applies to inheritance matters has been explained by 

the august Supreme Court as follows: 

(i)  Fatah  Uddin  v.  Zarshad  and  another  (1973  SCMR 

248) 

“under Article 120 of the Limitation Act the time begins 

to run from the date the right to sue accrues and in this 

case the right to sue accrued from the date of discovery 

of  the  fraud  which  was  specifically  alleged  to  be  in 

1969.”  

(ii)  Hakim  Muhammad  Buta  and  another  v.  Habib 

Ahmed and others (PLD 1985 SC 153) 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-8- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

“The  words  of  section  3  of  the  Limitation  Act  are 

mandatory  in  nature  in  that  every  suit  instituted  after 

the period of limitation shall, subject to the provision of 

Section  4  to  25  of  the  Act,  be  dismissed  although 

limitation has not been set up as a defence. If from the 

statement in the plaint the suit appears to be barred by 

limitation, the plaint shall have to be rejected also under 

Order VII, Rule  11,  C.P.C.  The  law,  therefore,  does  not 

leave  the  matter  of  limitation  to  the  pleadings  of  the 

parties.” 

“Where  the  question  of  limitation  is  not  a  mixed 

question of law and fact or where limitation is apparent 

on  the  face  of  the  record,  a  wavier  by  parties  would 

relieve the Court of its obligation under Section 3 of the 

Limitation, Act.” 

(iii) Muhammad  Raz  Khan  v.  Government  of  N.W.F.P 

and another  (PLD 1997 SC 397) 

“Principle of justice and fairplay does not help those who 

were  extraordinary  negligent  in  asserting  their  rights 

and  despite  becoming  aware  about  alleged  void  order 

adverse  to  their 

interest  remain  in  deep  slumber. 

Therefore,  according  to  our  considered  opinion,  facility 

regarding  extension  of  time  for  challenging  orders 

cannot  be  legitimately  stretched  to  any  length  of 

unreason  period  at  the  whim's,  choices or  sweet  will  of 

affected  party.  Thus,  order  termed as nullity  or  void 

could  at  best  be  assailed  by  computing  period  of 

limitation  when  he  factually  came  to  know  about  the 

same. When a person presumes that adverse order is a 

nullity or totally devoid of lawful authority and ignores it 

beyond the period specified by law of limitation, then he 

does so at his own risk.” 

(iv)  Atta  Muhammad  v.  Maula  Bakhsh  (2007  SCMR 

1446) 

“8.  The  findings  of  the  learned  two  Courts  is  that  the 

plaintiffs  were out  of  possession  and  they  have  not 

been  able  to  establish  receipt  of  rent and  profits  from 

the  land,  although  the  appellant  claimed  to  the 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-9- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

contrary. This  was  the  second  misrepresentation  which 

disentitled  the  plaintiffs  to any  relief  in  equitable 

jurisdiction.  The 

learned  two  Courts  held  that 

the suit  was  barred  by  time  but  the  learned  High 

Court, by making a sweeping statement, that there is 

no  limitation  in  the  cases  of  inheritance has,  in  fact, 

rewritten  the  law of  limitation. It  was  not  a case 

of inheritance  between  the  co-sharers  because  the 

plaintiffs  case  was  that the  appellant  was  a  stranger. 

As  the  mutation  of  inheritance  of  the  estate of  M st. 

Khairan 

in  1942 

is  concerned, 

there  was 

absolutely  no justification,  factual  or  legal,  to 

overlook the delay of 46 years in filing the suit. This 

delay  of  46  years  adversely  reflected  on  the  bona 

fides of the claim of the respondents.”  

“9.  We  may  add  that  public  interest  requires  that 

there  should  be  an end  to  litigation.  The  law  of 

limitation  provides  an  element  of  certainty in  the 

conduct  of  human  affair.  Statutes  of  limitation  and 

prescription are, 

thus,  statutes  of  peace  and 

repose.  In  order  to  avoid  the  difficulty and  errors 

that  necessarily  result 

from 

lapse  of 

time, 

the 

presumption of coincidence of fact and right is rightly 

accepted  as  final  after  a  certain  number  of  years. 

Whoever  wishes  to  dispute  this  presumption  must 

do so, within that period; otherwise his rights if any, 

will  be  forfeited  as  a penalty  for  his  neglect.  In 

other  words  the  law  of  limitation  is  a  law which  is 

designed  to  impose  quietus  on  legal  dissensions  and 

conflicts.  It requires  that  persons  must  come  to 

Court  and  take  recourse  to  legal  remedies  with 

due diligence.”  

(v)  Jamila  Khatoon  and  others  v.  Aish  Muhammad 

(2011 SCMR 222). 

7. In the memo of plaint no averment was made as to 

how and when the disputed mutation first came to the 

knowledge  of  the  appellants/  plaintiffs  except  making 

a  vague  averment  without  any  particular  when  and 

how  the  appellants  came  to  know  about  the  mutation 

of  land  in  question  in  favour  of  the  respondent  and 

 
  
 
  
 
 
-10- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

what  steps  were  taken  by  them  to  protect  their 

interest  nor  any  particular  has  been  given  if  the  land 

in  question  was  allotted  to  them  what  would  they  do 

to  take  possession  of  the  same  and  why  they  kept 

quiet for a period of 28 years… 

9.  For  the  foregoing  reasons we are  of  the  view  that 

the  appellants  not  only  failed  to  prove  that  the 

respondents  have  committed  fraud  in  mutation  of  the 

land  in  question  in  their  favour  in  the  year  1956  and 

that  the  suit  filed  by  the  appellants/plaintiffs  was  in 

time.  The  mutation  was  effected  on  17-12-1956 

whereas  suit  for  cancellation  was  filed  on  20-9-1989. 

The suit on the face of it was hopelessly barred by the 

time  and  learned  Single  Judge  in  Chambers  of  the 

Lahore High Court rightly dismissed the same. 

(vi)  Lal  Khan  v.  Muhammad  Yousaf  (PLD  2011  SC    

657 

“19. It would be pertinent to note that under the West 

Pakistan  Land  Revenue  Act,  1967,  an  elaborate 

procedure  is  laid  down  to  ensure  that  the  Revenue 

Record is maintained with care and any change sought 

to be made on account of acquiring a right by a person 

by  way  of  inheritance,  purchase  or  otherwise,  is  duly 

recorded  by  the  Patwari  and  subsequently  verified  by 

the  Revenue  Officer.  It  is  on  account  of  this  elaborate 

procedure 

for  maintenance  of 

record 

that  a 

presumption of truth is attached to Revenue Record in 

terms  of  section  52  of  the  Act  which  of-course  is 

rebuttable.” 

“20. With a view to rebut the said presumption of truth 

attached  to  mutation,  the  plaintiff  did  not  lead  any 

evidence  to  prove  the  allegation  of  fraud  against  any 

revenue  official  or  that  the  entries  were  forged.  In 

Hakim  Khan  v.  Nazeer  Ahmad  Lughmani  (1992  SCMR 

1832), the claim made on the basis of entries made in 

the  Revenue  Record  was  upheld  and  the  concurrent 

judgments  and  decrees  of  the  courts  below  were  set 

aside  by  the  court  because  no  evidence  was  led  to 

prove that those entries were collusive or fraudulent. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
   
-11- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

(Vii)  Blue  Star  Spinning  Mills  Limited  v.  Collector  of 

Sales Tax and others (2013 SCMR 587). 

“no  limitation  runs  against  a  void  order  and  held  that 

this  is  not  an  inflexible  rule;  that  a  party  cannot  sleep 

over  to  challenge  such an  order  and that  it is  bound  to 

do  so  within  the  stipulated/prescribed  period  of 

limitation from the date of knowledge before the proper 

forum in appropriate proceedings.”  

(viii) Pir  Wali  Khan  v.  Niaz  Badshah  (2013  MLD  1106 

Peshawar) 

“Where  factum  of  possession  of  defendant  was  in  the 

notice of the plaintiff since 1943, principle of accrual of 

cause  of  notice  on  each  adverse  entry  would  not  apply 

to plaintiff’s case” 

(ix) Mst. Garana v. Sahib Kamala Bibi and others (PLD 

2014 SC 167) 

“6. It  appears  that  in  a  suit  which  involves  some 

element  of  inheritance  the  Courts  are  generally  quick 

to  declare  that  the  law  of  limitation  would  not  be 

attracted.  It  is  not  in  all  cases  of  inheritance  that  the 

question  of  limitation  becomes  irrelevant.  Even  in 

Ghulam  Ali's  case  the  Court  recognized  that  there 

could  be  exceptional  circumstances  wherein  a  suit 

based  on  inheritance  issue  of  limitation  may  become 

relevant.  This  Court  recently  in  some  cases  had 

invoked 

the  principle  of 

time 

limitation  and 

acquiescence  of  the  plaintiff  material  in  suits  of 

inheritance.  In  Mst.  Phaphan  v.  Muhammad  Bakhsh 

(2005  SCMR  1278)  a  suit 

for  declaration  and 

possession  was 

filed 

in  the  year  1983  by  the 

plaintiff/petitioner  claiming  to  be  the  owner  of  the 

inherited  property.  The  suit  was  held  to  be  barred  by 

time  wherein  mutations  of  the  year  1959  and  1967 

were challenged in the year 1983 when the plea of the 

defendants  was  that  the  plaintiffs  had  alienated  the 

property  of  her  own  free-will.  The  plaintiff's  plea  of 

being  pardanashin  lady  and  reliance  on  the  case  of 

Ghulam Ali was not accepted as the plaintiff was found 

to have remained in deep slumber for 24 years despite 

 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
-12- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

the  fact  that  the  physical  possession  of  the  land  was 

passed on to the defendant. Recently in the case of Lal 

Khan  v  Muhammad  Yousaf  (PLD  2011  SC  657)  this 

Court  had  set  aside  the  concurrent  findings  of  the 

three  Courts  and  dismissed  the  suit  filed  on  13-5-

1970,  where  the  plaintiff  had  challenged  inheritance 

mutation of 13-2-1947;  the  Court held  it to be barred 

by time.” 

  (x) Ghulam Abbas and others v. Muhammad Shafi and   

others (2016 SCMR 1403) 

“An  heir,  who  is  directly  affected  by  a  wrongfully 

recorded mutation of inheritance, fails to challenge such 

mutation  for  a  considerable  length  of  time  until  his 

death,  thereby  deprives  his  heirs  of  locus  standi  to 

dispute  such  mutation  on  the  ground  of  his  estoppel, 

abandonment of claim/cause of action. Reference in this 

regard  is  made  to  Abdul  Haq  v.  Surraya  Begum  (2002 

SCMR 1330), Kala Khan v. Rab Nawaz (2004 SCMR 517) 

and  Muhammad  Rustam  v.  Makhan  Jan  (2013  SCMR 

299).” 

9. 

Most recently it was held by this Court in Civil Revision 

No.  297  of  2017  titled  Ahmed  Shah  Bukhari  and  others  v.  Mst. 

Zulaikha  Bi  through  legal  heirs  that  if  mutation  entries  are  not 

challenged  by  a  person  during  his  lifetime,  his  successors-in-

interest  cannot  challenge  them  subsequently,  while  relying  on 

precedents  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the 

following terms: 

“To answer the query guidance is sought from the judgment 

of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  reported  as 

“Muhammad  Rustam  and  another  v.  Mst.  Makhan  Jan  and 

others” (2013 SCMR 299) wherein it was held in paragraph-3 

that:-  

“3.  Having  heard  petitioners'  learned  counsel  at  some 

length,  we  find  that  admittedly  the  impugned  mutation 

of  inheritance  bearing  No.571  dated  9-7-1927  was 

never challenged by Mst. Karam Jan; that she remained 

 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
-13- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

alive  till  1975  and  no  reason  whatsoever  is  reflected 

either in the plaint or in the evidence led to indicate as 

to  why  she  did  not  challenge  the  said  mutation.  It  has 

never  been  the  case  of  the  petitioners  that  either  they 

or  their  predecessor-in-interest  were  unaware  of  the 

said  mutation.  In  the  afore-referred  circumstances,  the 

judgment of the learned High Court is unexceptionable. 

So far as the precedent case-law to which reference has 

been made by petitioners' learned counsel is concerned, 

the same is distinguishable as in none of the judgments 

the question of locus standi was a moot point. In Abdul 

Haq  v.  Mst.  Surraya  Begum  (2002  SCMR  1330),  this 

Court  inter  alia  was  seized  of  a  similar  issue  and  while 

dismissing the petition, it observed as follows:-  

"11.  Atta  Muhammad  was  deprived  of  right  to  inherit 

the  property  as  a  consequence  of  mutation  in  dispute 

but  he  did  not  challenge  the  same  during  his  lifetime. 

The  petitioners  claimed  the  property  through  Atta 

Muhammad  as  his  heirs  who  filed  the  suit  as  late  in 

1979  about  nine  years  after  the  sanction  of  mutation 

which  had already  been  given effect to  in the record of 

rights. The petitioners, therefore, had no locus standi to 

challenge 

the  mutation 

independently, 

for  Atta 

Muhammad  through  whom  they  claimed  inheritance 

himself  had  not  challenged  the  same  during  his 

lifetime.” 

10. 

It  has  been  held  in  Nawab  Khan  v.  Said  Karim  Khan 

(1997 SMCR 1840) that “the presumption of truth is attached to 

the  record  of  rights  generally  but  to  the  first  ever  settlement 

record in particular. Very strong evidence is required to rebut the 

presumption  of  correctness  attached  to  the  first  settlement 

record  of  an  area.”  It  is  trite  law  that  the  presumption  of  truth 

that attaches to sanctioned mutation record can be rebutted. But 

in  the  instant  case  no  reasons  have  been  recorded  by  the 

learned appellate court to explain how it came to the conclusion 

 
  
 
-14- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

that  entries  in  the  record  made  back  in  1904-05  ought  to  be 

altered. 

11. 

In  rendering  its  judgment,  the  learned  appellate  court 

seems to have been swayed by the fact that entries in mutation 

record  relating  to  village  Hoter-be-Charagh  (and  not  Chattar) 

also sanctioned in 1908 involving the predecessors-in-interest of 

the same parties were altered by a learned trial court in Murree. 

The  extent  to  which  the  judgments  of  other  courts  are  relevant 

and  to  be  given  effect  has  been  explained  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  context  of  sections  55  and  56  of  the 

Qanun-e-Shahdat Order, 1984 as follows: 

(i)  Mistri Muhammad Din v. Rawalpindi Improvement  

Trust, Rawalpindi (1976 SCMR 283)  

“Section  43  of  the  Evidence  Act  makes  judgment 

admissible  only  if  it  is  "a  fact  in  issue,  or  is  relevant 

under  some  other  provision  of  this  Act".  Learned 

counsel  conceded  that  the  judgment  in  the  previous 

suit,  per  se  was  not  a  fact  in  issue  in  the  instant  case 

nor  could  he  point  out  to  any  other  section  of  the 

Evidence  Act  under  which  that  judgment  could  be 

treated  as  relevant  to  the  instant  case.  Rather  it 

manifest  from  the  first  illustration  appended  to  the 

section that  merely  because that  the  respondent  was  a 

defendant in  the  earlier suit  and the  controversy  in  the 

suit related to another portion of Khasra No. 2656 would 

hardly make the judgment relevant to the instant case.” 

(ii)  Muhammad Shakil v. The State (PLD 1990 SC 686) 

“The Courts are bound to decide each case on the basis 

of its own record without reference to record of another 

case and pass conviction on accused in each case on its 

own record. There is express prohibition in the Evidence 

Act and even on accepted general principles, decision in 

every  proceedings  in  a  given  case  is  to  be  made  on  its 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
-15- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

own record. Conflicting decisions given in separate trials 

shall  not  be  allowed  to  be  used  against  each  other. In 

Civil  Law  decision  would  be  only  binding  upon  the 

parties  to  the  suit  and  it  shall  become  relevant  in 

another  suit  only  if  they  fall  under  sections  40  to  44  of 

the  Evidence  Act  unless,  of  course,  where 

the 

judgments  contain  an  exposition  of  law,  custom  or 

usage  having  the  force  of  law  in  which  the  Court  shall 

take judicial notice of the judgment so far as they state 

what  the  law  is  and  they  need  not  be  proved.  It  does 

not  follow  that  all  statements  of  facts  contained  in  the 

judgment become matters of which the Court will take, 

judicial notice.” 

(iii) Muhammad  Sohail  v.  Government  of  N.W.F.P 

(1996 SCMR 218) 

4.  At  this  stage  we  may  refer  to  Articles  55  and  56  of 
the Order, which read as under:-- 

"55. Relevancy  of  certain  judgments  in  probate,  etc.. 

jurisdiction.--A  final  judgment,  order  or  decree  of  a 

competent Court in the exercise of probate matrimonial, 

admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon 

or  takes  away  from  any  person  any  legal  character,  or 

which  declares  any  person  to  be  entitled  to  any  such 

character, or to be entitled to any specific thing,. not as 

against  any  specified  person  but  absolutely,  is  relevant 

when  the  existence  of  any  such  legal  character,  or  the 

title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant. 

Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof— 

that any legal character which it confers accrued, at the 

time  when  such  judgment,  order  or.,  decree  came  into 

operation; 

that  any  legal  character,  to  which  it  declares  any  such 

person to be entitled, accrued to that person at the time 

when  such  judgment,  order  or  decree  declares  it  to 

have accrued to that person; 

that  any  legal  character  which  it  takes  away  from  any 

such  person  ceased  at  the  time  which  such  judgment, 

order  or  decree  declared  that  it  had  ceased  or  should 

 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
-16- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

cease;  and  that  anything  to  which  it  declares  any 

person to be so entitled was the property of that person 

at  the  time  4bm-which such  judgment,  order or decree 

declares that it had been or should be his property. 

56. Relevancy and effect of judgment orders or decrees 

other  than  those  mentioned  in  Article  55.--Judgments, 

orders or decrees other than those mentioned in Article 

55  are  relevant  if  they  relate  to  matters  of  a  public 

nature  relevancy  the  enquiry;  but  such  judgments, 

orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which 

they state." 

A  perusal  of  above  Articles  indicates  that  a  final 

judgment, order or decree of a competent Court passed 

in the exercise of- 

(i)  Probate; or 
(ii) matrimonial; or . 
(iii) admirality; or 
(iv) Insolvency jurisdiction; 

which confers upon or takes away from any person any 

legal  character  or  which  declares  any  person  to  be 

entitled  to  any  such  character  or  to  be  entitled  to  any 

specific  thing  not  as  against  any  specified  person  but 

absolutely  is  relevant  to  the  extent  of  such  legal 

character  or  the  title  of  any  such  person  to  any  such 

thing is relevant it may further be observed that it also 

provides that the judgment, order or decree referred to 

in  para.  1  thereof  is  conclusive  proof  in  the  matters, 

provided  in  the  subsequent  portion  of  the  aforesaid 

Article reproduced hereinabove. 

It  may  also  be  pointed  out  that  under  Article  56  it  has 

been laid down that judgments, orders or decrees other 

than  those  mentioned  in  Article  55  are  relevant  if  they 

relate  to  matters  of  a  public  nature  relevant  to  the 

enquiry  but  such  judgments,  orders  or  decrees  are  not 

conclusive  proof  of  that  which  they  state.  In  other 

words, if a final judgment, order or decree is passed by 

a  competent  Court  in  the  exercise  of  four categories  of 

jurisdiction  mentioned  in  para.  1  of  Article  55  and  if  it 

relates  to  the  matters  as  to  the  character  referred  to 

 
  
 
  
  
  
  
-17- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

therein in the subsequent portions of the above Article, 

it  is  conclusive  'proof  but  any  other  final  judgment, 

order or decree which is passed by a competent Court in 

exercise  of  jurisdiction  other  than  the  above  four  types 

of  jurisdiction,  namely,  probate,  matrimonial,  admiralty 

or, insolvency, the same will be relevant but will not be 

conclusive  "'proof  of  that  which  it  states  in  view  of 

Article 56 of the Order. 

12. 

The  learned  trial  court  has  rendered  its  judgment  in 

favor  of  the  respondents  on  the  basis  of  its  findings  that  a 

predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners has committed fraud in 

relation to the suit  property against a predecessor-in-interest of 

the  respondents  back  in  the  year  1904-05.  The  law  on  the 

question  of  fraud  is  also  well  settled  by  now,  for  example,  in 

Muhammad Tufail v. Muhammad Aslam  Khan (1999 YLR 934) it 

was  held  that  “fraud  is  not  only  to  be  alleged  specifically  in  the 

pleadings  but  also  to  be  proved  by  convincing  evidence  beyond 

any shadow of doubt.” 

13. 

In  view  of  the  principles  of  law  as  enumerated  by  the 

august Supreme Court, the following can be concluded: 

(i)  No  principle  of  general  application  has  been  laid 

out  in  the  jurisprudence  produced  in  relation  to 

the  question  of  limitation  pursuant  to  which  the 

period  of 

limitation  prescribed  under 

the 

Limitation Act can be held to be not applicable to 

a  claim  asserted  on  the  basis  of  right  to 

inheritance or on the basis of fraud.  

(ii)  It  is  for  the  party  asserting  a  right  to  establish 

that  it  falls  within  the  prescribed  period  of 

limitation  if  on  the  face  of  record  the  claim  has 

been  asserted  beyond  the  period  of  limitation 

from  the  date  of  the  event  that  gives  rise  to  the 

 
  
 
 
 
-18- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

grievance. If such party claims that it is within the 

prescribed  limitation  period  when  calculated  from 

the date of such party’s knowledge of the event, it 

must  clearly  declare  the  date  when  the  party 

acquired knowledge of the event giving rise to the 

cause  of  action  in  its  averments,  such  as  a  false 

entry  in  the  mutation  record  or  fabrication  of 

record  on  the  basis  of  fraud  or  forgery  etc.,  and 

the  limitation  period  would  run  from  such  date  if 

the  party  can  discharge  the  onus  to  prove  the 

emergence  of  cause  of  action  on  such  date 

through evidence. 

(iii)  In  a  case  where  a  predecessor-in-interest  of  a 

party,  through  whom  such  party  claims  a  right, 

did  not  bring  a  claim  to  establish  and  assert  a 

right  during  the  prescribed  period  of  limitation, 

such person would be deemed to have acquiesced 

to the state of affairs as has existed and no right 

to assert the claim afresh would devolve onto his 

successors-in-interest  who  claims  a  right  through 

him. 

(iv)  A  presumption  of  correctness  attaches  to  entries 

in  the  revenue  record  in  view  of  section  52  of 

West  Pakistan  Land  Revenue  Act,  1967  and  a 

party  asserting  rights  in  conflict  with  such  record 

bears the onus to rebut the presumption attached 

to such record through convincing evidence.  

(v)  It  is  for  the  party  alleging  fraud  to  discharge  the 

onus  of  establishing  that  fraud  took  place  and 

resulted  in  loss  of  legal  character  for  the  party 

making  such  claim.  The  standard  of  proof 

required  to  establish  fraud  does  not  become  any 

less  stringent  merely  because  the  alleged  fraud 

transpired a long time back and the party making 

the  allegation  and  claiming  rights  on  the  basis  of 

such  allegation  lacks  the  ability  to  discharge  the 

 
  
 
 
 
 
-19- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

onus of poof due to non-availability of convincing 

evidence due to efflux of time.   

14. 

Let  us  now  apply  the  relevant  principles  of  law  to  the 

facts  in  the  instant  case.  Both  the  learned  trial  court  and  the 

learned  appellate  court  erred  in  law  on  the  question  of 

limitation.  The  relevant  events  in  which  the  respondents  (i.e. 

plaintiffs  in  the suit) locate their right  to property transpired in 

1898,  1904-05  and  1908  i.e.  when  Buk  died  and  his  property 

ought  to  have  devolved  upon  Hussain  according  to  the 

respondents,  when  the  property  purportedly  devolved  on  Qaim 

due  to  Khan  Zaman’s  statement  allegedly  procured  through 

fraud,  and  subsequently  when  Hussain  died  in  1908  and  his 

property,  including  property  that  ought  to  have  been  inherited 

from Buk, should have devolved upon Khan Zaman. Either way 

the latest year when limitation period began to run for purpose 

of  Khan  Zaman’s  claim  to  suit  property  that  he  allegedly 

inherited  from  Hussain  but  was  not  reflected  in  the  revenue 

record  was  19.03.1908  when  mutations  No.  8  and  12  were 

sanctioned.  Khan  Zaman  died  in  1938  and  for  the  thirty  long 

years that he was alive after 1908 he never asserted any claim 

against  the  suit  property  that  Qaim  allegedly  possessed.  After 

his  death  his  son  Ihtibar  never  claimed  any  right  against  the 

suit  property  and  he  too  reportedly  died  in  1972.  It  was  not 

until  1987  that  the  respondents  claim  to  have  suddenly 

discovered  that  their  great  grandfather  Hussain  and  their 

grandfather  Khan  Zaman  were  defrauded  by  Qaim,  the 

grandfather of the petitioners, in 1904-05.  

 
  
 
-20- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

15. 

Nemo dat quod non habet (“no one gives what they do 

not  have”) 

is  a  well-known  maxim 

in  common 

law 

jurisprudence.  Khan  Zaman  did  not  assert  any  right  during  his 

life to claim the suit property in question that devolved on Qaim 

and  after  him  to  his  successors-in-interest  all  the  way  to  the 

petitioners. If he had brought a claim against the suit property, 

he  would  have  been  required  to  do  so  within  the  period 

prescribed  under  the  Limitation  Act.  Once  he  did  not  do  so 

within his life time during the prescribed period of limitation, he 

left  no 

lingering  right  to  his  successors-in-interest  two 

generations  down,  to  bring  a  claim  for  correction  of  revenue 

record  and  assert  ownership  on  suit  property  allegedly 

appropriated  in  1904-05  by  the  predecessor-in-interest  of  the 

petitioners  on  the  basis  of  fraud.  If  Khan  Zaman  were  alive  in 

1987,  he  could  not  have  brought  such  a  suit  against  the 

petitioners,  being  barred  by  time,  and  neither  could  his 

successors-in-interest. 

16. 

Further,  with  all  due  respect  to  the  learned  appellate 

court, the impugned judgment is not a judgment for purpose of 

Order  XLI  Rule  31  of  CPC  in  view  of  the  law  laid  down  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court  in  Pakistan  Refinery  Ltd.,  Karachi  VS 

Barrett  Hodgson  Pakistan  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  (2019  SCMR  1726).  It  is 

completely  devoid  of  reasoning  and  while  decreeing  the  suit  of 

the respondents it does not explain at all how it reached certain 

conclusions  on  questions  of  fact  without  appreciating  or 

discussing  the  evidence  produced  before  it.  It  has  not 

determined,  for  example,  the  date  of  demise  of  Buk  or  Kala  or 

Hussain,  or  whether  the  suit  property  devolved  from  Buk  to 

 
  
 
-21- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

Khan  Zaman  and  Qaim  or  how  it  came  to  the  conclusion  that 

the  suit  property  rightly  belonged  to  Hussain.  It  has  not 

determined how old Khan Zaman was in 1898 at the time of the 

alleged demise of Buk or in 1904-05 when he was allegedly the 

object of fraud committed by Qaim. It has not determined how 

it  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Khan  Zaman  was  defrauded  by 

Qaim in 1904-05 and what evidence backed such finding. It has 

not discussed the entries in the revenue record and has further 

concluded  that  there  was  no  legal  requirement  to  implead  the 

concerned authorities whose record would need to be corrected 

to uphold the claim of the respondents in the suit, against clear 

dicta laid by the august Supreme Court that revenue authorities 

must  be  impleaded  to  present  their  version  in  a  case  where  a 

claim  is  made  on  the  basis  that  the  record  is  incorrect.  One  of 

the  purposes  for  creating  an  obligation  for  a  court  to  give 

reasons  is  that  a  superior  court  exercising  appellate  or 

supervisory  jurisdiction  is  able  to  appreciate  the  arguments 

backed  by  evidence  that  prevailed  with  the  court.  Devoid  of 

reasoning  the  impugned  judgment  falls  foul  of  the  requirement 

to  give  reasons  prescribed  under  section  24A  of  the  General 

Clauses Act, 1897. 

17. 

The learned appellate court also erred when instead of 

appreciating  the  evidence  adduced  before  the  learned  civil 

court, it acted under the influence of a judgment rendered by a 

learned court in Murree in relation to a claim of the respondents 

re property in Hoter-be-Charagh. In doing so it acted in breach 

of section 56 of the Qanun-e-shahadat Order and the law on the 

relevance  and  effects  of  judgments  of  other  courts  as 

 
  
 
-22- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

enumerated by the august Supreme Court in Mistri Muhammad 

Din  (1976  SCMR  283)  and  Muhammad  Sohail  (1996  SCMR 

218).  The  learned  appellate  court  could  not  use  the  judgment 

and findings of another court that did not fall within the scope of 

section  55  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  as  a 

substitute  for  its  own  findings  of  fact  backed  by  the  evidence 

adduced before it.     

18. 

The instant case is a text book example of why the law 

of  limitation  exists.  The  fraud  that  the  respondents  allege 

supposedly transpired in 1904-05. All characters involved in the 

episode i.e. Khan Zaman, Qaim, Hussain, Kala and Buk and the 

revenue authorities who would have created and sanctioned the 

record  at  the  time  are  long  gone.  The  children  of  the  main 

characters  i.e.  Khan  Zaman  and  Qaim,  have  also  passed  away 

from  this  world.  Even  if  one  were  to  assume  that  Khan  Zaman 

was the victim of some fraud back in 1904-05, there is no way 

to  substantiate  such  fact  with  convincing  evidence  after  the 

passage  of  115  years.  It  is  not  for  courts  of  law  to  decide 

matters  on  the  basis  of  assumptions  and  conjecture  instead  of 

facts as established through admissible evidence. In the present 

case  there  exists  no  evidence  on  the  basis  of  which  this  Court 

can  uphold  the  declaration  of  rights  made  by  the  learned 

appellate court in favor of the respondents who admittedly have 

never been in possession of this suit-property.   

19. 

For  the  reasons  stated  above,  the  instant  petition  is 

allowed  and  the 

impugned 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

27.05.2014 is set aside for suffering from illegality and material 

 
  
 
-23- 

C.R. No.260/2014 

irregularities  and  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned  Civil 

Judge is set aside as the suit was barred by limitation. As it has 

been determined that the suit was time barred and liable to be 

dismissed  for  having  been  filed  beyond  the  period  of  limitation 

by  some  seventy-three  odd  years,  the  question  of  remand  for 

determination of facts afresh does not arise.  

        (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 16.04.2021. 

Approved for reporting. 

Saeed. 

JUDGE 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
