ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.3493/2021 

Fasihuddin Ahmed 
VS 
Nabiha Naz Ahmed and three others 

Petitioner by: 

Kh. Ahmed Tariq Rahim, Advocate. 
Mr. Muhammad Azhar Siddique, Advocate. 
Mr. Hissam Tariq Rahim, Advocate. 
Mr. Hashim Tariq Rahim, Advocate. 
Malik M. Asif Khan, Advocate. 
Ch. Muhammad Shoaib, Advocate. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Ijaz Akhtar Janjua, Advocate. 
Mr. Muhammad Sameer, Advocate. 

Date of Decision: 

21.06.2022. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this  writ  petition  the 

petitioner  Fasihuddin  Ahmed  has  assailed  the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated 

29.04.2019 as well as 10.07.2021 respectively, passed by learned Judge Family 

Court  (West),  Islamabad  and  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West) 

Islamabad,  whereby,  the  Judgment  and  Decree  of  the  Family  Court  for 

maintenance has been maintained in the following manner: 

I. 

The  plaintiff  No.1 

is  held  entitled 

for  recovery  of 

maintenance  allowance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.200,000/-  per 

month, total amounting to Rs.600,000/- (for her Iddat period). 

II. 

The  plaintiff  No.2 

is  held  entitled 

for  recovery  of 

maintenance  allowance  as  at  the  rate  of  Rs.300,000/- 

(Rupees Three Lacs) per month which shall be admissible to 

him from the date of institution of instant suit till attaining 

of  age  of  majority.  Since  during  pendency  of  instant  suit 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 2 

interim  maintenance  was  fixed  by  my  learned  predecessor 

in  office,  therefore,  at  the  time  of  calculation  of  arrears  of 

maintenance  of  the  minor  the  amount  paid  as  interim 

maintenance  shall  be  deducted.  The  amount  so  fixed  shall 

be  liable  to  10%  annual  increase  from  the  date  of  decree. 

The plaintiff No.1 would be bound to keep proper accounts 

of  utilization  of  maintenance  allowance  being  paid  by  the 

defendant  to  plaintiff  No.2  and  the  defendant  if  so  desires 

may request for inspection of such accounts to the court in 

order  to  ensure  that  the  amount  of  maintenance  is  being 

spent on welfare and upbringing of the minor. 

III. 

Beside, 

fixation  of  above  maintenance  allowance 

for 

plaintiff  No.2  it  would  be  responsibility  of  defendant  to 

arrange  a  reasonable  residence  for  the  minor  and  a  car 

1300cc alongwith driver for utilization of the minor within 

a period of one month of pronouncement of this judgment. 

IV. 

The  plaintiff  No.2  is  held  entitled  for  recovery  of  dower 

amount of Rs.500,000/-. 

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner at the time of filing of instant petition 

confined his case to the extent of maintenance of Rs.300,000/- (three hundred 

thousand  rupees)  per  month  awarded  to  the  minor,  alongwith  vehicle  of 

1300cc  and  a  house  only,  rest  of  the  claims  have  not  been  challenged. 

Therefore,  this  court  will  give  its  findings  to  the  challenged  portion  of  the 

concurrent findings. 

3. 

Brief facts referred in the instant case are that the petitioner Fasihuddin 

Ahmed entered into marriage with respondent No.1 / Nabiha Naz Ahmed on 

 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 3 

07.12.2006  at  Islamabad.  Both  the  parties  were  blessed  with  the  son  namely 

Farisuddin  Ahmed  born  on  01.12.2007.  Later  on  due  to  acute  disparity  the 

petitioner divorced the  respondent No.1 / Nabiha Naz Ahmed  on 15.11.2016 

through  written  divorced,  which  was  revoked  on  03.12.2016,  thereafter,  the 

respondent  No.1  /  Nabiha  Naz  Ahmed  exercised  her  delegated  right  of 

divorce  on  30.12.2016.  The  respondent  No.1  had  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of 

dower  and  maintenance  during  the  period  of  Iddat  for  herself  and  for  the 

maintenance  of  minor  son  respondent  No.2  /  Farisuddin  Ahmed  on 

02.01.2017, which was contested by the petitioner by way of written statement. 

The Family Judge after recording the evidence of witnesses of both the parties, 

decreed  the  suit  to  extent  of  Rs.300,000/-  (Rupees  Three  Lacs)  per  month  as 

maintenance of the minor and also placed  responsibility upon respondent to 

arrange a house and a vehicle of 1300cc alongwith driver for the utilization of 

the minor within a period of one month of the announcement of the judgment. 

The  said  Judgment  and  Decree  has  been  maintained  by  the  first  appellate 

court  in  similar  manner,  whereby,  the  findings  on  issue  No.  2  have  been 

maintained.  

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  argued  that  petitioner  is 

primarily aggrieved with the exorbitant maintenance amount of Rs.300,000/- 

(three hundred thousand rupees) per month fixed by the courts below to the 

extent of minor son with the claim that the courts below have not considered 

the financial status of the petitioner in correct manner and even fixed the rate 

of  maintenance  contrary  to  the  salary  record  of  the  petitioner  Ex.D4/1  to 

Ex.D4/4, which discloses the monthly income of Rs.359,781/-. 

5. 

It is further contended that the courts below have failed to consider the 

difference  between  assets  and  monthly  income  of  the  petitioner  and  it  is  not 

 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 4 

possible  for  a  father  to  pay  more  than  fifty  percent  of  his  income  towards 

awarded  maintenance  for  a  single  child;  that  the  courts  below  have  traveled 

beyond their sphere while allowing the provisions of separate residence and a 

chauffeur driven car which is not actual or realistic need of the minor, since he 

is living with his mother at Islamabad; that the Income Tax Return under the 

law  are  confidential  but  the  same  have  been  brought  on  record  and 

appreciated by the court, which is not part of the income; that an application 

was  filed  by  the  petitioner  requiring  the  details  of  expenditure  of  the 

respondent  No.2  but  said  application  was  not  replied  nor  any  details  have 

been provided, which itself is violation of the court orders but the family court 

has  not  taken  into  account  this  aspect  before  passing  the  Judgment  and 

Decree. 

6. 

Conversely 

learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  highlighted  the 

evidence brought on record, whereby, he contends that the petitioner being a 

father  has  conceded  the  entire  claim  of  maintenance  of  the  minor  in  cross 

examination,  even  he  has  not  denied  his  financial  status  having  multiple 

properties  inside  and  outside  of  Pakistan  including  the  share  holdings  in 

difference companies;  that  the  petitioner father  himself  conceded and agreed 

in a reply of a question that he has no objection in fixation of any maintenance 

by  the  court,  therefore,  now  he  is  not  entitled  to  challenge  the  rate  of 

maintenance contrary to his own answer recorded in the evidence. 

7. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that the petitioner and respondent No.1 were 

divorced and they were blessed with the son namely Farisuddin Ahmed born 

on  01.12.2007  during  the  sustenance  of  the  marriage.  The  minor  son  is 

presently  in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.1  /  Nabiha  Naz  Ahmed  the 

 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 5 

mother, who filed a suit for recovery of dower, maintenance of Iddat period for 

herself and maintenance of minor son before the learned Judge Family Court 

(West)  Islamabad  with  the  claim  that  petitioner  is  a  billionaire  businessman 

who  owns  multiple properties  inside and  outside of Pakistan  besides,  shares 

in different companies. The claim submitted by the respondent No.1 has been 

denied  by  the  petitioner  in  the  written  statement,  whereafter,  the  learned 

Judge Family Court has framed the issues on 28.07.2017, whereas, the present 

case is only confined to the extent of issue No.2, which is as under: 

Whether  plaintiff  No.2  is  entitled  for  recovery  of 

maintenance from the defendant, it so, at what rate and 

for which period? OPP. 

9. 

The  respondent  No.1  /  mother  in  order  to  prove  her  claim  of 

maintenance  for  a  minor  submitted  her  evidence  through  affidavit  Ex.PW-1. 

She claims the maintenance explained in the body of the plaint for the minor 

and  acknowledged  the  monthly  tuition  fee  of  the  minor  as  of  Rs.  40,000/-, 

17,000/- per month as stationary charges excluding other school expenses, and 

also  paid  Rs.  15,000/-  for  extracurricular  activities  in  the  school  like  football 

and  robotics.  Though  no  receipt  has  been  attached  with  affidavit  but  all  the 

answers  have  been  brought  on  record  in  cross-examination  of  the  petitioner. 

Even the amount so paid to doctor for the minor has also been acknowledged, 

as such it was admitted fact that the respondent No.1 / mother was working 

in Head Start School, which extend the benefit of concession qua fifty percent 

of  tuition  fee  of  the  minor.  The  minor  and  respondent  No.1  do  not  own  any 

vehicle, though the family car of PW-2 was used for schooling of a minor. 

10. 

Respondent No.1 has also produced her father Najam-ul-Kamal Haider 

as  PW-2  in  support  of  her  case  who  has  provided  the  detail  of  his  expense 

 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 6 

including  the  salary  of  driver,  cleaning  maid,  armed  guard,  household 

expenses,  charges  of  Gun  and  Country  Club  as  well  as  Islamabad  club, 

electricity bill, sanitation bill, medical expenses, and the expenditure of minor 

for food items, which also confirms the expenditure details of the minor. 

11.  On  the  other  hand  the  petitioner  appeared  as  DW-4  in  support  of  his 

case  by  way  of  evidence  in  shape  of  Ex.D-4,  whereby  he  acknowledged  that 

his take home salary is Rs. 3,59,781/- per month after deduction of taxes and 

out  of  this  income  he  can  only  provide  a  maintenance  for  his  minor  son  for 

which  he  is  willing  but  subject  to  the  actual  expenses  of  health,  education 

inclusive  of  stationary  and  school  uniform  and  daily/monthly  expenses  of 

diet.  Petitioner  also  admitted  the  fact  of  paying  Rs.100,000/-  per  month  as 

interim-maintenance for minor son and is willing to pay the same amount as 

maintenance till minor attains the age of majority. 

12.  During  the  course  of  cross-examination  DW-4  acknowledges  the 

following: 

 ۔ںہو نچیفا ٹرڈ

 یا کا 

 Newsweek Pakistan

 میں کہ ہے 

سرد یہ ۔ 

1

 ممبر کا زیکٹر
ئ

اڈ فٓا ڈربو کے ںکمپنیو 

6/7

 بقمطا کے 

1

 نمبر اپیر کے 

Ex.D4/P1

سارر

د میں ۔ 

2

 ۔ںہو

 ن ا
ن میں کہ تھی کی 
 نےہو میں نلند کو لغا

ئ

ساررد 
اد 

 یا میں اہذ 

لاعد نے میں کہ ہے 

سرد یہ ۔ 

3

 تزجاا کی نےجا لے لئے کے کتشر میں سا ہے ا

ناوکر منعقد 

ئی

بھا امیر کہ جو یلفیسٹو یر

 ئلٹر رہولا لےاو

 پر فنکشن ہرکومذ ۔تھا کیا 

Arrange 

 ماگروپر یہ نے 

LLF

ئی روا 

بھا ےمیر فنکشن ہرکومذ ۔تھی کی طلب

 ۔تھا کیا ادا نے زنسرسپا کہ جو تھا ا

 نٓا چہر

خ ڈ

یوا

 ن رار

 ہ

 50 

تقرًیبا

 ،بئیود ہم ۔تھے تےجا ملک نوبیر فعہد 

4/5

 میں لسا یحتفر و سیر ئےار

 ئ ہم پہلے سے نےہو ختم یدا

ش  ۔

5

۔ںہو ممبر کا یکٹرر

ئاڈ فٓا ڈربو کے 

LLF

 بھی میں  ۔

4

 یبیو جبکہ تھا ا

نہو مہذکے کمپنی چہر

خ امیر پر 

 Trips

  ہرکومذ ۔تھے گئے

) 

(ہلید

 نڈ
 ا

یا روا مور ،سپیر ،نلند

۔تھے تےکر ادا سے 

 ج پنیا ہم چہر

خ کا بچے روا

 یںدائیدجا ئشیہار میں ملک نوبیر روا نکستاا

 ن میں ۔ہے بھی دائیدجا شلکمر ہوعلا کے دائیدجا ئشیہار یمیر  ۔

6

 مجھے ۔ںہو ہتاچا ا

نکر نہیں 

 Share 

 پتہ کا سا میں لیکن ہے دائیدجا ملک نوبیر یمیر کہ ہے 

سرد یہ ۔ہیں

 
 
ت
 
 
ت
 
ر
 
ت
ت
ت
ر
 
 
ت
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ت
 
 
 
 
 
ت
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 7 

 کا سا تو ئےجا ا

 نلگا 

نپلا نیا کا زطر کی  

JJVL 

 گرا جٓا ۔ہے کیا لیتما کی گیس 

 ل زمیسر کہ ہے نہیں علم

۔تھا ا

 نلگا میں زلراڈ ملین 

تقر ًیبا80

 قبل لسا 

10

نپلا یہ نے ہم ۔گا ہو زلراڈ ملین 

150

 تخمینہتقر ًیبا

AG Architectural Engineering 
 ،

AG Publications 

 زمیسر 

 بتقا کا ہاگو  ۔

7

 روا 

A-

 مرفا کے 

AG Trading

 ،

AG Radio

 ،

AG TV

 ،

AG Gas

 ،

& Design

 متما ،کئے تسلیم 

سرد نے ہاگو کہ جو گیا ا

 ناوکر سے 

29

 مرفا کے 

AG  Omnimedia

 زمیسر

 یہ مجھے ۔ہار میں گھر پنےا ہما ھڈ

 یڈ میں نگلینڈا میں 

۔ہیں

 Ex.D4/P8 

ن  
 ا

Ex.D4/P2

  تار

 ئوستاد

 نہیں علم کا لیتما تخمینہ کی گھر سا مجھے ۔ہے گھر کا موربیڈ 

2

 یہ ۔ہے ار

 ئ کتنا گھر امیر میں نلند کہ ہے نہیں ممعلو

۔ہیں ینر

ئ مہنگی ٹیپراپر کی نلند لسنٹر کہ ہے نہیں 

سرد یہ ۔ہے میں نلند لسنٹر گھر یہ۔ہے

 Two 

 کو زجہا سا پٓا ۔ہیں تےہو ئلٹا

 ن 

2

 میں زجہا سا ۔ہے 

Beechcraft Jet

 زجہا امیر ۔

8

 ن ہے بقیر کے لراڈ ملین 
 ا

 ن 4
 ا

3.5

 لیتما ک زجہا سا کہ ممعلو نہیں مجھے ۔ہیں 

۔ںہو رلڈہو شیئر کا کمپنی سا میں ۔ہے تیکر ادا کمپنی ،یتاد نہیں بھی پیہور 

 یا کو س

Pilot Crew

سکت کہہ 
ئا
 ن کے زجہا میں ۔نہیں

ٹل

 شیئر بھی میں ںکمپنیو نا میں ۔ہے تیاوکر جمع کمپنی نیٹرر نہلاسا کی ٹرپو گیس نکستاا

 ن روا گیس 

 ل ۔

9

The  above referred  admissions on the part of the  petitioner  settled his 

۔ںہو رلڈہو

financial status, which is on the higher side, rather a life style which has been 

maintained by the petitioner seems to be of a rich man who can afford a life of 

luxury living, especially when he owns multiple properties inside and outside 

of Pakistan, simultaneously having shares of multiple companies, from which 

he is receiving handsome income beside his take home salary. 

13.  During the course of cross-examination the petitioner has also admitted 

the financial details and record when confronted to him in unequivocal terms. 

Both  the  courts  below  have  categorically  referred the  above  admitted  factors 

in  findings  on  issue  No.2,  even  the  appellate  court  has  gone  ahead  in  the 

findings  while  referring  the  assets  of  declaration  submitted  by  the  petitioner 

for the year 2014-15 in the following manner: 

The  Assets  Declaration  of  the  defendant  pertaining  to 

the  year  2014-15  wherein  his  net  asset  was  declared  as 

Rs.322,295,481/-. The learned counsel for the appellant during 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ت
 
ت
 
 
ت
ت
 
ت
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 8 

the arguments contended that the trial court has not taken into 

consideration  the  income  stated  by  the  defendant  as  he  is 

drawing  the  salary  of  Rs.3,59,781/-  after  deduction  of  taxes. 

But this contention is rebutted from his own assets declaration 

wherein it indicates that the defendant had made an investment 

of  Rs.118,515,810/- It is worthwhile to mention  that even the 

defendant had disclosed in the said asset declaration that he had 

gifted out an amount of Rs.129,900,366/-. 

14.  All  above  details  left  noting  in  favor  of  petitioner,  however,  the  last 

question  answered  by  the  petitioner  himself  concluded  the  entire  matter 

which  prevails  upon  both  the  courts  below  who  adjudicated  the  financial 

status  of  the  petitioner  and  fixed  the  maintenance  of  Rs.300,000/-  (three 

hundred  thousand  rupees)  per  month.  The  question  answer  in  the  cross-

examination is as under: 

 ؟ہیں 

سکت ےد چہر

 نا
خ نہہاما کتنا کو لغا

ن سے ضیمر پنیا پٓا

  :

لاسو

This  court  has  also  confronted  the  similar  question  to  the  petitioner 

۔یںکر فیصلہ جو 

 حصا جج

  :

باجو

counsel,  whereby  they  contended  that  at  present  they  are  depositing  the 

monthly  interim-maintenance  of  Rs.150,000/-  (one  hundred  fifty  thousand 

rupees) with effect from filing of this petition regularly and willing to pay the 

same 

to 

the  minor,  even  petitioner  counsel 

in  unequivocal 

terms 

acknowledged  that  they  are  willing  to  arrange  the  chauffeur  driven  vehicle 

and  a  house  as  directed  by  the  trial  court  in  the  impugned  judgment,  which 

would be at the disposal of petitioner’s son, who can use those facilities as and 

when required by him. 

 
 
ت
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 9 

15.  While placing all the evidence in juxtaposition with the stance taken by 

the  petitioner,  this  court  is  mindful  of  the  fact  that  every  father  is  under  a 

social or a moral compulsion and under the obligation to maintain a minor for 

as  long  as  the  offspring  does  not  attained  the  requisite  state  of  physical, 

mental  and  financial  capacity  to  survive  and  sustain  on  his  own.  In  present 

case the petitioner agreed to provide everything to his minor son, even there is 

a history of travelling to foreign countries prior to the divorce with respondent 

No.1. Such aspect further goes in favor of petitioner whose conduct has to be 

taken  into  consideration,  in  allowing  or  disallowing  the  partial  relief  in 

constitutional  Jurisdiction.  No  doubt  the  petitioner /  father  of  the minor  has 

come to this court with clean hands and equitable consideration also lie in his 

favor  but  the  findings  and  the  facts  recorded  by  the  both  courts  below  have 

properly been appreciated. No illegality has been noted down by this court in 

appreciation  of  any  evidence,  which  clearly  justifies  the  high  income  of 

petitioner who can afford any amount as maintenance to be paid to the minor. 

Now the question arises as to whether the expenses are to be true in every case 

of  maintenance;  the  answer  to  the  question is  negative.  As  the  minor  who  is 

studying in a school in a grown up age needs a complete financial support to 

fulfill  his  social  standard,  maintained  and  observed  in  pre-divorce  era  of  his 

parents which is requirement for his physical, mental and intellectual growth 

to  live  in  his  modern  high  tech  life  style,  in  which  he  needs  a  car  ,  a  house, 

with every other facility which his father was providing prior to Khula of his 

mother.  

16. 

The  petitioner  in  his  own  evidence  has  not  placed  the  details  of  his 

other  assets  which  was  brought  on  record  during  the  course  of  cross-

examination, which itself shows that father intends to confine his cases on  the 

 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 10 

basis  of  his  salary,  which  he  acknowledged  in  para  No.6  of  affidavit  in 

evidence.  However,  when  other  details  of  assets  come  on  record    which 

multiply the financial status of petitioner, therefore, Family Court has rightly 

ascertained the earnings of the father who is required to pay maintenance as 

per his own life style as held in PLD 2009 [SC] 760 (Tauqeer Ahmed Qureshi 

VS Additional District Judge Lahore). No doubt the unjust enrichment cannot 

be permitted at the cost of father nor it is the case in hand, especially when the 

Family  Court  has  rightly  determined  the  earnings  of  father  in  terms  of 

principle laid down in PLD 2018 [SC] 819 (Muhammad Asim VS Mst. Samro 

Begum).  It  is  the  obligation  of  the  court  to  determine  the  income  of  father 

either  through proper documentary evidence or on basis of social  status and 

earning  capacity  of  father  as  held  in  PLD  2018  [Lahore]  916  (Nazia  Bibi  VS 

Additional  District  Judge,  Ferozewala),  which  is  evident  from  the  details 

available  on  record.  This  court  has  also  laid  down  different  factors  in 

judgment  reported  as  2020  CLC  [Islamabad]  131  (Dr.  Aqueel  Waris  VS 

Ibrahim Aqueel Waris) for determination of interim-maintenance on the basis 

of certain parameters, where life style of father, his living standard, including 

housing  facilities,  transport,  gifts  and  immovable  properties  are  the  key 

factors to be considered as a determination scale of maintenance. 

17. 

This  court  has  also  gone  through  the  appreciation  given  by  Family 

Court  and  the  Appellate  Court  in  appeal  and  comes  to  an  irresistible 

conclusion  that  this  court  while  exercising  its  constitutional  jurisdiction  in 

terms of Article 199 of the Constitution of Pakistan 1973 is not in a position to 

alter the factual aspects recorded by the courts below, especially when there is 

no  procedural  or  legal  defects  in  the  findings  of  the  Family  Courts.  No 

question  of  law  has  been  raised  except  the  factual  determination  of 

 
 
W.P.No.3493/2021 

Page | 11 

maintenance at higher side has been argued before this court but on the other 

hand  the  petitioner  agrees  to  the  judgment  given  by  the  courts  below  in 

unequivocal  terms  in  his  evidence  and  even  before  this  Court.  Therefore,  no 

interference is required, hence, instant Writ Petition is DISMISSED.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

A.Waheed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
