Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       WRIT PETITION NO. 2429 OF 2021 

Brig. Adnan Danish Khan 

VS 

Mehwish Javed, etc.  

PETITIONER BY:      

Sardar Asad Ullah Khan, Advocate.  

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr. Muhammad Masood Khan, Advocate. 

DATE OF HEARING: 

29.09.2021. 

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  Through  this  petition,  the  judgment 

and  decree  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  dated 

16.12.2019  and  the  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  learned 

appellate court dated 13.04.2021 have been impugned. 

2.   

Learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the petitioner 

and  respondent  No.1  were  divorced  in  2018.  That  they  have  three 

children,  who  are  in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.1  and  the 

petitioner  had visitation rights. He contended that the salary slip of 

the  petitioner  reflected  that  the  cash-in-hand  received  by  the 

petitioner per month was an amount of Rs.151,629/-. That through 

the  judgments  and  decrees  impugned  the  petitioner  had  been 

directed  to  pay  maintenance  in  the  amount  of  Rs.20,000/-  per 

month per child with 10% annual increase and has been directed to 

also  pay to the school of respondents No. 2 to 4 any annual charges 

imposed by the school. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 2429/2021  

P a g e  | 2 

3.   

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  while 

awarding  maintenance  neither  the  learned  Family  Court  nor  the 

learned  appellate  court  took  into  account  the  means  of  the 

petitioner. He submitted that the petitioner was an Army Officer and 

belonged  to  salaried  class  and  the  maintenance  fixed  in  the 

impugned judgments is disproportionate to his means. He relied on 

Tauqeer  Ahmad  Qureshi  VS  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore 

(PLD  2009  SC  760)  for  the  proposition  that  the  Family  Court  is 

under  an  obligation  to  take  into  account  the  financial  condition  and 

the  status  of  the  father  while  granting  maintenance.  He  further 

contended that there was no provision of law pursuant to which the 

learned Family Court and the learned appellate court could direct the 

petitioner to provide accommodation for minor children who were in 

the custody of his former wife. And that the petitioner was an Army 

Officer  and  his  children  were  entitled  to  study  in  an  Army  Public 

School, which charged lesser fee than the school in which they were 

presently enrolled, and by moving the children to Army Public School 

the quantum of maintenance expense would be reduced.  

4.   

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  submitted  that  where 

the  Family  Court  had  given  findings  of  fact  which  were  also  upheld 

by  the  learned  appellate  court,  the  scope  of  interference  by  a  high 

court in its writ jurisdiction was very limited and that the High Court 

could  only  exercise  its  constitutional  jurisdiction  if  it  found  that  the 

impugned  judgment  suffered  from  any  jurisdictional  defect.  He 

further submitted that the petitioner had made inaccurate disclosure 

of facts before the learned Family Court and it was respondent No.1 

who  had  produced  the  latest  pay  slip  of  the  petitioner  which 

reflected  his  salary  as  Rs.200,000/-  per  month.  He  submitted  that 

 
 
W.P No. 2429/2021  

P a g e  | 3 

the quantum of maintenance fixed by the learned Family Court and 

upheld  by  the  appellate  court  did  not  suffer  from  any  infirmity.  On 

Court  query  regarding  the  legal  basis  for  issuance  of  direction  to 

provide  the  respondents  with  accommodation  in  addition  to 

provision  of  the  maintenance,  the 

learned  counsel 

for  the 

respondents submitted that respondents No. 2 to 4 were settled with 

respondent  No.1  and  did  not  press  for  provision  of  accommodation 

as  part  of  the  relief  granted  by  the  learned  Family  Court  and  the 

learned  appellate  court.  He,  however,  submitted 

that 

the 

maintenance granted by the learned Family Court was reasonable in 

view of salary of the petitioner and there was no misreading or non-

reading  of  evidence.  That  the  petitioner  had    himself  enrolled  his 

children  in  the  school  in  which  they  were  presently  studying  and  it 

was only after the petitioner and respondent no.1 were divorced that 

the petitioner demanded the children be pulled out from the present 

school  and  be  enrolled  in  an  Army  Public  School  which  charged 

lesser fee. He further submitted that respondent No.1 had produced 

forty  five  exhibits  before  the  learned  Family  Court  to  document  the 

expenses  incurred  by  respondent  No.1  in  maintaining  respondents 

No.  2  to  4  and  it  was  in  view  of  the  evidence  produced  before  the 

learned  Family  Court  that  the  quantum  of  maintenance  was 

determined.  He  relied  on  Amjad  Khan  VS  Muhammad  Irshad 

(2020  SCMR  2155),  Shah  Jahan  and  others  VS  Syed  Amjad 

Ali  (2000  SCMR  88),  Abdul  Wali  Khan  VS  Muhammad  Saleh 

(1998 SCMR 760), Muhammad Akbar VS Addl. District Judge 

and  others  (2019  CLC  Note  32  Lahore),  Muhammad  Farique 

VS Kaneezan Bibi (2018 MLD 1988), Fazalur Rehman VS Mst. 

Shazia  Bibi  (2015  CLC  116),  Faisal  Hanif  VS  Baby  Mahnoor 

 
 
W.P No. 2429/2021  

P a g e  | 4 

(2002  CLC  1754),  Muhammad  Aslam  VS  District  Judge  and 

others  (2002  CLC  1768),  Syed  Hamid  Shah  VS  Mst.  Sahiba 

and  others  (2005  YLR  2393),  Shahid  Raza  VS  Dr.  Fauzia 

Shaheen  (2004  MLD  1325),  Tayyab  Khan  VS  Nadia  Khan 

(2000 CLC 558), Muhammad Rafi VS Atta Ullah Kausar (1993 

CLC  1364)  and  Usman  Khan  VS  Mst.  Shehla  Gul  (2002  CLC 

910).   

5.   

The  law  on  the  scope  of  High  Court’s  jurisdiction  in  family 

matters  is  well  settled.  The  august  Supreme  Court  in  Shah  Jahan 

and  others  VS  Syed  Amjad  Ali  and  others  (2000  SCMR  88) 

held the following:  

“…To  assess  evidence  or 

to  determine 

the  amount  of 

maintenance,  was  the  function  of  the  Family  Court  which  has 

been  vested  with  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  decide  such  matters. 

Evidently,  neither  there  appears  to  be  any  misreading  of 

evidence  nor  any  material  piece  of  evidence  appears  to  have 

been  overlooked  by  the  Family  Court  while  determining  the 

amount of maintenance awarded to the appellants. It is pertinent 

to  point  out  that,  when  the  High  Court  exercises  Constitutional 

Jurisdiction,  its  powers  are  not  analogous  to  those  of  an 

Appellate Court. Therefore, although it can strike down an order 

passed  by  a  subordinate  Court  or  a  Tribunal  as  without  lawful 

authority  and  of  no  legal  effect  but  it  cannot  substitute  its  own 

judgment for that of the subordinate Court or Tribunal.” 

6.   

In  Amjad  Khan  VS  Muhammad  Irshad  (2020  SCMR 

2155) It was held that: 

“…that  it  is  by  now  a  settled  principle  of  law  that  the  High 

Courts  must  not  exercise  their  constitutional  jurisdiction  in 

order to interfere with the discretion exercised by  lower courts 

unless  the  same  suffers  from  jurisdictional,  factual  or  legal 

errors.  In  other  words,  such  interference  would  be  justified  in 

cases  where  the  impugned  order  has  been  passed  without 

jurisdiction  or  is  based  on  misreading  or  non-reading  of 

 
 
W.P No. 2429/2021  

P a g e  | 5 

evidence, or is not in accordance with the law. If none of these 

errors  is  present,  the  High  Courts  must  not  exercise  their 

constitutional jurisdiction to interfere with the findings of lower 

courts  merely  because  it  reached  a  different  conclusion  as  to 

the controversy than the latter. In this regard, reference can be 

made  to  a  collective  reading  of  Mst.  Mobin  Fatima  v. 

Muhammad  Yamin  (PLD  2006  SC  214)  and  Nadira  Shahzad  v. 

Mubashir Ahmad (1995 SCMR 1419).” 

7.   

It  is  settled  law  that  the  quality  and  adequacy  of  evidence 

adduced  and  the  quantum  of  maintenance  determined  on  the  basis 

of  such  evidence  falls  within  the  exclusive  domain  of  the  family 

court, and in its constitutional jurisdiction the High Court cannot sit 

in  appeal  over  the  quantum  of  maintenance  determined  by  the 

family  Court  upon  re-appraisal  of  evidence,  or  second  guess  the 

quantum determined by the Family Court unless the judgment of the 

Family  Court  suffers  from  a  jurisdictional  defect,  or  a  legal  defect 

due to misapplication of law, or a factual defect due to misreading or 

non reading of evidence.   

8.   

In  the  instant  case,  the  learned  Family  Court  and  the 

learned  appellate  court  have  determined 

the  quantum  of 

maintenance  awarded  on  the  basis  of  the  latest  pay  slip  of  the 

petitioner. The learned counsel for the petitioner  has failed to point 

out any misreading or non-reading of evidence by the Family Court. 

The  learned  Family  did  record  an  expectation  that  the  petitioner 

ought  to  provide  accommodation  to  respondents  No.  2  to  4,  who 

were  in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.1.  This  expectation  was 

converted  into  a  direction  by  the  learned  appellate  court.  Such 

expectation  and  direction  requiring  the  petitioner  to  provide 

accommodation to respondents No. 2 to 4 in addition to provision of 

maintenance  has  no  basis  in  law  and  to  this  extent  the  impugned 

 
 
 
W.P No. 2429/2021  

P a g e  | 6 

judgments and decrees suffer from legal errors and are liable to be 

set  aside.  The  maintenance  awarded,  on  the  other  hand,  could  not 

be interfered with as the award of maintenance and direction to pay 

any  annual  charges  imposed  by  the  school  in  relation  to  the 

education of respondents No. 2 to 4 are in accordance with law.  

9.   

Divorce  is  understandably  an  acrimonious  affair.  But 

bitterness emanating from breakup of a marriage must not be used 

as a lens to view the parental relationship between a father and his 

children.  A  father  is  the  natural  guardian  of  his  children  and  the 

maintenance  that  he  is  liable  to  pay  is  for  the  upkeep  of  his  own 

children and not that of his former spouse. Thus, it is in the interest 

of  the  relationship  between  the  father  and  his  children  to  approach 

the  issue  of  maintenance  with  the  generosity  of  heart  that  defines 

the  bond  between  a  father  and  his  children.  This  is  all  the  more 

important  in  face  of  breakup  of  the  marriage  which  then  deprives 

the  children  of  the  constant  love  and  affection  of  both  parents 

simultaneously. The needs of maintenance change over time as the 

children  grow  older  and  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  children  at 

the receiving end of a broken home that their evolving maintenance 

needs are discussed between the parents and resolved in a civil and 

amicable manner.                      

10. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  partly 

allowed.  The  part  of  the  judgments  and  decrees  impugned  before 

this  Court  that  relate  to  the  direction  issued  to  the  petitioner  to 

provide  accommodation  to  respondents  No.  2,  3  and  4,  (which  has 

also not been pressed by the learned counsel for respondent No.1), 

is  set  aside  for  being  not  supported  by  law.  The  impugned 

 
 
 
W.P No. 2429/2021  

P a g e  | 7 

judgments  and  decrees  to  the  extent  of  grant  of  maintenance, 

quantum  of  maintenance  and  direction  to  the  petitioner  to  pay 

annual charges directly to the school, in which respondents No. 2, 3 

and 4 are studying, suffer from no infirmity and to such extent this 

petition is dismissed.   

     (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

Saeed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
