ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal Appeal No. 310 of 2019 

Muhammad Vounas 
VS 
The State &  another 

Appellant  By: 

Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, Advocate. 

Complainant By: 

Raja Shahzad Javed, Advocate 

State by: 

Mr. Khalique Siddiqui, State 
Counsel with Munir Ahmad  Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

29.07.2020 

Crl. Revision No. 98/2019 

Mst. Akhtar Jabeen 
VS
The State & others 

Petitioner By: 

Raja Shahzad Javed Advocate 

Date of Hearing: 

29.07.2020 

Ghulam Azam  Qambrani,  J.: Through this single judgment 

shall  decide  the  Criminal  Appeal  No.  310/2019  and  Criminal 

Revision  No.  98/2019,  being  outcome  of  one  and  the  same 

Judgment,  dated  07.09.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge-IV,  Islamabad-East,  whereby  the  appellant  was 

convicted  under  Section  316  PPC  and  sentenced  to  pay  Diyat 

amount 

i.e.  Rs.2,055,936/-  mentioned 

in  notification,  dated 

01.07.2018  issued  by  the  Federal  Government  of  Pakistan,  to  the 

legal heirs of the deceased, whereas the convict  was acquitted from 

the charge under Section 201  PPC levelled against him. 

a 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

2. 

Brief facts of the case as per complaint are that on  18.03.2019 

at  about  05:30  p.m.  she  got  recorded  her  statement  before  the 

police, stating therein that earlier, she was  married with  Muhammad 

Vounas  convict/  appellant.  Out  of  said  wedlock,  a  son  namely, 

Muhammad  Vousaf  and  two  daughters  namely,  Hafifa  Sofia  and 

Ghanwa  Jabeen  were  born. Thereafter,  she  got  divorced  from  him 

as  he  used  to  quarrel  and  give  beatings  to  her  but  the  children 

remained  in  his custody. The  appellant contracted  second  marriage 

with  Sabiha  Bibi and out of the said wedlock the appellant has three 

children.  Afterwards,  complainant  also  contracted  second  marriage 

with  Haji Sarfaraz and she is  living with her second husband; that on 

12.03.2019, her son Muhammad Yousaf, telephonically informed her 

about death  of Mst. Ghanwa Jabeen and  he also informed that they 

were  shifting  her  dead  body  to  Chakwal  for  burial.  The  dead  body 

was  shown  to  her by the convict /appellant  and  his family  members 

and  it  came  to  her  knowledge  that  Muhammad  Vounas  convict 

/appellant  murdered  her daughter  in  the  name of  'honour',  levelling 

allegation of bad character upon her. 

3. 

After  registration  of  case,  investigations  was  carried  out  and, 

thereafter,  report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C.  was  submitted  before 

the  learned  trial  Court  by  placing  convict  in  column  No.3.  After 

fulfilling  codal 

formalities,  charge  was 

framed  against 

the 

appellanUconvict, to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.  In 

order to  prove the guilt against the appellant,  prosecution examined 

the following witnesses;- 

PW.1 
(i) 
PW.2 
(ii) 
PW.3 
(iii) 
PW.4 
(iv) 
PW.5 
(v) 
PW.6 
(vi) 
(vii) 
PW.7 
(viii)  PW.8 
PW.9 
(ix) 

Shafqat  Ullah  Khan-ASI, 
Munir  Ahmad-  SI, 
Niaz  Muhammad  37 43/LHC, 
Mst.  Jabeen  Akhtar, 
Munsabdar  ASI, 
Dr.  Dr.  lshtiaq  Ahmad  Awan  OMS, 
Muhammad  Anees  Akbar  Inspector/IQ, 
Dr.Mehwish  Abbas  WMO, 
Haji  Sarfaraz  Khan, 

3 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

4. 

Statement  of  the  convict  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  was 

recorded,  wherein  all  the  incriminating  evidence  recorded  in  his 

presence  was  put  to  him,  he  claimed  innocence,  however  he 

deposed on oath as  his own witness  as per Section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. 

He opted  to  produce  defence evidence  and  produced  Khalid  lmran 

DW-1 as his witness.  In  reply to a  question "why  the  case has been 

registered  against  him  and  why  the  prosecution  witnesses deposed 

against  him",  the convict /appellant,  Muhammad Vounas,  replied as 

under.- 

"The complainant  managed  to  get  registered  a false  and 
frivolous  case  against  me,  due  to  personal  grudge  as  I 
divorced  her  in  past  and  got  married  again  and  living a 
happy  married life  with my  second  wife.  I  have  nothing  to 
do  with  the  alleged  murder  of my  beloved  daughter  who 
was  very dear to me  and all the  witnesses  appeared  in  the 
witness  box  on  behest  of  complainant  just  to  strengthen 
the  case  against  me.  Further  the  investigation  officer 
detained  me  in  his  illegal custody  for  two  days  which  is 
proved  in  evidence  of the  complainant;  hence  he  shall be 
dealt  with relevant law of illegal detention." 

5. 

After  recording  evidence  and  hearing  arguments  of  the 

learned  counsels  for  the  parties,  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge-IV, 

Islamabad-East,  passed 

impugned 

judgment,  dated 

07.09.2019,  hence  this  appeal.  On  the  other  hand,  Mst.  Akhtar 

Jabeen, being aggrieved of the said judgment filed Criminal Revision 

Petition No.98/2019, for enhancement of punishment. 

6. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  Muhammad  Vounas 

contended  that  the  appellant  is 

totally  innocent;  that  he  had 

committed  no  offence;  that  his  daughter  had  died  a  natural  death, 

but the complainant  has falsely  involved him in  the  instant case due 

to  personal  grudge  to  take  revenge of  her  divorce;  that  there  is  an 

inordinate and unexplained delay of six days in  lodging the  FIR; that 

the prosecution has failed to prove the case against him beyond any 

shadow of doubt, which is very much clear from the medical report of 

PW-8; that  the  recovery of  Danda  has been  planted  upon  him; that 

4 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

the  Investigating  Officer  intentionally  did  not  obtain  the  Forensic 

Report  about 

the  said  recovery  of  Danda;  that 

in  spite  of 

manipulations,  the  prosecution  has failed  to  prove the  case  against 

the appellant; that there is  no eye witness  of the alleged occurrence, 

therefore, 

the  conviction  and  sentence  passed 

through 

the 

impugned  judgment  is  based  upon  the  presumptions. 

It  is  further 

contended  that  the  prosecution  story  has  been  totally  negated 

through  the  statement  of  PW-1  Khalid  lmran;  that  the  prosecution 

also failed to produce Haroon, who allegedly sent the pictures of the 

deceased  on  cell  phone number of  Mst. Jabeen Akhtar,  which  also 

makes  the  prosecution  story  doubtful.  Lastly  prayed for  acquittal  of 

the appellant from the instant case. 

7. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant 

contended  that  it  is  not  a  case  of  ocular  account,  where  eye 

witnesses  are  required  to  appear  before  the  Court  to  prove  the 

prosecution  case; that  the onus shifts  upon the  appellanUconvict, in 

whose  custody,  death  of  such  person  has  been  caused  and  being 

father  of  deceased  Ghanwa  Jabeen,  for  proving  that  who  is  the 

murderer  or  how  the  death  has  been  caused;  that  the  prosecution 

has  proved  the  case  against  the  appellanUconvict  beyond  any 

shadow  of  doubt.  Further  contended  that  the  judgment  passed  by 

the  learned  trial  Court  is  against  the  law  to  the  extent  of  awarding 

lesser  punishment  under  Section  316  PPC;  that  the  convict, 

Muhammad  Younis,  has  intentionally  committed  the  murder  of  his 

daughter, therefore,  he was liable to be punished under Section 302 

PPC;  that  on  the  basis  of  available  prosecution  evidence,  charge 

against  the  appellanUconvict  has  been  proved;  the  convict  in  his 

application  submitted to the  SP (R), Koral, Islamabad, admitted that 

there  was  an  injury  on  the  head  of  the  deceased;  that  the 

convicUappellant has also levelled allegation against one Jameel but 

he has  not  moved any application against the  said Jameel; that the 

convict  admitted  that  there  were  stains  of  blood  on  the  mattress 

which  were  taken  into  possession  by  the  investigating  officer;  that 

/ 

5 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

the  prosecution  has  successfully  proved  the  case  against  the 

appellanUconvict, but he has only been convicted under Section 316 

PPC and awarded sentence of Diyat, whereas Section 201  PPC was 

also  attracted  in  the  instant case;  hence  prayed for  dismissal of the 

instant appeal and acceptance of the revision petition. 

8. 

The  learned  State  Counsel  did  not  support  the  impugned 

judgment  and submitted that it  is  a  case of no evidence; that there is 

no  admission  on  the  part  of  the  appellant;  that  the  pictures  of  the 

deceased have not been got exhibited. 

9. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsels  for  the 

parties  and  have  perused  the  available  record  with  their  able 

assistance. 

10.  Before  discussing  merits of  the  case,  it would  be  appropriate 

to give gist of the prosecution evidence. 

•  PW.1,  Shafqat  Ullah  Khan  ASI, 

registered  FIR 

No.96/2019  on  the  complaint  forwarded  by  the  Anees 

Akbar  lnspector/lncharge. 

•  PW.2,  Munir Ahmad-SI,  is  the  witness  of  blood  stained 

pieces  taken  from  the  mattress  from  the  place  of 

occurrence. He  is  also witness of recovery of shalwar P2, 

Qameez  P3,  recovery  of  danda  which  were  taken  into 

possession vide  recovery memo  Ex.PD. He was  also the 

witness  of photographs of the grave of the deceased (P4 

to  P11 ).  He  has also taken the blood stained three pieces 

to Punjab Forensic Science Agency, Lahore. 

•  PW.3,  Niaz  Muhammad  3743/LHC  is  also  witness  of 

three  blood  stained  pieces,  shlawar  P2,  qameez  P3, 

mobile phone and original CNIC of convict P13. 

6 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

•  PW.4, Mst.  Jabeen Akhtar  is  the complainant of the case 

and while  appearing  in  the  witness  box,  she  deposed  in 

line with the prosecution case. 

•  PW.5,  Munsabdar  ASI  kept  in  his  safe  custody  blood 

stained 

cotton, 

road 

certificate/receipt 

and 

specimen/pieces  taken  from  different  body  parts  of  the 

deceased.  He  also  got  recorded  his  statement  under 

Section 161  Cr.PC. 

•  PW.6,  Dr. 

lshtiaq  Ahmad  Awan  OMS  supervised  the 

collection  of  samples  from  post-mortem  examination  of 

the dead body of deceased. 

•  PW.7,  Muhammad  Anees  Akbar, 

Inspector  was 

Investigating  Officer  of 

the  case,  who  completed 

investigation  and  prepared  report  under  Section  173 

Cr.PC. 

•  PW.8,  Dr.  Mehwish  Abbas  WMO,  got  conducted 

exhumation  of the grave of deceased and conducted  her 

post-mortem  examination  under  the  supervision  of  Dr. 

lshtiaq  Ahmad  Awan  and  prepared  post-mortem  report 

Ex.PN (1-6). 

•  PW-9,  Haji  Sarfraz  Khan,  is  the  witness  of  exhumation. 

He  stated  about the  marks of  injury present on  the  body 

of deceased at the time of exhumation. 

11. 

The  allegation  against 

the  appellant/  convict  Muhammad 

Vounas 

is  that  he  has  allegedly  committed  Qatl-e-Amd  of  his 

daughter  namely,  Mst.  Ghanwa  Jabeen  by  Danda  blows  in the  name 

of  'honour'  and  the  complainant  was  informed  telephonically  by  her 

son  namely  Muhammad  Yousuf  about  the  death  of  Mst.  Ghanwa 

Jabeen  and  that  the  dead  body  of  the  deceased  was  shown  to  her 

from  a  distance.  After  registration  of  F.l.R.  investigation  was  carried 

out.  The  appellant  was  arrested  on  20.03.2019.  As  per  prosecution 

7 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

case,  during  the  course  of  investigation,  the  appellant  allegedly 

confessed  the  guilt  before  the  police  and  on  his  pointation  on 

26.03.2019  Danda/crime weapon was recovered by the  Investigating 

Officer. 

12.  Perusal  of  the  record  reveals that  there  is  no  eye  witness  of 

the  alleged  occurrence.  The  prosecution  case  is  based  upon 

circumstantial  evidence,  medical  evidence  and  the  recovery  of 

Danda. For proving the charge, the prosecution has produced PW.2, 

PW.3  and  PW.7,  who  produced  articles  P-1 

to  P-14  and  the 

documents  Ex.PA  to  Ex.PR. The  prosecution  proved the  recoveries 

through  the  above  mentioned  witnesses  also  proved  the  blood 

stained mattress and got positive report from  PFSA, Lahore,  beyond 

any  shadow  of  doubt that the  said  pieces were  stained with  human 

blood.  The  second  limb  of  the  prosecution  case  is  recovery  of 

crime  weapon  "Danda".  It  was  in  the  evidence  of  PW-2  and  PW.3 

that  the  appellant  led  the  police  party  inside  the  house  and  got 

recovered  weapon  of  offence  "Danda".  It  is  also  important  to 

mention  here  that  in  the  statements,  the  witnesses  have  not 

specifically 

stated 

that 

from  which 

point 

the  alleged 

weapon/Danda  was  recovered. 

It  was  not  possible 

that  the 

appellant  committed  murder  of  his  daughter  by  means  of  "Danda" 

and  still  kept  the  same  in  the  house.  It  is  also  imperative  to  note 

that  recovery  of  article  cannot  be  termed  as  discovery,  when  it 

was  not  recovered  from  any  hidden  place  and  if  in  normal  course, 

the  Investigating  Officer/agency  was  able  to  see  it  and  takes  its 

possession  without  any  statement  of the  convict  for  pointing  it out. 

Reference  in  this  context  can  be  made  to  "Mst.  Askar  Jan  and 

others  v.  Muhammad  Daud  and  others"  (2010  SCMR  1604).  Even 

otherwise,  the  recovery  of  danda  was  not  helpful  to  the  case  of 

prosecution  due  to  the  reason  that  no  injury  was  pointed  out  by 

the  lady  Doctor,  which  was caused  by the alleged  danda. 

8 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

13.  PW.8,  Dr.  Mehwish Abbas  WMO,  in  her  examination-in-chief 

has stated that on the external examination of the body of deceased 

like wrist,  abdomen, thoracic area, spine, legs, no marks of violence 

were  found  either  externally  or  internally  and  further  has  clearly 

deposed that on examination of upper and lower limbs, she found no 

injury, fracture  and dislocation. During cross-examination,  in  reply to 

a  question  she  has  stated  that  it  is  incorrect  to  suggest  that  the 

death  of  deceased  Ghanwa  Jabeen  was  result  of  violence  and 

injuries.  To  another  question  by  the 

learned  counsel  for  the 

complainant,  she denied that there was  head injury to the deceased 

Ghanwa Jabeen. During cross-examination, she has admitted that at 

the  time  of  post  mortem  examination  of  the  deceased  Ghanwa 

Jabeen  except  their  team  members,  no  private  person  was  inside 

the  tent.  She  unambiguously  gave  her  opinion  that  death  of  the 

deceased had occurred naturally. 

14.  Minute perusal of the  record reveals that  it  is  an un-witnessed 

occurrence.  The  FIR  has  been  lodged  after  an  inordinate  and 

unexplained  delay  of  six  days  on  the  complaint  of  ex-wife  of  the 

appellant. The  entire  prosecution case  is  based  upon circumstantial 

evidence  and  recovery  of the  weapon  of  offence  Danda  and  blood 

stained  mattress.  It  is  the  case  of  prosecution  that  the  appellant 

allegedly  confessed the guilt before the  police and  on  his pointation 

on  26.03.2019,  Danda/weapon  of  offence  was  recovered,  but  no 

disclosure  memo  was  prepared  by  the  Investigating  Officer  in  this 

regard.  Under  Article  39  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984, 

confession  made  by convict of  his guilt  under custody  of the  police, 

which  is  not  made  in  the  presence of  Magistrate,  is  inadmissible in 

evidence.  In  the  present  case,  admittedly,  there  is  no  disclosure 

memo on the record in  proof of such alleged confession. Further, it is 

also  not  confirmed  by  any  kind  of  report  that  whose  blood  was 

present on the mattress, except the report that it was human blood. 

9 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

15. 

The  entire  case  of the  prosecution  is  based on  circumstantial 

evidence. The principle of law, consistently laid down by the superior 

Courts  is  that  different  pieces  of  such  evidence  have  to  make  one 

chain, where  one end of it  touches the dead  body and the other the 

neck  of  the  convict.  In  case  of  any  missing  link  in  the  chain,  the 

whole  chain  is  broken and  no conviction  can  be  recorded  in  crimes 

entailing  capital  punishment.  This  principle  is  fully  attracted  to  the 

facts and circumstances of the present case. 

16. 

It  is  also  well  settled  principle  of  law  and justice  that  no  one 

should  be construed  into a  crime on the  basis of presumption  in  the 

absence of strong evidence of  unimpeachable character and  legally 

admissible one.  Similarly, mere heinous or gruesome nature of crime 

shall not detract the Court of law in  any manner from the due course 

to judge  and  make the appraisal of evidence  in  a  laid down  manner 

and  to  extend  the  benefit  of  reasonable  doubt  to  a  convict  person 

being  indefeasible  and  inalienable  right  of  a  convict.  In  getting 

influence  from  the  nature  of  the  crime  and  other  extraneous 

consideration  might lead the Judges to a  patently wrong  conclusion. 

In  that event the justice would be casualty. 

17. 

In  the  case  reported  as  "Azeem  Khan  and  another  VS 

Mujahid  Khan  and  others"  (2016  SCMR  274),  it  has  been  held  as 

under:- 

"In  cases of circumstantial evidence,  the  Courts are to  take 
extraordinary care and caution before  relying on the same. 
Circumstantial evidence,  even  if supported  by  defective  or 
inadequate  evidence,  cannot  be  made  basis for conviction 
on  a  capital  charge.  More  particularly,  when  there  are 
indications  of  design  in  the  preparation  of  a  case  or 
introducing  any  piece  of fabricated  evidence,  the  Court 
extraordinary 
should  always  be  mindful 
precautions,  so  that  the  possibility of it  being  deliberately 
misled into false  inference and patently  wrong conclusion is 
to  be  ruled  out,  therefore  hard  and  fast  rules  should  be 
applied for carefully and narrowly examining circumstantial 
evidence  in  such cases because  chances of fabricating  such 
evidence  are always  there.  To justify  the  inference  of guilt 

take 

to 

10 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

of an  convict person,  the  circumstantial  evidence  must  be 
of a  quality  to  be  incompatible  with  the  innocence  of the 
convict.  If  such  circumstantial  evidence  is  not  of  that 
standard  and  quality, it  would be  highly dangerous  to  rely 
upon  the same  by awarding capital punishment.  The better 
and safe  course would be not  to rely upon it in securing the 
ends of justice. 11 

In  another  case  reported  as  Hashim  Qasim  and  another  VS  The 

State (2017 SCMR 986), it has been held as under:- 

"In  cases  of circumstantial  evidence,  there  are  chances  of 
procuring  and  fabricating  evidence,  therefore,  Courts are 
required  to  take  extra  care  and  caution  to  narrowly 
examine  such  evidence  with  pure  judicial  approach  to 
satisfy  itsetf,  about  its  intrinsic worth  and  reliability, also 
ensuring  that  no  dishonesty  was  committed  during  the 
course  of collecting such  evidence  by  the  Investigators.  If 
there  are  apparent  indications  of  designs  on  part  of  the 
investigating  agency in  the preparation of a case resting on 
circumstantial  evidence,  the  court  must  be  on  its  guard 
against  the  trap  of being  deliberately  misled  into  a false 
inference. If the court fails to observe such care and caution 
and hastily relies on such evidence,  there  would be a failure 
of justice.  Reference may be made  to the case of Fazal Elahi 
v.  Crown (PLO 1953 FC 214} and of Lejzor v.  The Queen (PLO 
1952  PC  109},  it  was  held  therein  with  considerable 
emphasis  that  circumstantial  evidence  may  sometimes 
appears  to  be  conclusive but  it  must  always  be  narrowly 
examined,  if only  because  this  count  of evidence  may  be 
fabricated  in  order to cast suspicion on another,  therefore, 
it is  all the  more  necessary before  drawing inference,  if the 
accused's guilt from  circumstantial evidence  to be sure and 
that  there  are  no  other  co-existing  circumstances,  which 
weaken  or destroy  the  inference  then,  in  that  case alone it 
may be relied upon otherwise, not at all. 

18. 

It 

is  a  general  principle  of  criminal  jurisprudence 

that 

prosecution  has to  prove  its  case  against the  convict  beyond doubt 

and this  burden does  not shift from  prosecution,  even  if the  convict 

takes  up  any  particular  plea  and  fails  in  it  and  that  in  case  of  any 

doubt  in  the  prosecution case, the  benefit of the  same will go to the 

convict  and  not  to  the  prosecution. 

In  the  instant  case,  the 

prosecution  has  also  failed  to  prove  the  motive  by  leading  any 

11 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

evidence  or  any  circumstance  except  application  (Ex.PM)  allegedly 

submitted by the appellant to the S.P. (R), Koral, Islamabad. 

19. 

That  through  PW-7,  the  application  Ex.PM  written  by  the 

appellant  has  been  brought  on  record  by  the  prosecution  that  the 

same  application  has been sent to the  S.P (R)  Koral,  Islamabad for 

taking action against one, Jameel son of Zaman, who had committed 

rape with  his deceased daughter and also tortured  her and probably 

during  the  scuffle  with  said  Muhammad  Jameel,  the  deceased 

sustained  injuries on her face and head, which the appellant himself 

has  mentioned  in  the  said  application,  which  fact  was  told  by  the 

deceased to  her father  before her death, but the appellant  remained 

mum due to his honour. Admittedly, in  those days, the appellant was 

detained  in  jail,  it  has  also  not  been  proved  through  evidence  that 

the said application was moved by the appellant through Jail, but the 

investigating  officer  did  not  join  the  jail  authorities  for  proving  the 

authenticity of the said application. Admittedly, the said application is 

not attested  by the Superintendent Jail, therefore,  it  cannot be relied 

upon.  The  prosecution  has  tried  to  shift  the  burden  upon  the 

shoulder of appellant  by producing such application (Ex.PM). 

If any 

such document is taken in  evidence, then the contents whereof must 

be  considered  in  toto.  The  prosecution  has  intended  to  pick  and 

choose  the  relevant  portion  in  support  of  its  version,  even  the 

authenticity  whereof 

is  not  proved.  The  contents  of 

this 

application/Ex.PM,  if considered in  toto and believed to be true, then 

no  offence  is  made  out  at  all  against  the  appellant.  So  far  as, 

contention  of  the  learned  counsel  of  the  complainant  that  the 

appellant  was  answerable  for  the  death  of  the  deceased  is 

concerned,  in  this  regard, there  is  evidence  that  in  the  said  house, 

the  step-mother  of  the  deceased,  real  sister  and  brother  of  the 

deceased were  also  residing. In  such circumstances,  only appellant 

could not be held responsible/answerable for death of the deceased. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  and  deceased  were  only 

12 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

residing  in  the  house  who  could  be  answerable  for  the  death  of 

deceased. 

20.  DW-1, Khalid lmran, who was given up by the prosecution and 

he  appeared  as  defence  witness  stated  that  he  received  a 

telephonic  call  from  his  father  at  about  5:00  p.m.  about  the 

unconscious condition of the deceased and when  he reached home, 

his  sister  had  already  died.  He further  deposed that  he did  not saw 

any mark of violence on her face. The name of the said witness was 

originally  shown  in 

the  list  of  prosecution  witnesses  and  his 

statement  under Section  161  Cr.P.C. was also attributed to  him, but 

thereafter,  he  was  given  up  by 

the  prosecution. 

In  cross  

examination,  he  denied  about  making  of  any  statement  under 

Section  161  Cr.P.C. before the investigating officer. The learned trial 

Court, while  relying on highly cryptic, infirm and incredible evidence, 

only on  hypothesis,  convicted the  appellant  under Section  316  PPC 

and  awarded  the  sentence  of  Diyat,  resulting  into  miscarriage  of 

justice,  which  cannot  sustain.  Further PW.8  Dr.Mehwish  has clearly 

stated  that  no  private  person  associated  them  during  post-mortem 

examination  of the  deceased, therefore, the  statement  of  PW.9 Haji 

Sarfraz  Khan is  not supported by the medical evidence, as such, his 

statement is  not trust worthy. 

21.  Admittedly,  the  appellant  divorced  the  complainant  about  14 

years  ago, thereafter  the  children from the  wedlock  of the appellant 

and  complainant  have  been  residing  with  the  appellant,  therefore, 

false 

implication  of 

the  appellant  cannot  be  ruled  out.  The 

prosecution has failed to bring on record any piece of evidence with 

regard  to  any  kind  of  torture  by  the  appellant  upon  his  children 

whereas  the  relationship of the  appellant and  his children was  quite 

cordial  and  loving. All  these facts  and  circumstances  show that the 

prosecution case is  not free from doubts. 

13 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

22.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme Court  of  Pakistan in  the  case  reported 

as  "Muhammad Karim  VS  The State" (2009 SCMR  230) has held as 

under:- 

"in  case of doubt,  the  benefit  thereof  must  be given to 
convict  as a matter  of right and not  as a matter  of grace, 
for giving the benefit  of doubt  it is not necessary  that  there 
should  be  many  circumstances  creating  doubts,  single 
circumstance  creating reasonable  doubt  in  a prudent  mind 
about  the  guilt  of convict  makes  him  entitled  to  benefit, 
not  as  matter  of grace  and  concessions, but  as  matter  of 
right. II 

23. 

In  the  case  of  "Ghulam  Akbar  and  another  VS  The  State" 

(2008 SCMR 1064), it has been held as under:- 

"It  is  cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence  that  the 
burden  of  proving  the  case  beyond  doubt  against  the 
convict  securely  lied  upon  the  prosecution  and  it  did  not 
shift. Similarly, the presumption  and probabilities, however, 
strong may be, could not take the shape  of proof. 11 

24. 

In  the  case  reported  as  "Sanaullah  VS  The  State  through 

Prosecutor  General"  (2015  P .Cr.L.J.  382  (Balochistan)), 

it  has 

been held that as under:- 

"Rule of prudence, stipulated  that prosecution had to prove 
its  case  beyond  the  shadow  of doubt.  Convict  had  not  to 
prove  his innocence,  until and  unless proved  guilty. Benefit 
of slightest  doubt  would necessarily be  extended  in favour 
of convict  and not otherwise. 11 

25. 

In the case reported as "Rahee/ and others  VS  The State and 

others" (2015 P.Cr.L.J.  470), it has been held that:- 

"If any  doubt  would  arise from  the  prosecution  evidence, 
benefit  of same  was to be extended  to convict. 11 

26. 

In  view  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  mentioned  above, 

Criminal  Appeal  No.310/2009  filed  by  the  appellant,  Muhammad 

Vounas,  is  allowed,  whereas the criminal  revision No.98/2019) filed 

by  the  complainant  is  dismissed.  Resultantly,  the  conviction  and 

sentence of the  appellant recorded by the  learned trial  Court,  is  set 

aside and he is acquitted of the charge by extending the benefit of 

14 

"Criminal  Appeal  No. 310 of 2019" 

doubt  to  him.  He  shall  be  released  from  the  jail  forthwith,  if  not 

required to be detained in  connection with any other case. 

="611Ulam Azam  QamlsV&ni 
Judge 

Announced  in  Open Court, on this  19th  day of August, 2020. 

S.Akhtar 

Juage 

