JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J.---Through this single judgment, I intended to decide 
the above mentioned criminal  appeals  whereby the appellants  have assailed their  conviction  in 
case FIR No.5/2010, dated 12.11.2010, under sections 409/420/468/471/109/34, P.P.C. read with 
sections 5(2) 47, P.C.A. registered with P.S. FIA/SIU, Islamabad vide judgment dated 03.6.2016 
passed by learned Special Judge (Central) Islamabad. Through the said judgment the appellants 
have been convicted and sentenced as under:-- 

Appellant Rao Shakeel Ahmed:-- 

Under section 408/34, P.P.C. 

Imprisonment for six years and to pay fine of SR-5,264,200/- (PKR-147,397,600/-) or in 
default of payment of fine to further undergo for two years' S.I. 

Under sections 420, 468 and 471, P.P.C. 

Imprisonment for six years on each count and to pay fine of Rs.1,000,000/- on each count 
(i.e. total Rs.3,000,000/-) or in default of payment of fine to further undergo two years' S.I. 
on each count. 

Under section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. 

Imprisonment for six years and also to pay fine of Rs.1,000,000/- or in default of payment 
of fine to further undergo two years' S.I. 

Appellant Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi:-- 

Under section 409/34, P.P.C.  

Imprisonment for six years and to pay fine of SR.5,264,200/- (PKR-147,397,600/-) or in 
default of payment of fine to further undergo for two years' S.I. 

Under section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. 

Imprisonment for a period of six years and to pay a fine of Rs.10,00,000/- or in default of 
payment of fine to further undergo for two years' S.I. 

Appellant Aftab-ul-Islam Raja:- 

Under section 409/34, P.P.C. 

Imprisonment  for  a  period  of  six  years  and  to  pay  fine  of  SR-5,264,200/-  (PKR-
147,397,600/-) or in default of payment of fine to further undergo for two years' S.I. 

Under section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. 

Imprisonment for six years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000,000/- or in default of payment of 
fine to further undergo for two years' S.I. 

Appellants have been held entitled to the benefit of section 382(b), Cr.P.C. 

criminal 

Brief facts of the instant case are that Ch. Naimat Ali, Assistant Director, FIA (PW-51) 
2. 
registered 
sections 
409/420/468/471/109/34, P.P.C. read with section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. registered with P.S. FIA/SIU, 
Islamabad vide Exh.PW.51/A against the appellants under the orders of the competent authority. 
The contents of the FIR are reproduced as under:-- 

FIR  No.05/2010, 

12.11.2010 

under 

dated 

case 

"After completion of preliminary inquiry No. E-25/10 conducted on the basis of inquiry 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
report  of  Review  committee  of  Senate/National  Assembly  it  revealed  that  Rao  Shakeel 
Ahmed former DG/Hajj by misusing his official position and with the active connivance 
of Ahmed Shafee and others had acquired 87 buildings in Saudi Arabia for residence of 
Pilgrimages for the Hajj Season 2010 on exorbitant rates in violation of instruction issued 
by the Cabinet Division and Minister of Religious Affairs for their personal gains. Accused 
Rao Shakeel Ahmed had also paid advance rent of three buildings upto 30-50% of the total 
rent to the owners/agents of hired buildings against the previous practice of 15% advance 
payment besides other violation of Govt. instructions to award undue benefit to the building 
owners/agents  etc.  Thus  they  caused  huge  wrongful  loss  to  the  public  exchequer  and 
corresponding wrongful gains to themselves. Prima facie these facts constitute commission 
of offences under sections 409, 109, 34, 3, 4, P.P.C. read with 5(2) 47, P.C.A. The Secretary 
M/o  Interior (competent  Authority) has accorded permission of case. Hence, the case is 
accordingly registered against Rao Shakeel Ahmed, Ahmed Shafee and others." 

As per contents referred above, the inquiry report of Review Committee of Senate/National 
3. 
Assembly has been made basis for registration of the instant criminal case whereby the cabinet 
took  the  decision  in  which  a  Committee  was  constituted  to  look  after  the  affairs  of  Hajj  2010 
comprising  of  five  members  (1)  Mollana  Muhammad  Qasim  (MNA),  Chairman  Standing 
Committee for Religious Affairs (National Assembly) (Leader), (2) Syed Muhammad Saleh Shah, 
Senator, Chairman Standing Committee for Religious Affairs (Senate) (Member), (3) Pirzada Syed 
Imran  Ahmed  Shah  (MNA),  Member  Standing  Committee  for  Religious  Affairs  (National 
Assembly)  (Member),  (4)  Bilal  Yasin  (MNA)  (Member),  (5)  Dr.  Khalid  Mehmood  Soomro, 
Senator, Member Standing Committee for Religious Affairs (Senate) (Member) visited Makkah 
Mukarma and prepared their report Exh.PA dated 01.09.2010 which is reproduced as under:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After the submission of Exh.PA, all three appellants were charged in the said case whereby the 
FIA  authorities  submitted  Challan  under  section  173,  Cr.P.C.  before  the  learned  Special  Judge 
Central, Rawalpindi whereby the learned Judge framed the following charges:-- 

"I, Muhammad Khalid Shabbir, Special Judge Central, Rawalpindi, do hereby charge you 
Shakeel  Ahmad  Rao,  Aftab-ul-Islam  Raja  and  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  accused  as 
under:-- 

Firstly, (i) you accused Shakeel Ahmad Rao, former DG/Hajj and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja, JS 
(Hajj) misused your official position and hired '87' buildings in Makkah Mukarrma and in 
Madina  Munawara  Saudi  Arabia  for  Hajj  pilgrims  for  the  Hajj  season  2010  with  the 
capacity of 29493 Hajj pilgrims on exorbitant rates of average rent SR.3492.09 per person. 

(ii)  four  buildings  (out  of  87  hired  buildings)  No.4009,  one  building  of  four  towers 
registration  Nos.4012,  4013,  4014,  4015,  a  building  namely  Shirkat  Almasart  and  a 
building  Waqf  Albasri  were  at  a  distance  of  2000  meters  in  violation  of  the  terms  and 
conditions of Hajj Policy 2010 and guidelines of Ministry of Religious Affairs. 

 
 
 
Secondly, '60' out of total '87' buildings were hired from Mustajirs/wakeels/agents. From 
the comparison of difference of rent between the agreements among the building owners 
with  Mustajirs/agents  and  its  subsequent  agreement  with  Pakistan  Hajj  Mission, 
SR.1,83,27,320/- (Pak Rs.403179040) were paid extra which indicates the magnitude of 
the loss caused to the State exchequer and corresponding gain by the accused persons. Most 
of the hired buildings were substandard and were hired in violation of the prescribed Hajj 
Policy, and the parameters laid down by the Hajj Ministry and the Cabinet Division. From 
the  comparison  of  the  difference  of  rent,  between  the  agreements  among  the  building 
owners with Mustajirs/Agents and its subsequent agreement with Pakistan Hajj Mission, 
SR 1,87,26,320/- (Pak Rs.403179040/-) were paid extra which indicates the magnitude of 
the loss caused to the State exchequer and the corresponding gain by the accused persons. 

Thirdly,  you  accused  Shakeel  Ahmed  Rao  also  paid  50%  advance  amounting  to 
SR.25,47,000 and SR.39,60,000 to Mustajir of buildings namely Nukhaba 1 and 11 against 
the previous practice of 15% advance without approval of the ministry and thereby violated 
the conditions of Hajj Policy 2010. As per new Tasreeh 2010, buildings had the capacity 
of  2525  persons  whereas  payment  was  made  for  3615  persons.  Thus  an  amount  of  SR 
39,24,000 (Pak Rs.90,252,000/-) was paid in excess on account of over booked capacity of 
1090 persons and thus causing loss to public ex-chequer and corresponding wrongful gain 
to agents/themselves. 

Fourthly,  the  buildings  were  not  handed  over  to  Pakistan  Hajj  Mission  and  the  whole 
amount is recoverable from Mustajir. Building Burjjal haram was hired @ SR 3600 per 
person by you accused Shakeel Ahmad Rao and Aftab-ul-Islam, JS (Hajj) having capacity 
of  2505  persons.  An  amount  of  SR  27,05,400/-  (Pak  Rs.62,22,4200/-)  was  issued  to 
Mustajir but possession of the buildings was not taken which amount is recoverable from 
Mustajir and loss to public ex-chequer. 

Fifthly,  you  Shakeel  Ahmad  Rao  former  DG  Hajj  and  Aftab-ul-Islam  JS  Hajj/accused 
issued second installment cheques of '8' out of 87 buildings against which rent were got 
reduced  from  SR  3600  to  SR  3400  for  three  buildings  Nos.2001,  2002  and  2003  for 
SR.3450 to SR 3200 for two buildings Nos.4011 and 5004 from SR. 3500 to SR 3455 for 
one building with registration Nos.4012, 4013, 4014 and 4015 from SR 3400 to SR 2400 
for one building No.6031 and SR 3500 to SR 1900 from one building No. 8011. These 
buildings were hired on high rates which have been rehired by Sultan Ali Shah, acting DG 
Hajj on reduced rent after negotiation with building owners. Thus given relief to Hujjaj to 
the tune of SR 3023475. Minutes of meeting of 87 hired buildings contain signatures of 
accused Shakeel Ahmad Rao, former DG Hajj as chairman Hiring committee and Aftab-
ul-Islam JS (Hajj) as member of Hiring Committee. 

Sixthly, on the direction of accused Hamid Saeed Kazmi Former Minister for Religious 
Affairs, co-accused Ahmed fait (since P.O) was illegally appointed by Shakeel Ahmad Rao 
accused  as  'Building  Supervisor'  with  mala  fide  intention  on  voluntary  basis.  He  was 
involved in the receipt of kick-backs from the building owners/Mustajirs and also used to 
threat  and  pressurize  the  concerned  staff  of  Pakistan  Hajj  Mission  Makkah  for 
recommending hiring of sub-standard buildings for Pakistani  Hajj pilgrims.  In this way 
buildings  for  Hajj  pilgrims  were  acquired  on  exorbitant  rates  and  huge  amounts  were 
illegally received by the accused persons as kickbacks. 

Seventhly, you Shakeel Ahmed Rao accused sent SR 234000: (Pak Rs.51,48,000/-) to your 
family members in Pakistan through different employees of Pakistan Hajj Mission during 
your  one  year  stay  in  Saudi  Arabia.  This  amount  was  beyond  your  known  sources  of 
income  and  was  part  of  ill  gotten  money.  You  accused  could  not  account  for  unusual 
increase  in  your  bank  accounts.  You  also  awarded  contract  for  the  provision  of 
accommodation in Medina Munawwara for Pakistan Hajj pilgrims to three out of 22 groups 
of  your  choice  who  applied  for  the  same.  Your  act  was  in  violation  of  the  relevant 
rules/policy and was also not in the interest of Pakistani Hajj Mission as a number of groups 
of Medina Munawwara, later on, offered lesser rates SR 450/- per pilgrim against the given 

 
 
rate of SR 500/-. This all was done by you for personal gains with ulterior motives. 

Eighthly, in the year 2009 Govt. Hajj scheme, buildings for 80000 pilgrims were booked 
but  you  accused  Minister  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  by  abusing  your  official  position 
withheld 7098 seats for hardship cases without approval of the Cabinet and did not include 
them in the balloting and deprived these persons from Hajj although their dues were already 
deposited with the Hajj ministry. Later on only 3563 withheld seats could be utilized by 
you accused for persons of your choice. Resultantly eleven buildings which had already 
been hired remained vacant and huge loss of SR.90,54,625/- (Pak RS.199201750/-) was 
caused to the Government exchequer and '200' persons who performed sponsored free Hajj 
by MOI stayed in the hired buildings without payment. 

Ninthly,  you  Shakeel  Ahmed  Rao  sent  a  bill  of  SR  593,550/-  and  SR  80,000/-  for 
accommodation charges of the aforesaid '1200' persons for Makkah Mukarama and Medina 
Munawara respectively to Ministry of Religious Affairs for recovery from the Ministry of 
Interior. 

Tenthly, bank accounts of you accused Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi have been examined and 
bank  record  have  been  taken  into  possession  but  you  could  not  account  for  it.  Illegal 
gratification in cash was brought back through illegal channel and hidden in tangible and 
benami investment. The un-usual increase found in the movable/immovable property of 
the accused during 2009-2010, for which you failed to explain the legitimate sources of 
income and thus found disproportionate to your legitimate sources of income. 

Thus you all the three accused in connivance with each and co-accused Ahmad Faiz (since 
P.O.)  have  committed  offences  under  sections  109/420/467/468/471/109/34/3,  4,  P.P.C. 
read with section 5(2) 47, PCA which is within the cognizance of this Court." 

Whereby the appellants  pleaded not guilty, therefore, prosecution produced 56 witnesses along 
with a bulk of documentary evidence including Hajj Policy 2010 as Exh. PW-13/A1-32, details of 
buildings as Exh.PW-13/E1-28, agreements of buildings as Exh.PW-13/H1-339, property details 
and assets details of appellants, documents relating to 129 buildings hired by Acting DG Hajj and 
Secretary Ministry of Religious Affairs, comparative statements of buildings hired by Rao Shakeel 
Ahmed. The 56 PWs produced by the prosecution are relating to following heads:-- 

"Joint Charge with ten heads was framed against all accused persons, who were sent to 
face trial  and all  accused persons pleaded not  guilty. Prosecution out  of 86 prosecution 
witnesses produced 56 and gave-up 30 witnesses." 

Allegation wise Prosecution witnesses:-- 

(a) 

Senate Review Committee: 

(i) 

PW-1, Abdur Rehman. 

(ii) 

PW-3, Pirzada Syed Imran Ali Shah, MNA. 

(iii) 

PW-4, Bilal Yasin, MNA. 

(iv) 

PW-21, Muhammad Saleh Shah. 

(b) 

Appointment of Ahmed Faiz: 

(i) 

PW-2, Arshad Mehmood Bajwa, 

(ii) 

PW-19, Muhammad Iqbal Siddiqui, 

(c) 

Difficulties of Hujjaj: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

PW-5, Tayyab Hussain Qureshi. 

(ii) 

PW-6, Muhammad Ali Khan. 

(d) 

Illegal Benefits: 

(I) 

(i) 

Transfer of money (Rao Shakeel Ahmed) 

PW-9, Muhammad Mushtaq (Steno). 

(ii) 

PW-10, Muhammad Aslam (Assistant/cashier). 

(iii) 

PW-11, Muhammad Yasin (Driver). 

(iv) 

PW-12, Abdur Rasheed (Naib Qasid) 

(v) 

PW-38, Riaz Ahmed (Naib Qasid). 

(vi) 

PW-39, Muhammad Saleem Akhter (Driver). 

(vii)  PW-42, Samiullah (Assistant Accounts Officers). 

(II)  Assets (Rao Shakeel Ahmed). 

(i) 

PW-18, Muhammad Idrees Khan (Engr. FIA). 

(ii) 

PW-22, Ch. Shakeel Ahmed (X.En). 

(iii) 

PW-23, Azmat Javaid (Insp. FIA). 

(iv) 

PW-24, Muhammad Sarwar (Insp. FIA). 

(e) 

Acquiring and utilizing of building in Saudi Arabia: 

(i) 

PW-13, Muhammad Khursheed Anwar. 

(ii) 

PW-14, Syed Sultan Ali Shah (Acting DG) 

(iii) 

PW-15, Agha Sarwar Raza Qazalbash (Secretary MORA). 

(iv) 

PW-28, Umer Ali Khan Sherazi (Ambassador). 

(v) 

PW-36, Umer Farooq Khokhkar (D.D.Hajj). 

(vi) 

PW-42, Muhammad Samiullah (Asstt. Accounts Officer). 

(vii)  PW-43, Muhammad Aslam (Room Attendant). 

(viii)  PW-45, Shakir Husain (Arabic Desk). 

(ix) 

PW-48, Muhammad Farooq (Investor-Private person). 

(x) 

PW-51, Naimat Ali (I.O.). 

(xi) 

PW-52, Khalid Rasool (I.O.). 

After conclusion of entire evidence, all the appellants recorded their statements under section 342, 
Cr.P.C.  whereafter  the  learned  trial  Court  has  convicted  the  appellants  through  the  impugned 
judgment  dated  03.06.2016,  hence,  the  appellants  filed  their  respective  appeals.  However  at 
present, Rao Shakeel Ahmed and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja are on bail and Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi 
has not been granted bail by this Court. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learned counsel  for appellants  (in Crl. Appeal  No.117/2016 (Rao Shakeel  Ahmad)  and 
4. 
Crl. Appeal No.122/2016 (Aftab-ul-Islam Raja)] argued that the appellants have been convicted 
and sentenced under sections 409/34, 420, 468 and 471 read with section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. but there 
is no evidence on record to connect the appellants with the said offences; that the charge framed 
by the learned trial Court was joint in nature and there is no specific details of particular offence, 
hence,  the  conviction  is  illegal;  that  the  learned  trial  Court  while  awarding  the  sentence  to  the 
appellants simultaneously proceeded under sections 409 and 420, P.P.C. which is illegal; that the 
documents produced by the prosecution were not proved in accordance with the Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984, whereas the prosecution has failed to prove their proper custody, permission from 
the relevant authorities nor those documents are admissible under the law; that the investigation 
Officer filed Challan against five persons out of them one namely Ahmed Faiz was declared as 
P.O.  who  was  arrested  during  the  trial  of  present  appellants  and  learned  trial  Court  has  not 
proceeded  under  single  trial  rather  separated  the  trial  of  Ahmed  Faiz  and  convicted  him 
subsequently which is an illegal method adopted by the learned trial Court; that the appellant Rao 
Shakeel Ahmed was Ex-D.G. Hajj and he was not the Chairman of Hiring Committee nor even he 
was designated as Chairman of Hiring Committee by Government and his duty was to spot the 
buildings and then Hiring Committee in Pakistan has to finalize those buildings; that no recovery 
whatsoever was  effected from  the appellants  during the investigation to  connect  them with  the 
crime proceeds; that the prosecution has failed to prove the fraudulent intent and misappropriation 
of funds or receiving of illegal benefit while causing loss to national exchequer; that during the 
trial not a single witness has been produced by the prosecution who stated before the Court that 87 
buildings for Hujjaj Karam were hired after receiving kickbacks by the appellants, even no Saudi 
official  or  owners/Mustajars  of  the  buildings  were  produced  before  the  learned  trial  Court  to 
connect  the  appellants  with  any  of  the  offence  leveled  in  the  FIR  or  in  the  charge;  that  the 
Investigation Officer has not collected any bank record from the Saudi Arabia regarding any crime 
proceed nor there is any evidence of misappropriation of funds; that appellant Aftab-ul-Islam Raja 
was just a signatory along with Rao Shakeel Ahmad, however he had no independent authority to 
decide the fate of any hired building. 

Learned counsel for appellant (in Crl. Appeal No.119/2016 of Hamid Saeed Kazmi) argued 
5. 
that the conviction and sentence awarded by the learned trial Court is against the law and facts of 
case;  that none out  of the 56 PWs has uttered  a single word  against the  appellant  and even no 
evidence was recorded regarding the receipt of kickbacks or commission by the said appellant; 
that the prosecution has miserably failed to connect the appellant Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi with 
the crime proceeds as alleged by the prosecution; that the appellant has no role in the hiring of 
buildings of Hujjaj  Karam  as the same was the act  performed by the Hiring Committee which 
comprised of 07 members and the appellant had no role in the said committee; that the report of 
review committee brought on record as Exh.PA which furnished the very basis of registration of 
instant  case, the same is  completely silent  qua the alleged offences;  that according to  the Rule 
5(9)(b) of Rules of Business, 1973, the Secretary of Ministry was bound to execute the sanctioned 
Hajj  policy  and  Minister  of  Religious  Affairs  had  no  concern  with  the  implementation  and 
execution of said policy; that the appellant has not been nominated in the FIR nor there is  any 
direct  evidence  against  the  appellant  to  connect  him  with  the  alleged  crime;  that  there  is  no 
evidence on record against the appellant for criminal breach of trust or receiving of any benefit of 
in terms of section 409, P.P.C. or in terms of section 5(2) 47, PCA; that the impugned judgment is 
based upon mis-reading and non-reading of material evidence available on record. 

Conversely, learned SPP FIA along with Investigation Officer argued that the appellants 
6. 
Rao Shakeel Ahmad and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja were appointed in their official capacity at Saudi 
Arabia for Hajj Mission to perform their official duties which includes the hiring of buildings for 
Hujjaj Karam for Hajj Operations, 2010 under the supervision of Minister of Hajj/appellant Syed 
Hamid Saeed Kazmi; that all the appellants while misusing their official position have abused the 
process of hiring of buildings which is evident from the report Exh.PA, whereas appellants Rao 
Shakeel Ahmed Ex-D.G. Hajj and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja Joint Secretary/Member Hiring Committee 
for Hajj, 2010 are responsible for the hiring of buildings and while performing their official duties 
in Hajj Mission 2010, hired 87 buildings for 29,493 Hujjaj Karam whereas they were directed not 
to hire any building beyond two thousand meters from Haram Sharif, even they were directed to 

 
 
confirm the status of buildings as any building should not be eight years old; that Parliamentary 
Committee visited Saudi Arabia and it has been observed by the then Committee of the Parliament 
that 59 buildings were obtained in violation of directions, even some of the buildings were beyond 
the prescribed distance of two thousand meters, some were old buildings and last few buildings 
were incomplete and there was no possibility that Pakistani Hujjaj would be able to utilize those 
buildings. Learned SPP further argued that both the appellants Rao Shakeel Ahmed and Aftab-ul-
Islam  Raja  had  obtained  87  buildings  on  higher  rates  i.e.  SR  3500  to  3600  per  Haji  whereas 
buildings at reasonable rate were available at that time hence, they have caused loss to individuals; 
that the then Ex-DG Hajj Rao Shakeel Ahmad engaged private individual, namely, Ahmed Faiz 
who  was  illegally  living  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  was  not  entitled to  perform  any  duty  but  he  was 
engaged as front man of the DG Hajj who entered in all kinds of deals with the owners/Mustajars 
and  Attorneys  of  buildings  whereby  received  kickbacks  in  this  regard;  that  Ahmed  Faiz  was 
appointed by the then Ex-DG Hajj (appellant) Rao Shakeel Ahmed even a recommendation was 
given  for  the  issuance  of  official/gratis  passport  in  his  name;  that  two  buildings  Nukhba-I  and 
Nukhba-II were hired at higher rates with 50% advance payment and the appellants have received 
kickbacks of SR 2,600,000/- even some of the black-listed agents and their buildings were hired 
through Ahmed Faiz co-accused as in this entire deal the appellants have received SR.500 to 1100 
in each building in Makkah Mukarma and similarly they have received kickbacks of SR 50 to 100 
as commission per Haji in Madina Munawwara. That after receiving the complaints submitted by 
the Parliamentary Committee, appellant Rao Shakeel Ahmed was removed and new Acting DG 
was  appointed  for  hiring  of  buildings,  who  engaged  129  buildings  which  were  comparatively 
economical than 87 buildings engaged by the previous committee of appellants and in comparison 
of  these  buildings  it  was  observed  that  the  appellants  have  caused  a  huge  financial  loss  to  the 
national exchequer while using their official position; that appellant Rao Shakeel Ahmed signed 
up  different  persons  for  sending  cash  amount  which  was  received  by  him  in  Saudi  Arabia  as 
kickback  to  his  family  members  and  others;  that  appellants  are  living  beyond  their  means  and 
established different properties from kickbacks received by them during the said season of Hajj. 

7. 
Learned SPP, FIA further argued that appellant Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi was minister at 
the relevant time who was under obligation to implement the Hajj Policy, 2010 in letter and spirit 
but he by violating the directions issued by the cabinet allowed the appellants Ro Shakeel Ahmed 
and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja to continue with their illegal hiring of buildings against the exorbitant 
rates and even in violation of terms of the Hajj Policy, 2010 as well as guidelines; that appellant 
Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  had  visited  Saudi  Arabia  prior  to  Hajj,  2010  and  visited  all  those 
buildings in presence of Ahmed Faiz and co-appellants which is evident from the pictures, even 
Ahmed Faiz briefed Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi whose passport was recommended by appellant 
Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi;  that  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  has  failed  to  prove  the  legitimate 
resources of his assets and amount which was received by him beyond his legal means and the 
same shall be considered as crime proceeds received as kickbacks in Saudi Arabia; that appellant 
Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi has caused loss to the public exchaquer by not following due procedure 
under his command and due to his official position he has withheld 7098 seats for hardship cases 
as a result he deprived number of persons from performing of Hajj; that 11 buildings were already 
hired but they remained vacant and Government of Pakistan has suffered a loss of S.R. 9,054,625. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

9. 
From  the  perusal  of  record  it  has  been  observed  that  Hiring  Review  Committee  of 
Senate/National  Assembly  comprising  of  five  members  (1)  Molana  Muhammad  Qasim,  MNA, 
Chairman  Standing  Committee  for  Religious  Affairs  (National  Assembly)  (Leader),  (2)  Syed 
Muhammad Saleh Shah, Senator, Chairman Standing Committee for Religious Affairs (Senate) 
(Member),  (3)  Pirzada  Syed  Imran  Ahmed  Shah,  MNA,  Member  Standing  Committee  for 
Religious Affairs (National Assembly) (Member), (4) Bilal Yasin, MNA (Member), (5) Dr. Khalid 
Mehmood  Soomro,  Senator,  Member  Standing  Committee  for  Religious  Affairs  (Senate) 
(Member)  submitted  their  report  Exh.PA  (1-21)  dated  01.09.2010  whereby  the  said  committee 
visited Saudi Arabia to overview the Hajj arrangements and during their visit it transpired that 87 
buildings had already been hired for 29,493 Hujjaj Karaam under the guidelines referred by the 
Ministry. As per the report of the said committee there were specific directions in which every 

 
 
building should have capacity of two thousand members/Hujjaj, building should not be situated 
beyond the distance of 2000 meters from Haram Sharif and engaged buildings should not be eight 
years old and all the buildings should be engaged in group form. While visiting the buildings, the 
Hiring Review Committee observed that few buildings were engaged beyond 2000 meters from 
Haram Sharif, 15 buildings were engaged which were more than eight years old and majority of 
the buildings were not engaged in cluster form in violation of direction of Government of Pakistan 
and  even  one  building  was  engaged  which  was  not  completed  at  that  time  and  the  same  was 
reflecting that the construction of the building will not be completed before Hajj. The committee 
further  stated  in  the  report  that  79  buildings  out  of  87  buildings  were  engaged  in  violation  of 
Cabinet as well as decision of Ministry of Religious Affairs even the advance amount of 50% was 
paid  to  the  owners/Mustajars  of  buildings  in  violation  of  previous  year's  practice  of  15%  of 
advance rent and it has been observed by the committee that millions of riyals have been received 
as kickback and commission. The parliamentary committee also observed that the buildings which 
were engaged having the capacity were hired at the rate of S.R.3500/3600 per Haji, however the 
same were available at cheaper rates, hence, the committee has received kickbacks on per Haji 
basis. It has further been observed by the said committee that one person Ahmed Faiz acted as 
middle man who has received the commission, who is a deportee, who was living in Saudi Arabia 
without Aqama and he was arrested by the Saudi police but he was released on the intervention of 
Rao  Shakeel  Ahmed,  the  said  person  was  appointed  as  Building  Supervisor  and  that  name  of 
Ahmed Faiz was recommended for official/gratis passport. Two buildings Nukhba-I and Nukhba-
II were engaged against advance rent of 50% and DG Hajj while performing his official duties 
received  kickbacks.  The  Hiring  Review  Committee  of  parliament  has  given  certain 
recommendations in which it has been recommended that DG Hajj should be immediately removed 
from his position and his agent Ahmed Faiz may also be deported from Saudi Arabia to Pakistan 
and the entire matter should be thrashed out through inquiry. The committee also recommended 
that  all  the  buildings  which  are  engaged  in  Makkah  Mukarma  and  Madina  Munawwara  be 
cancelled and the amount be recovered and if the said amount would not be recovered then same 
be recovered from DG Hajj. On the basis of said report Exh.PA, criminal case FIR No.05/2010, 
dated  12.11.2010,  under  sections  409/420/468/471/109/34,  P.P.C.  read  with  section  5(2)  47, 
P.C.A., P.S. (FIA/SIU, Islamabad was registered by Ch. Naimat Ali, Assistant Director, FIA (PW-
51) as Exh.PW-51/A, whereby investigation was started. 

After  the  registration  of  criminal  case,  three  FIA  officers  investigated  the  matter  and 
10. 
submitted the Challan before the learned trial Court against the appellants on different intervals of 
time. 

The prosecution has produced total 56 witnesses to prove the case against the appellants 
11. 
whereas the learned trial Court framed 10 charges against the appellants and out of those charges 
the appellants Rao Shakeel Ahmed and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja were charged in eight charges and 
Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi appellant was charged against three allegations only, as referred in the 
order dated 30.05.2012  passed by learned Special  Judge (Central), Rawalpindi  whereby  all the 
appellants pleaded not guilty and prosecution produced 56 witnesses to prove their case. In order 
to discuss the allegations, it is necessary to review the Hajj Policy document available on record 
as  Exh.PW-13/A1-32  dated  14.05.2010  whereby  the  clause-XVIII  relates  to  the  instant  case 
whereas  Annexure-A  of  the  said  policy  gives  the  details  of  hiring  of  buildings  under  Clause-5 
which is reproduced as under:- 

"5. HIRING OF BUILDINGS 

(A)  There  being  acute  shortage  of  buildings  in  the  vicinity  of  Haram  Sharif  due  to 
continuous  demolition  of  buildings  in  Makkah  Mukarramah,  following  conditions  for 
hiring of accommodation for Hajj Pilgrims for Hajj-2010 will be observed subject to minor 
adjustments  to  be  made  by  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  on  account  of  distance  of 
buildings:- 

The maximum rent in Makkah Mukarramah shall be SR.3600 per pilgrim upto 2000 

i. 
meters; 

 
 
 
The  determination  of  rent  in  Makkah  Mukarramah  will  be  based  on  quality  of 

ii. 
building and distance from Haram; 

iii. 

55-60% of accommodation shall be hired in Markazia in Medina Munawwarah; 

Accommodation in Medina Munawwarah shall be hired @ SR.500/- per pilgrim 

iv. 
per cycle to be paid on actual occupancy basis. 

(B)  COMMITTEES 

In  order  to  ensure  transparency  and  qualitative  hiring  of  buildings  a  new  mechanism  is 
being introduced which would contain an in-built system of check and balances:- 

I) 

a. 

i. 

ii. 

HIRING COMMITTEE 

The Hiring Committee in Saudi Arabia would comprise the following:-- 

Director General Hajj, Jeddah Chairman 

Joint Secretary (Hajj)  Member 

Any other person conversant with Makkah/ Madina nominated by MORA  Member 

iii. 

iv. 

Director Hajj, Jeddah  Member 

Deputy Director Hajj  Member 

Madina Munawwarah (for Madina only) 

v. 

Representative of the Pakistan 

Member 

Ambassador in Saudi Arabia.  

vi. 

Assistant Accounts Officer Jeddah  Convener  

b. 
in order to strengthen the Hiring Committee in Makkah and Madinah at least one 
officer of the Ministry and one (Pak based) ex-officio nominee shall be placed by Ministry 
of Religious Affairs on the panel of Hiring Committee; 

Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  shall  nominate  ex-officio  representative,  to  impart 

c. 
guidance to the committee, purely in advisory capacity. 

As a pre-condition, the said nominee shall be selected for the prime reason that he 
d. 
is familiar/conversant with the buildings, distance, reasonability of rent etc. in Makkah and 
Madina; 

e. 

The decision of the majority shall prevail. 

Any  difference  of  opinion  shall  be  referred  to  the  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs 

f. 
whose decision would be binding. 

g. 
On  completion  of  the  hiring  process  both  in  Makkah  and  Madina,  the  joint 
Secretary  (Hajj)  who  is  a  nominee  of  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs,  shall  submit  a 
comprehensive report to the Ministry of Religious Affairs about the quality of buildings, 
reasonability of rent, distance and above all the snags (if any) which have surfaced during 
the hiring process. 

(II)  HIRING REVIEW COMMITTEE 

There shall be a Hiring Review Committee comprising of the following:-- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

Minister for Religious Affairs Chairman 

Minister of State for Religious Affairs 

Vice-Chairman 

Chairman, Senate Standing Committee for Religious Affairs 

Member 

Chairman,  National  Assembly  Standing  Committee  for  Religious  Affairs
Member 

v. 

One Member of the Senate  Member 

vi. 

On Member of the National Assembly 

Member 

vii.  Director General Hajj, Jeddah Convener 

viii.  Director Hajj, Jeddah  Secretary 

At least two (2) and maximum three (3) members of the above Committee shall 

(a) 
visit Saudi Arabia for not more than two times (during the hiring season) on need basis. 

The said  committee shall  submit its  report commenting on the reasonability and 

(b) 
standard of buildings so hired, to the Prime Minister. 

No  authority  other  than  the  Hiring  Review  Committee  shall  be  authorized  to 
(c) 
generate any report being addressed to the President, Prime Minister or anybody or organ 
of the State about the hired buildings in KSA (except sub-para B(1)(g) above). 

The expenditure in respect of members mentioned at S. No(s) 3 to 6 shall be borne 

(d) 
by the respective Secretariats." 

From the above referred details of Hajj Policy, it has been assumed that two committees have been 
constituted, first committee comprising of Chairman and Members appointed for the purpose of 
hiring of buildings and second is called Hiring Review Committee comprising of Minister as well 
as Members of the Parliament. 

12. 
Besides  the  Hajj  Policy,  2010,  Exh.PW-13/A1-32  was  issued  by  Cabinet  Secretariat, 
Government of Pakistan on 14.05.2010, another document which plays a key role in the entire 
process of the hiring of buildings, called as Policy Guidelines Ehx.PW-13/B1-32 dated 04.02.2010, 
due to the fact that Hajj Policy, 2010 was not issued prior to May 2010 wherein Hajj Mission was 
under obligation to engage the buildings on first-come first-serve basis as other countries are also 
in process of hiring of the buildings, therefore, it has been observed that a strong competition was 
going  on  in  Madina  Munawwara  and  Makkah  Mukarrama  for  hiring  of  buildings  for  Hujjaj. 
Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan issued a policy document dated 04.02.2010 
referred as Exh.PW-13/B1-32 which was issued in response to the letter of appellant Rao Shakeel 
Ahmed DG Hajj, Jeddah regarding late hiring of buildings for Hajj, 2010 to hire suitable buildings 
whereby the Ministry of Religious Affairs constituted a Spotting Committee in Saudi Arabia who 
spotted and located the buildings and recommended them for hiring to the Hiring Committee in 
Pakistan who would check the suitability of buildings for hiring or otherwise in accordance with 
parameters  laid  down  for  that  purpose,  however,  documents  reveal  certain  conditions  to  be 
followed and policy provides the details of the Spotting Committee as well as Hiring Committee, 
which are as under:-- 

"2. The following conditions for hiring of accommodation for Hajj pilgrims for Hajj 2010 
should be observed strictly before the buildings are hired:-- 

The maximum rent in Makkah Mukarramah shall be SR.3600 per pilgrim upto 1500 

i. 
meters and SR.3200 upto 2000 meters; 

ii. 

The  determination  or  rent  in  Makkah  Mukarramah  may  be  based  on  quality  of 

 
 
 
building and distance from Haram; 

iii. 
The buildings rated in category-A & B by Khuddam-ul-Hujjaj in Hajj-2009 may be 
hired on priority basis. The buildings rated in category C, D and E by Khuddam-ul-Hajjaj 
in Hajj-2009 may not be hired; 

iv. 
Accommodation in Markazia in Madina Munawwarah shall be hired at SR.500 per 
pilgrim per cycle, to be paid on actual occupancy basis, however, the rent charged for first 
and second cycles which is usually low should be borne in mind before the negotiations 
are made. 

Cluster accommodation should be arranged invariable in old Mina for all Hujjaj 
v. 
under Govt. Hajj Scheme having facility of sofa-cum-bed with break-fast/light refreshment 
against payment of Compulsory Hajj Dues (CHD) SR. 1588/- per persons,' 

Hiring may be done by observing codal formalities on first come first served basis 
vi. 
after  floating  an  advertisement  in  the  local  press.  Moreover,  the  basic  principle  of  one 
flight, one Maktab and one building should be ensured; 

The previous hiring committee in Makkah shall now perform the role of locating 

vii. 
and spotting the buildings in the light of guide-lines to follow. 

viii.  The spotting committee shall recommend suitable buildings to the hiring committee 
even while having 2/3rd strength of its total constitution. This is important as at times some 
members are not available at the required time and in that case the essential task of the 
committee to recommend the buildings impetuously should not suffer. 

ix. 

The Sporting Committee in Saudi Arabia may comprise of the following:- 

a) 

b) 

c) 

Director General Hajj, Jeddah. Chairman 

Director Hajj Jeddah. Member. 

Deputy Director Hajj Member (for Madina only) 

Madina Munawwarah, 

(d) 

Representative of the Pakistan. Member 

Ambassador in Saudi Arabia. 

e) 

Any prominent Overseas Pakistani. Member 

In KSA (to be nominated by MORA), 

f) 

Assistant Accounts Officer Jeddah. Convener. 

3. The Spotting Committee shall explore possibilities to hire buildings in Makkah for the 
entire year and rent be paid accordingly instead of rent being paid for the Hajj season only. 

4.  While  spotting  buildings,  the  spotting  committee  shall  primarily  keep  the  following 
guidelines and parameters into consideration and the Hiring Committee in Pakistan shall 
evaluate the suitability of these buildings on the basis of these parameters:-- 

The age of buildings being hired should not be more than 6-7 years. 

Hiring of "shuggas" should he avoided. 

In  case  of  high  rise  buildings,  the  facility  of  lifts  should  be  adequate  and  in 

conformity with the capacity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bathroom pressure should be maximum 8 persons per bath. 

The total number of buildings for the entire Hujjaj should not exceed 200. 

The  total  capacity  of  each  building  so  hired  should  be  minimum  200  Hujjaj  per 

building. 

The buildings should be hired on the main road (with no ascents) instead of small 

streets at the back. 

All basic facilities/Amenities like Laundry, AC, fridge, kitchen should, be available 

in these buildings. 

Four  times  a  day,  shuttle  facility  should  be  negotiated  with  the  owners  of  the 

buildings for the Hujjaj staying at a distance of 1501 meters to 2000 meters. 

Hiring of buildings should be made in such a manner that atleast 5000 Hujjaj stay 
banded in the same area/vicinity, thus giving a village like effect. In this way Monitoring 
conducted by the teams would be easy and effective. 

Provision  of  drinking  water  and  Aab-e-Zam  Zam  should  be  ensured  in  these 

buildings. 

The buildings and rooms should be presentable with particular focus on cleanliness. 

The  buildings  located  on  roads  which  are  jammed  due  to  heavy  traffic  and 

pedestrians during the Hajj season should be avoided. 

The building so recommended should have the provision to house the monitoring 

teams and dispensaries. 

These buildings should be in near vicinity of Markets, Restaurants and basic needs 

shops. 

5. The detail of buildings so spotted by the spotting committee shall indicate information 
as per format devised (copy enclosed) for the purpose by MORA (in the light of guidelines). 
Moreover,  the  visual  detail  of  buildings  should  be  videoed  and  sent  electronically 
containing  photographs  both  still  and  video  of  buildings,  with  particular  focus  on  the 
elevation, interior and surroundings. 

6.  The  said  information  would  be  subjected  to  scrutiny  by  a  panel  constituted  for  the 
purpose  in  Pakistan  and  final  approval  shall  be  granted  by  the  said  panel  for  hiring  or 
otherwise within three days of the receipt of the communication. The decision about hiring 
or  otherwise  of  the  building  can  be  taken  by  at  least  2/3rd  of  the  total  strength  of  the 
Committee. 

7.  This  committee  hereinafter  referred  to  as  Hiring  Committee  shall  comprise  of  the 
following:- 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

e) 

f) 

Secretary, MORA 

Chairman 

Joint Secretary (Hajj)  Member 

Joint Secretary (Admn.) 

Member 

DS (HP) 

Member 

DS (HA) 

Member 

Vice President 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NESPAK Islamabad or his nominee. Member 

g) 

Chief Architect 

(Architect Division NESPAK Islamabad) or his nominee.  Member 

h) 

Nominee of Pakistan Engineering Council, IBD  Member 

i) 

j) 

k) 

l) 

Chairman Pakistan Hajj Organizers Federation. 

Member 

President  Islamabad  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  or  his  nominee
Member 

A.O. (H-II)  Member 

SO (HP-I) 

Convener 

8.  It  would  be  pertinent  to  add  here  that  verification  of  the  particulars/details  of  the 
buildings as recommended by the spotting committee shall be physically inspected/verified 
by JS (Hajj) along with one member fully conversant with the geography of Makkah/Mina 
for which they shall make periodical visits to Saudi Arabia (as and when required by the 
Committee) and ascertain the suitability of such buildings both in terms of distance, quality 
and reasonability of rent: 

9. There shall be a Hiring Review Committee comprising of the following:- 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Minister for Religious Affairs Chairman 

Minister of State for Religious Affairs 

Vice Chairman 

Chairman, Senate Standing Committee For Religious Affairs 

Member 

Chairman,  National  Assembly  Standing  Committee  for  Religious  Affairs
Member 

5. 

Director Hajj, Makkah 

Convener 

The said Committee shall visit Saudi Arabia for maximum two times on needs basis and 
submit its report containing the suitability of buildings or otherwise to the Prime Minister. 
The expenditures in respect of members mentioned at 3 and 4 shall be brone by respective 
Secretariats. 

10. Negotiations shall be made directly with the owners of the buildings and any contact 
with  unauthorized  dealers  should  be  strictly  avoided  as  this  illegal  practice  gives  a  bad 
name to the Mission and secondly tends to inflate the rent of the building which obviously 
contains commission of the intermeddler. 

11. The prime objective of hiring buildings at the juncture is no doubt advantageous in as 
much as Rent would be at its lowest level and other Muslim countries may not be in the 
Market. 

12. The competent authority has therefore desired that the process of hiring of buildings in 
Makkah  Mukarramah  and  Madinah  Munawwarah  and  Makatib  in  old  Mina  may  be 
initiated  forthwith  and  strictly  in  the  light  of  instructions/guidelines  as  contained  in  the 
foregoing lines. We expect  that  your first  installment of proposed buildings would start 
pouring in within a week's time without fail." 

The above referred policy document prior to the Hajj Policy, 2010 is a key document which has 
been used by the prosecution to built up the entire case and from the referred terms and conditions 

 
 
 
 
 
of the guidelines given above, it is clearly understandable that the rates or buildings in Makkah 
Mukarrama, distance, conditions of the buildings and facilities of buildings have been categorized 
however,  the  laid  down  procedure  provides  three  sets  of  committees  including  a  Spotting 
Committee, Hiring Committee and Hiring Review Committee by Members of Parliament. 

13.  The  prosecution  opened  his  case  before  this  Court  through  the  learned  SPP,  that  the  said 
guidelines have been violated and they have not been followed in letter and spirit. I have asked 
learned SPP/FIA to provide procedure as to how the Hiring Committee proceeded in the matter 
while hiring any building, he stated that a Spotting Committee initially spots the building which is 
recommended to the Hiring Committee in Pakistan and Hiring Committee while sitting in Pakistan 
approves the hiring of any building whereby this Court is surprised to see that the entire case has 
been built up against the appellants in backdrop of violation of terms and conditions of Hajj Policy, 
2010 which was referred by the prosecution as Exh.PW.13/A1-32 dated 14.05.2010 which was 
implemented  in  June  2010  and  prior  to  the  promulgation  of  said  Hajj  Policy  the  competent 
authority  of  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  issued  a  letter  dated  04.02.2010  which  means  that 
Secretary Ministry of Religious Affairs was well conversant with the process and procedure while 
sitting in Pakistan, being the Chairman of the Hiring Committee, who has been produced by the 
prosecution as PW-15, therefore, in order to overview the prosecution case, I have to attend the 
evidence of PW-13 Muhammad Khursheed Anwar Shah, Dy. Secretary Hajj Policy (from the year 
2006 to 2011) and the said witness, on the direction of FIA, has submitted the following record in 
Court:- 

Exh.PW-13/A1-32  Hajj Policy 2010 dated 14.05.2010 

Exh.PW13/B1-32 

Policy Guidelines dated 04.02.2010 

Exh.PW-13/C1-2 

Notification  dated  03.09.2009  of  Transfer  and  Posting  of  Rao 
Shakeel Ahmad as Director General Hajj, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia and 
Notification dated 29.09.2010 Transfer of Rao Shakeel  Ahmad to 
Establishment Division 

Exh.PW-13/D1-5 

Copies of Advertisement of Hiring of Accommodation along with 
Urdu News and Arabic News (Dated 05.05.2010) 

Exh.PW-13/E1-28  Details of 556 Buildings (Makkah Mukarmma) offered in response 

to advertisement by different persons 

Exh.PW-13/F1-13 

List of 87 buildings Hired by Rao Shakeel Ahmad as DG Hajj in 
Makkah Mukarma along with details of distance, capacity, etc. 

Exh.PW-13/G1-10  Minutes of Meeting of Hiring of Buildings by Rao Shakeel Ahmad 

in Makkah Mukarma 

Exh.PW-13/H1-339  Copies of Agreements of Buildings hired in Makkah Mukarma by 

DG Hajj Rao Shakeel Ahmad and cheques issued by him 

Exh.PW-13/J1-3 

Brief regarding Nukhba-I, II and Burjul Haram given by Samiullah 
Assistant Accounts Officer along with Arabic documents 

Exh.PW-13/K1-6 

List of 129 buildings hired by Acting DG Hajj Syed Sultan Ali Shah 

Exh.PW-13/L1-9 

Comparative  Statement  (Rent  wise)  of  hired  buildings  by  former 
DG Hajj Rao Shakeel Ahmad and acting DG Hajj Syed Sultan Ali 
Shah with photocopies of cheques issue for second installment of 8 
buildings 

Exh.PW-13/M 

statement 

through 
Comparative 
owners/Mustajars/agents  by former DG  Hajj Rao Shakeel  Ahmad 
with buildings hired through acting DG Hajj in same category 

buildings 

hired 

of 

 
 
Exh.PW-13/N 

Advertisement for hiring of buildings in Madina Munawwara 

Exh.PW-13/P 

Statement  of  offers  received  for  accommodation  for  Hajj  2010 
Madina Munawwara 

Exh.PW-13/Q1-20 

Photocopies of agreements signed by Rao Shakeel Ahmad former 
DG Hajj with three accommodation groups for Madina Munawwara 
namely  Messrs  Arab  Resort  Area  Company,  Messrs  Manazli 
Company  and Messrs Manzil Al-Mukhtair Trading Establishment 
@ 500 S.R. per Haj Pilgrim 

Exh.PW-13/R1-3 

Photocopy of letter of Account Transfer Details issued by Bank Al-
Jazirah (Dated 21.09.2010) 

Exh.PW-13/S1-2 

Special  Offer  dated  09.06.2010  by  Messrs  Saeed  Makkey  Hotel 
Group and Al-Tawan Group 

All  the  above  referred  documents  when  produced  by  PW-13  before  the  learned  trial  Court, 
objection was raised regarding admissibility of the documents tendered in the evidence as all these 
documents referred above play a key role in the entire trial. I have gone through each and every 
detail of the documents received in the trial. Majority of the documents are in Arabic language, 
some  are  produced  along  with  translation  and  majority  of  the  documents  are  photocopies  or 
manually prepared computer generated lists, therefore, it is necessary to discuss the status of these 
documents. I have also gone through the objections raised by the learned counsel during the trial 
regarding the admissibility of documents but it has been observed from the record of learned trial 
court  that  all  these  objections  regarding  admissibility  of  the  documents  have  not  been  decided 
though  at  the  time  of  production  of  documents,  objections  were  raised,  however,  the  Court, 
regarding objections, observed:-- 

"Order: The objections will be decided at the time of final judgment"  

Whereas, I have gone through the judgment of learned trial Court and I could not see any findings 
in this regard therefore, it is necessary to discuss the status of these documents at the very first 
instance. 

The record tendered by the prosecution in the learned trial Court comprising of following 

14. 
kind of documents:-- 

Copies of agreements  for hiring of buildings in  Makkah Mukarama and  Madina 

i. 
Munawwara of 87 buildings referred in Arabic and English. 

ii. 

Arabic documents, reports, translations. 

iii. 

Bank record of Enjaz Bank Saudi Arabia, bank deposit slips.  

Correspondence  between  Saudi  Government  and  officials  with  Pakistani 

iv. 
authorities. 

v. 

Copies of cheques/banking instruments. 

Computerized  generated  lists  of  87  buildings,  129  buildings,  comparative  list  of 

vi. 
buildings comprising of details with rates.  

vii. 
Computer forensic report prepared on the basis of data and flash drive and one CD 
referred as EX.PW8/A1-93 which includes forensic analysis of Hajj, 2010 arrangements 
and documentations of Hajj, 2010. 

The above referred documents if put in parameters referred in Articles 72, 73, 74, 75, 78, 79 and 
80 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, whereby the, basic mode to prove the documents under 

 
 
 
the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 are as under:-- 

i. 

ii. 

By calling a person who signed or wrote the document. 

By calling a person in whose presence the document was signed or written. 

iii. 

By calling a hand writing expert. 

By  calling  a  person  acquainted  with  the  hand  writing  of  person  by  whom  the 

iv. 
document is placed to be signed or written. 

By comparing in Court the signature or writing with some admitted signatures or 

v. 
writing. 

By proof of admission by the person, who is alleged to have signed or written the 

vi. 
document that he signed or wrote it. 

These basic requirements have to be considered by the Court while admitting document even the 
concept of primary and secondary evidence is a key factor while deciding the admissibility of the 
document but in present case the documents which referred in Arabic language are photocopies 
which are not  admissible by any stretch of imagination  as they are in  foreign language and no 
translation  has  been  provided  with  majority  of  the  documents,  even  some  of  the  documents  in 
Arabic also contain English version along with the Arabic text but law remains the same in terms 
of Article 73 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, primary evidence means original document 
which has  been produced for the inspection of the Court whereas Exh.PW13/H1-339 called  as 
agreements of buildings are photocopies along with its annexure, which are in Arabic and copies 
of  the  cheques,  all  these  documents  on  which  prosecution  has  put  reliance,  are  without  the 
legitimate translation, therefore, the contents could not be read in totality, even each and every 
agreement executed between the Consulate General of Islamic Republic of Pakistan Hajj Mission 
and landlord/lessor for buildings, if seen, it reveals that the English portion does not fulfill the 
criteria  required  under  the  law  whereas  content  of  one  of  the  agreement  has  been  produced  as 
under:-- 

(Copy  attached)  having  accommodation  capacity  according 

"WHEREAS  the  First  Party  is  in  possession  of  the  building  located  at_____  (building 
name) made up of G + _______ floor, ________ rooms and bears a valid Tasreeh No._____ 
dated/  14  H. 
to 
Tasreeh/Tamteer for_____ number of Pilgrims. The Tamteer of the building was carried 
out  on.  Which  is  signed  by  both  the  parties,  and  is  to  be  read  as  integral  part  of  this 
agreement. The second Party agrees to hire the building at a total rent of SR.______; @ 
per person rent of SR______; subject to further deduction in case the building as hired does 
not accommodate to the pre-agreed capacity of Pilgrims, for accommodating its Pilgrims 
for the current Hajj seasons, which commences from 15/10/1431 H. and ceases with the 
ending  of  the  Hajj  season  on  20/01/1431  H.  In  case  the  number  of  Hujjaj  is  less  than 
Tasreeh  on  measurement,  then  lesser  number  will  be  accommodated,  while  in  case  the 
number exceeds the Tasreeh on measurement, the agreement is restricted to the number of 
Hujjaj mentioned in Tasreeh for the year 1431 and the same number will be accommodated, 
and paid. 

Building name ______ location ________ holds_____ Number of Pilgrims. Rent for the 
current Hajj 1431 H. /2009 G. season is SR.____ only, which is inclusive of services. Both 
the parties have read, undertake and agree to all of the above terms and conditions of this 
contract and carry out all of their objections and affix their signature as below. 

THE SECOND PARTY 

 THE FIRST PARTY." 

The above referred contents of English version of one of the agreements has been compared with 
each and every contract referred by the prosecution and surprisingly all agreements are in same 
manner,  its  English  versions  have  not  been  filed  even  the  documents  could  not  be  read  for  its 

 
 
 
content  purposes  details  are  only  provided  in  Arabic  whereas,  no  official  translation  duly 
prescribed  under  the  law  has  been  provided  before  the  learned  trial  Court  nor  any  person 
acquainted with such kind of knowledge has been produced before the Court, who can confirm the 
details of the agreement. 

15. 
In view of above, I am of the considered view that prosecution is under legal duty to prove 
the contents of documents in accordance with the principles of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 
wherein it is necessary to submit the primary documents on record but only photocopies have been 
tendered in evidence by PW-13 and objection was raised during the trial which was not decided. 
As far as law is concerned, a document could not be exhibited and admitted on record unless same 
has not been proved through a primary mode or through a secondary mode, in case the primary 
evidence is not available but Investigation Officers have not taken any pain to look into the matter 
with this legal angle rather they are not aware of the scheme of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 
even no secondary evidence has been tendered whereas Article 74 provides the concept of certified 
copies which are comparable with original but no such effort has been made by the prosecution. It 
has been observed from record that majority of the documents are prepared from a copy of original 
record retained by some Saudi person/owner/Mustajir in Saudi Arabia which have been given to 
the Investigation Officer and they are not admissible as no effort was made to prove the correct 
copy by evidence as no one has stated before the Court nor sworn to of its being a true copy. Even 
for the sake of arguments, if we consider copy of lease agreement to be tendered in evidence, it is 
necessary to produce the author or signatory of the document whereas not a single owner/Mustajar, 
landlord or attorney of the buildings has  been produced in  evidence to  prove the rates, details, 
capacity, nature, construction and distance of the buildings, all the required informations which 
are part of the agreements are blank except they were filled in Arabic text on the Arabic side. The 
prosecution has  not  produced 87 landlords of the buildings  to  prove the agreements  on record, 
similarly  129  agreements  of  those  buildings  which  were  hired  subsequent  to  report  referred  as 
Exh.PA  of  the  parliamentary  committee  after  removal  of  appellants  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmed  and 
Aftab-ul-Islam from their position, have also not been proved accordingly. All those documents 
referred as agreements in this case are inadmissible and could not be seen as part of evidence. 

16. 
PW-13, Muhammad Khurshid Anwar Shah, who remained posted as Deputy Secretary Hajj 
Policy from 2006 to 2011 has produced number of documents referred above, whereas the law on 
this subject is clear as any document which is not original or primary could not be tendered in 
evidence and even without the author or the witnesses, contents of the same could not be proved 
as admissible. Reliance is placed upon 2005 PCr.LJ 882 [Quetta] Nazeer Ahmad Barach v. The 
State and another) wherein it is held that:-- 

"The  documents  produced  in  evidence  by  the  prosecution  except  the  report  of  the 
Handwriting Expert, and specimen signatures of the petitioner; unless admitted in writing 
before the trial Court by the petitioner within the meaning of Article 76(c) of Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, 1984 would not dispense with the requirement of the formal proof of the 
documents by primary evidence as provided by Articles 72 and 73 of the Order. Secondary 
evidence can be admitted only on one or more conditions laid down in Article 76 of Qanun-
e-Shahadat  Order  having  been  satisfied  by  the  party  tendering  such  evidence  and; 
secondary  evidence  cannot  be  admitted  of  the  contents  of  document  without  the  non-
production  of  the  original  having  first  been  accounted  for  as  required  by  the  above-
mentioned  Article.  The  reception  of  secondary  evidence  without  objection  by  the  party 
against whom it is intended or required to be used in evidence cannot ordinarily object to 
the admission of the such evidence at any subsequent stage, subject to provision of Article 
162 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order. 

Perusal of the record of the case reveals that the documents tendered by the prosecution 
were  received  in  evidence  improperly  without  the  production  of  their  originals  and  the 
conditions  pre-requisite  for  permitting  secondary  evidence  were  also  wanting  and  mere 
consent or omission to object to the reception of inadmissible evidence cannot be treated 
as a valid and legal piece of evidence because such departure of the rule appears to have a 
substantial effect on the decision of the courts below, which if excluded might have resulted 

 
 
in varying the decision, in view of the facts and circumstances of the case, and thus; the 
judgments  impugned  herein  cannot  sustain  and;  therefore,  the  other  contentions  of  the 
parties' counsel are not attended to. The case-law cited by the petitioner's learned counsel 
are not relevant because of wrong reference." 

Similarly it is also held in 1999 PCr.LJ 1955 (Alam Zaib v. The State) that:-- 

"It  appears  that  despite  clear  directions  original  identification  parade  memo  was  not 
produced  before  the  trial  Court  and  the  case  was  decided  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence 
already available on record. It may be observed here that in order to prove a document a 
particular mode has to be adopted under the law. Reference in this regard, may be made to 
Articles 73 to 76 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 wherein it has been clearly provided 
that except in the cases covered by the Article 76 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 all 
documents must be proved by primary evidence. Needless to point out that Article 73 of 
the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  provides  that  primary  evidence  means  document  itself 
produced for the inspection of the Court. Thus, to my mind the learned Trial Court was not 
justified to take on record photo copy of the document in question and that too, without 
making a comparison with the original. Such causal approach is not appreciable.  

Likewise, in the case 2004 PCr.LJ 371 (Muhammad Arshad Naseem v. The State) it has been held 
that:-- 

"8. We have given our anxious consideration to the respective contentions of the learned 
counsel  for the parties  and have also  perused the available record with  their assistance. 
Admittedly, the application wherein, the allegation regarding Zina was leveled against the 
complainant  was  not  exhibited,  at  the  trial  whereas,  legally,  the  person  relying  on  a 
document is under obligation to prove the same. Article 72 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 
1984 (hereinafter referred to as "the Order") lays down that contents of documents may be 
proved  either  by  primary  or  by  secondary  evidence  whereas,  Article  73  of  "the  Order" 
provides that 'primary evidence' means the document itself produced for inspection of the 
Court and it is  the requirement of  Article 75 of  "the Order"  that the document must be 
proved except in the cases in which secondary evidence may be given. 

Having regard to the above provisions, it may be noted here that though documents not 
formally admitted in evidence and available on Court's record or elsewhere even, may, for 
the purpose of elucidation of certain facts, be looked into yet, the same, by no stretch of 
imagination, can be termed or regarded as "evidence" unless proved and exhibited, at the 
trial, in accordance with law. Further, since documents do not prove themselves and truth 
of  the  contents  of  the  documents  cannot  be  proved  by  merely  producing  the  same  for 
inspection  of  the  Court  within  the  purview  of  Article  2(c)(ii)  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984, therefore, the document upon which is party places its reliance must, at first, 
be placed before the Court and then be got proved by calling a witness/witnesses. In this 
view, we are fortified by the following reported judgments:-- 

(i) Abdul Qayyum v. Muhammad Rafique 2001 SCMR 1651; (ii) Muhammad Azam v. 
Muhammad Iqbal and another PLD 1984 SC 192; (iii) Fazal Muhammad v. Mst. Chohara 
and others 1992 SCMR 2182; (iv) Bishwanath v. Sachhidananad AIR 1971 SC 1949; (v) 
Om Prakash v. Unit Trust of India and others AIR 1983 Bom. 1; and (vi) Rajwati Devi v. 
Joint Director Consolidation, Government of Bihar, Patna and others AIR 1989 Patna 66. 

Thus,  the  application  in  question,  a  Photostat  copy  whereof  only  as  per  record,  was 
produced before the Magistrate at inquiry stage could not have formed basis for conviction 
of the appellant." 

Similar  view  has  also  been  taken  in  2015  YLR  2214  (Balochistan)  (The  State  v.  Muhammad 
Kaleem Bhatti) wherein it is held that:-- 

"9.  It  appears  that  at  the  trial,  a  noval  procedure  was  adopted  by  the  trial  Judge.  The 

 
 
documentary evidence from the side of the defence i.e. Ex.D/1 to Ex.D/69 had been taken 
on record, either during the suggestion to the prosecution witnesses, or during the statement 
of  the  respondent  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.  The  documents  Ex.D/1  to  Ex.D/69  are 
photocopies and without adhering to the provision of Article 76 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984 (hereinafter referred as to "the Order, 1984), the said documents were taken 
on record. The alleged documentary evidence pertain  to  the official  record of DCO/DC 
Office,  Quetta,  but  it  had  not  been  authenticated  by  calling  the  representative  of  the 
concerned department. Moreover, while bringing the aforesaid documentary evidence on 
record, no opportunity of cross-examination was provided to the prosecution to challenge 
the authenticity of the said documents which is in clear violation of Article 78 of the Order, 
1984.  The  contents  of  the  documents  are  required  to  be  proved  through  primary  and 
secondary evidence, as provided under Article 72 of the Order, 1984. The contents of the 
documents can be provided through the secondary evidence, if the conditions mentioned 
under Article 76 of the Order, 1984 are available. Reference in this context can be placed 
to the judgments reported in 2005 SCMR 152 and 2009 PCr.LJ 619. The production of the 
documents  and  proof  of  documents  are  two  different  subjects.  Documents  could  be 
produced  in  evidence  subject  to  proof  as  required  under  Article  78  of  the  Order,  1984, 
which reads as under:-- 

"78. Proof signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written document 
produced.--If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part 
by any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged 
to be in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting."  

10. The aforesaid provision provides that document can be proved by calling such person, 
in whose presence same were written and by proof of admission by the person who was 
alleged to have signed or written documents in question. 

11.  Besides,  Article  75  of  the  Order,  1984  provides  proof  of  documents  by  primary 
evidence while Article 76 of the Order, 1984 provides that secondary evidence might be 
given, if existence or contents of a document was not available. Secondary evidence cannot 
be admitted in evidence except on completion of condition laid down in Article 76 of the 
Order, 1984, as held in 2005 PCr.LJ 882." 

In view of the above referred authoritative judgments of different higher Courts, it can safely be 
concluded that entire record produced by the prosecution has not been tendered in accordance with 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  all  those  documents  which  were  tendered  in  evidence  and 
admitted  as  exhibits  for  the  purposes  of  conviction  are  not  admitted  in  accordance  with  law, 
therefore, my view is as follows:-- 

The documents produced by the prosecution during the course of trial in order to 
a) 
prove  the  accusation  have  improperly  been  admitted  in  evidence  for  want  of  original 
documents which were not produced in evidence. 

No reliance for the purposes of conviction can be placed on photostat copies of the 
b) 
documents, on the basis of which appellants were convicted and found guilty as the same 
are not admissible as not validly tendered in evidence. 

The documents whose contents have not been proved by way of its author, executor 

c) 
and witnesses of contents and executions, are not admissible. 

Foreign  documents  without 

translation  and  attestation  from  High 
d) 
Commission, Embassy of Saudi Arabia and Ministry of Foreign Affairs, are not admissible. 

legal 

Therefore, entire documentary evidence is inadmissible and cannot be relied upon for the 
purpose of conviction. 

16(sic.)  As  far  as  other  documents  are  concerned,  the  same  contain  official  correspondence  of 

 
 
Government authorities of Pakistan whereas, officials have not been produced who had signed the 
documents or who are custodians of those records in their official capacity. The precise allegations 
against  Rao  Sahkeel  Ahmed  and  Aftab-ul-Islam  Raja  are  regarding  hiring  of  87  buildings  for 
Hujjaj for Hajj 2010 which are as under:- 

1) 

2) 

3) 

4) 

5) 

Acquiring of 87 buildings against exorbitant rates, 

Misuse of authority, 

Loss caused to public exchequer, 

Benefit to the owners of the buildings, and 

Personal gain. 

The prosecution in order to prove the above referred charges has initially produced four 
witnesses to substantiate the case i.e. PW-1 Abdul Rahman put appearance on behalf of Maulana 
Muhammad  Qasim,  Chairman,  Standing  Committee,  Religious  Affairs,  National  Assembly 
Secretariat, Islamabad who has confirmed the signatures of Maulana Muhammad Qasim. PW-3 
Pirzada Syed Imran Ali Shah (MNA) (member of Standing Committee on Religious Affairs and 
Member of Review Committee Islamabad) while appearing as witness stated before the Court that 
he  along  with  Maulana  Muhammad  Qasim  (MNA)  Chairman,  Syed  Muhammad  Saleh  Shah 
(Senator), Dr. Khalid Mehmood Soomro (Senator) and Bilal Yaseen (MNA) visited Saudi Arabia 
with  regard  to  inspection  of  Hajj  arrangements  for  Hajj  2010.  He  further  stated  that  prior  to 
inspection by Review Committee, 87 buildings had already been hired by the committee headed 
by  Ex-DG  Hajj  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmed  appellant  and  majority  of  the  buildings  were  not  hired  in 
accordance with the direction, especially the distance of 2000 meters from Haram Sharif and rates 
of each building. The said witness has also referred precise statement of the allegations including 
hiring of two buildings Nukhba-I and Nukhba-II which were engaged on the basis of 50% advance 
rent in violation of previous practices of 15% advance rent. PW-3 further alleged in his statement 
that S.R. 2,600,000/- were given as commissions to Ahmed Faiz, Building Supervisor, appointed 
by DG Hajj. During the course of cross-examination PW-3 admitted that all the payments were 
made through crossed cheques to  the concerned owners and  DG  Hajj and Finance  Officer had 
authority to sign the cheques. He also admitted before the Court that ministry of Hajj had affixed 
the ceiling of a Haji for residence @ 3400/3500 Saudi Riyals, the said witness is credible to justify 
his report Exh.PA but he admits before the Court that he does not reveal the names of the owners 
of  the  buildings  on  whose  statements  he  prepared  the  report  even  the  said  witness  has  not 
summoned Ahmed Faiz nor inspected the official file. PW-3 has not stated a single word against 
appellant Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi and Aftab ul Islam in his report Exh.PA. 

The other related witness of this transaction is PW-4 Bilal Yasin (MNA) Member Hiring 
17. 
Review, Committee, who almost stated the same facts but in addition to above referred evidence 
of PW-3, he stated that first building which was inspected by them was under construction and DG 
Hajj Rao Shakeel Ahmed appellant told him that a bond was executed by the owner of the building 
that the same be got completed before the arrival of Hujjaj. PW-4 also admitted before the Court 
that he is not aware of the details of owners of 87 buildings nor provided any particulars of the 
buildings  mentioned  in  Para-11  of  the  report  neither  he  can  disclose  the  information  and 
whereabouts of those people who had disclosed these informations to him. He is even not aware 
of the writer/author of the report Exh.PA. He also admitted before the Court that not a single word 
has been stated against Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi appellant. The fourth witness regarding the said 
report is PW-21 Muhammad Saleh Shah (Senator) who while appearing before the Court stated 
that he was member of Hiring Review Committee and he identifies his signatures on Exh.PA as 
Exh.PA/1. He admitted before the Court that committee has not recorded statement of witnesses 
prior to completion of inquiry report Exh.PA even no statement of any owner or Mustajir of the 
building available in Saudi Arabia was recorded by them, he only stated that the entire inquiry was 
made orally/verbally and he does not remember the name of all those persons who were associated 
during the course of inquiry, however he admitted before the Court that no complaint was made 
against appellants Aftab-ul-Islam Raja and Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi. 

 
 
 
The above referred discussion clearly demonstrates the status of those four witnesses who 
18. 
have been produced by the prosecution in order to prove the contents of Exh.PA, which is the basic 
source of instant criminal case, are not tenable in the eyes of law and they have failed to prove 
anything against the appellants. I am of the considered view that two MNAs and two Senators of 
the  Hiring  Committee  who  visited  Saudi  Arabia  during  Hajj  season  in  2010,  were  not  able  to 
collect the information which is required to prove the instant criminal case. From the bare perusal 
of  Exh.PA  it  can  safely  be  assumed  that  87  buildings  were  not  hired  in  accordance  with  the 
guidelines or parameters of Hajj Policy, 2010 but the fact remains the same that all these buildings 
were hired prior to Hajj Policy, 2010 but the question raised before this Court is whether Exh.PA 
is an admissible document under the law to be treated as source document for the prosecution of 
appellants. In my humble view the author of Exh.PA has not recorded any witness nor received 
any document to substantiate the allegations referred in  Exh.PA, therefore, the statement of all 
these four witnesses PW-1, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-21 can merely be considered as story of journey 
to Saudi Arabia and nothing more, whereas prosecution is under legal obligation to prove those 
allegations  through  confidence  inspiring  evidence  against  the  appellants,  even  the  author  of 
Exh.PA has not been produced, therefore, it could not be appreciated in terms of the Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, 1984, when the author of a document has not been produced and even the persons 
who have signed the report have not admitted before the Court that they ever recorded statement 
of  any  of  the  witness  or  received  any  document  during  the  course  of  their  inquiry,  Exh.PA, 
therefore the document Exh.PA has no legal worth in the eyes of law except to move the hierarchy 
of investigation agency, therefore, I will not consider Exh.PA as admissible in evidence unless the 
contents of the same have been corroborated by its author/signatories but at this stage entire report 
Exh.PA bears no legal meaning. 

Acquiring and utilization of buildings in Saudi Arabia 

19. 
As per charges framed by learned trial Court, the principal allegation against Rao Shakeel 
Ahmad  appellant  and  Aftab-ul-Islam  Raja,  who  are  former  D.G.  Hajj  and  Joint  Secretary  Hajj 
Ministry of Religious Affairs, respectively, being Civil Servants, and public officials, is that they 
have hired 87 buildings in violation of Hajj Policy 2010, some of the buildings were not completed 
at  the  time  of  hiring  and  in  majority  of  the  cases  they  have  paid  advance  amount  contrary  to 
previous practices, most of the hired buildings were substandard and when the hired buildings have 
been compared with the subsequent agreements of 129 buildings, it revealed that millions of Saudi 
Riyal have been paid in extra which caused a huge loss to State exchequer. 

20. 
I have gone through each and every charge whereby charges Nos. 1 to 5, 7 and 9 are directly 
related to both these public officials, however the allegations, in strict sense, relate to violation of 
hiring  guidelines  and  Hajj  Policy.  The  prosecution,  in  order  to  prove  these  allegations,  has 
produced 11 witnesses appeared as PW-13 Muhammad Khurshid Ahmad, PW-14 Syed Sultan Ali 
Shah  (acting  DG),  PW-15  Agha  Sarwar  Raza  Qazilbash  (Secretary),  PW-28  Umar  Ali  Khan 
Sherazi (Ambassador), PW-36 Umar Farooq Khokhar (D.D. Hajj), PW-42 Muhammad Samiullah 
(Assistant  Accounts  Officer),  PW-43  Muhammad  Aslam  (Room  Attendant),  PW-45  Shakir 
Hussain (Arabic Desk), PW-48 Muhammad Farooq (Investor-Private Person) PW-51 Naimat Ali 
(Investigation Officer) and PW-52 Khalid Rasool (Investigation Officer). The star witness in this 
case is PW-15 Agha Sarwar Raza Qazilbash who remained posted as Secretary Religious Affairs 
from  07.03.2009  till  20.12.2010  in  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs,  Government  of  Pakistan.  He 
initially  prepared  the  draft  of  Hajj  Policy,  2010,  allocation  of  Hajj  quota  for  the  Hajj  group 
organizers, and advised the government in respect of hiring of the buildings for Hujjaj Karaam. 
He stated in his evidence that accused Rao Shakeel Ahmad, D.G. Hajj in Jeddah, was given a task 
to hire buildings for 75,000 Hujjaj Karaam and during the said process Hiring Review Committee, 
approved  by  the  cabinet,  was  sent  to  Saudi  Arabia  for  inspection  purposes  whereby  the  said 
committee was responsible to inspect the quality and quantity of the buildings and to confirm as 
to whether the buildings were hired in accordance with the policy laid down by the government. 
PW-15 further stated before the Court that the parameters approved by the cabinet for 2010 Hajj 
include the maximum ceiling per Haji to be fixed as SR-3600/- and distance of each building to be 
2,000  meters  from  Harram  Shareef.  He  further  stated  before  the  Court  that  Hiring  Review 
Committee was comprising of Moulana Qasim (MNA), Senator Saleh Shah, Bilal Yasin (MNA), 

 
 
Pirzada  Syed  Imran  Shah  (MNA)  and  Dr.  Khalid  Soomro  (Senator),  who  have  submitted  their 
report Exh.PA whereby he initiated the summary to the Prime Minister of Pakistan to recall D.G. 
Hajj, Rao Shakkeel Ahmad from Saudi Arabia. 

21. 
PW-15,  Agha  Sarwar  Raza  Qazilbash  further  stated  before  the  Court  that  Rao  Shakeel 
Ahmad  procured  the  accommodation  for  29,000  Hujjaj  Karaam  but  capacity  of  23,000  Hujjaj 
Karaam was approved by Moassassa, South Asia, and the remaining 52,000 Hujjaj Karaam were 
not accommodated, therefore, he left Pakistan to oversee the hiring of buildings and visited Saudi 
Arabia on 29  and 30 September 2010, but  other members of  review committee failed to reach 
Saudi Arabia whereby Syed Sultan Ali Shah, Director Hajj Camp, was required to act as D.G. Hajj 
at Jeddah and Mr. Zaidi, Director Hajj Camp Lahore, was also deputed in the said team headed by 
him  and  after  taking  oath  from  the  newly  hired  officials  for  hiring  of  buildings,  published  an 
advertisement in local newspaper, PW-15 further stated before the Court that four (4) buildings 
namely  Nukhba-I,  Nukhba-II  Burj-ul-Harram  and  4-Towers  Building  owned  by  Mr.  Hussain 
Bihari and whose Mustajjar was Faiz-ul-Harsi, were situated within the radius of 1500 meters from 
Harram Shareef whereas Muhammad Farooq was the agent of these buildings and he contacted 
the agent for handing over of possession of these buildings but the agent has refused to hand over 
the  Possession  of  buildings  on  the  ground  that  extra  advance  money  to  be  paid  in  capacity  of 
accommodation, as a result of said dispute, possession could not be taken over whereas the advance 
of 6.2 million Saudi Riyal was already paid by Rao Shakeel Ahmad, Ex-D.G. Hajj, which was 
50% of the principal amount whereas the Saudi Government has fixed the rules of 30% Advance 
at  the  time  of  hiring  of  building  and  30%  at  the  time  of  arrival  of  Hujjaj  Karaam  but  the  said 
practice  had  been  violated  in  this  case  by  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmed,  accused.  PW-15  further  stated 
before the Court that they have recovered 5.2 million Saudi Riyal from Muhammad Farooq (agent) 
and remaining 1.3 million Saudi Riyal was to be recovered till his departure from Saudi Arabia. 

22. 
PW-15 also stated before the Court that Rao Shakeel Ahmed accused, against the building 
Burj-ul-Harram, has paid 3.4 million Saudi Riyal in advance which is 10% and due to the said 
reason he could not  get  possession of the building. 4-Towers Building was under construction, 
Rao Shakeel Ahmad and his committee has hired the buildings @ 3,500 Saudi Riyal per Haji and 
due to negotiations of PW.15 the rates were reduced from 3,500 to 3,300 Saudi Riyal per Haji. He 
further stated that after his negotiations, the transport issue was also resolved after payment of 65 
Saudi Riyal per Haji and he hired 129 buildings with the help of his committee and he negotiated 
on 11 buildings and due to reduction in rates, saved eight crore rupees. During the course of cross-
examination he admitted before the Court that advance of 7 out of 11 buildings was not paid by 
Rao Shakeel Ahmad and the Mustajjar handed over a cheque as guarantee of 5 million Saudi Riyal 
to Hajj Mission if he failed to complete the construction within stipulated period, resultantly Hajj 
Mission would he able to get 5 million Saudi Riyal as fine against the under construction building, 
he also admitted before the Court that 112 out of 129 buildings hired by PW-15 were beyond the 
limits of 3,000 meters from Harram Shareef, hence, it has been concluded that 2nd committee has 
also violated Hajj Policy and they are also liable for legal action but no such action has been taken 
against them by the FIA authorities. 

From the perusal  of evidence referred above it has been proved that the buildings were 
23. 
hired  in  two  phases,  initially  appellant  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad  hired  87  buildings  and  during  the 
second phase 129 buildings were hired by PW-15 but the most important factor comes on record 
that Acting D.G. Hajj under the supervision of PW-15 (Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs) 
has not followed the Hajj Policy 2010 in letter and spirit, he on the other hand conceded before the 
Court that 112 buildings hired by him were beyond the distance of 3,000 meters from Harram Pak. 
In addition, PW-15 failed to utter even a single word through which any comparison can be made 
or any saving can be proved. He himself admitted the violations of Hajj Policy but volunteered 
that he has got permission from Ministry of Religious Affairs for relaxation to hire any building 
beyond 3,000 meters of distance from Harram Shareef, however he could not produce any such 
document on record, even otherwise the Hajj Policy was framed by the cabinet, therefore, Ministry 
of Religious Affairs has no role to give any permission for the rectification of Hajj Policy under 
the Rules of Business, 1973. 

 
 
PW-14 Syed Sultan Ali Shah, who was appointed as Acting DG Hajj at Jeddah remained 
24. 
in Saudi Arabia after the removal of Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellant, he was sent to Jeddah before 
start of Hajj operations. He stated before the Court that he was appointed as acting DG Hajj along 
with Assistant Accounts Officer for hiring of the buildings for remaining 50,000 Hujjaj Karaam 
under the supervision of PW-15 Agha Sarwar Raza Qazilbash, he stated before the Court that he 
along  with  other  members  hired  the  buildings  along  with  transport  facility  at  minimum  rate 
whereby the rent was assessed at the rate of Saudi Riyal 2,250/- per person comparatively low to 
the previous committee's rate of Saudi Riyal 3,493/- per person. He further stated before the Court 
that 11 buildings were already hired by the previous D.G. Hajj, Rao Shakeel Ahmad and PW-14 
consulted  with  owners/Mustajars  and  saved  Saudi  Riyal  325,000/-  by  reducing  the  high  rates. 
During the course of cross-examination he admitted before the Court that the buildings he hired 
are beyond 2,000 meters from Haram Pak and no buildings, at that time, were available within 
2000 meters range. He further admitted before the Court that four buildings hired by the previous 
Hiring Committee were not handed over to the pilgrims as the owners/Mustajars refused to deliver 
the  possession  and  in  this  regard  legal  proceedings  are  pending  in  Saudi  Arabia.  He  further 
admitted  before  the  Court  that  other  Hujjaj  Karaam  were  settled  in  buildings  of  Phase-1  and 
Samiullah PW -42 was the signatory of the agreements of Phase-1. He also admits before the Court 
that he issued crossed-cheques to the owners/Mustajars and he and PW-15 could not become the 
signatory  of  any  of  the  lease  agreement  due  to  the  fact  that  both  were  on  Hajj  Visa.  He  also 
admitted before the Court that Samiullah PW-42 was a member of Hiring Committee as Secretary 
but he has not been arrayed as accused in this case. The evidence of PW-14 being a star witness is 
relevant to entire controversy, the said witness has given certain reasons which are apparent on 
record through which one can understands the situation in Makkah Mukarma but the fact remains 
the same that PW 14 is not a signatory of any document, hence, his testimony has been considered 
as hearsay, especially when he admitted before the Court that he was on Hajj Visa along with PW-
15 the Secretary Agha Sarwar Raza Qazilbash. Even both these witnesses have not signed any 
document nor produced any documentary evidence through which one can assume their presence 
to verify the facts narrated by them. The difference of rent, savings of Saudi Riyals and comparison 
of buildings could not be assumed on the basis of statement of PW-14 and PW-15 as they have not 
produced any documentary proof nor even prosecution has produced any respondent witness in 
this regard. 

The other star witness referred by the prosecution is PW-36 Mr. Umar Farooq Khokhar, 
25. 
Deputy Director Hajj Madina Munawwara, who assumed the charge on 28.05.2010 and remained 
posted  in  Madina  Munawwara  during  the  Hajj  2010.  He  stated  before  the  Court  that  prior  to 
assumption of his charge, the hiring process was already initiated whereby different groups had 
submitted their applications and he also stated that majority of the groups were not registered with 
Moassassa. He has produced a letter Exh.PW-36/A and confirmed his signature. He stated before 
the Court that Rao Shakeel  Ahmad told him that Arq Group was providing 100% buildings in 
central area (Markizia), and Manazli Group was providing 50% of buildings in the Markizia, and 
their performance is A-Plus however he admitted before the Court that the rates of rent were not 
discussed.  He  stated  before  the  Court  that  minutes  of  the  Hiring  Committee  Exh.PW-36/B  has 
been signed by  him on  02.06.2010 and he produced documents  Exh.PW-36/C1-37. During the 
course of cross-examination he admitted before the Court that Saudi Riyal 500/- rate was fixed per 
head in the advertisement. He also admitted before the Court that he did not make any complaint 
in writing to the high ups, however he has been confronted with the statement as to whether he 
referred any oral complaint but the said fact has not been recorded in his statement, confronted as 
Exh.PW-36/DA.  He  further  admits  before  the  Court  that  he  did  not  make  any  complaint  to 
Secretary Ministry of Religious Affairs regarding the hiring process, however he admitted that the 
buildings of the Arq. Group are situated adjacent to Masjid-e-Nabvi and all the Hujjaj Karaam are 
accommodated  by  this  group  in  Markizia  and  in  last,  he  admitted  that  the  ceiling  for  Madina 
Munawara was fixed @ S.R. 500 per Haji in Hajj Policy 2010. In view of above answers in the 
statement of witness, it could safely be concluded that the said witness has not alleged any illegality 
on the part of appellants, even the terms of Hajj Policy have been complied as stated by the said 
witness. 

26. 

PW-42,  Muhammad  Samiullah,  Assistant  Accounts  Officer  (AAO)  appointed  in  the 

 
 
Directorate General of Jeddah, who issued cheques after the recommendation of Hiring Committee 
comprising of Aftab-ul-Islam Raja and Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellants, he sent the cheques to PW-
45 Mr. Shakir (Arabic Desk) for onward delivery to the owners/Mustajars of the buildings. He 
stated before the Court that agreements of three buildings namely Nukhba-I, Nukhba-II and Burj-
ul-Haram  were  cancelled  at  the  instructions  of  PW-14  Syed  Sultan  Ali  Shah  acting  DG  Hajj, 
whereby  the  payment  of  Saudi  Riyal  10,114,200/-  was  made.  Amount  of  S.R.520,000/-  was 
returned and the remaining amount was outstanding. He further stated before the Court that one 
building with 4-Towers was hired by the Joint Hiring Committee during the tenure of Rao Shakeel 
Ahmad appellant @S.R.3500/- per Haji for capacity of 5,000 Hujjaj Karaam, whereby the same 
building was hired by the acting DG Hajj, PW-14 and Secretary Ministry of Religious Affairs PW-
15 @ S.R.3455/- per Haji. He also admitted before the Court that Saudi government, Ministry of 
Religious  Affairs  Saudia  directed  the  Mustajjars  of  these  buildings  to  return  the  amount  to 
Government of Pakistan, whereby the owners/Mustajars of Nukhba-I and Nukhba-II returned the 
amount of S.R. 52,00,000/- out of S.R. 65,07,000/-. The owners/Mustajars, despite admitting in 
their  undertakings  to  payback  the  remaining  amount,  have  not  returned  the  same  till  now.  He 
further stated before the Court that Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellant sent cheque in Aljazira Bank for 
encashment in order to send the amount to Pakistan through Riaz Ahmad (Cashier), Abdul Rashid 
(Messenger),  Muhammad  Aslam  (Cashier)  and  Yasin  (Driver).  The  amount  was  sent  through 
Enjaz  Bank  in  Pakistan,  whereby  Riaz  Ahmad  (Messenger)  sent  S.R.62,000/-,  Abdul  Rashid 
(Messenger) sent S.R. 88,000/- plus S.R. 10,000/-, Muhammad Aslam (Cashier) S.R. 10,000/- and 
Yasin (Driver) sent S.R. 6,000/- and the total amount sent to Pakistan was S.R. 1,76,000/-. He 
further  stated  before  the  Court  that  Muhammad  Mushtaq  (Steno-typist)  informed  him  that 
S.R.25,000/- was also sent by Rao Shakeel Ahmad to his relatives in Pakistan. The witness has 
also produced the receipt Mark-PW-1.2/1-10 which was already placed on record and same has no 
evidentiary value in the eyes of law. He further admitted before the Court that acting DG Hajj PW-
14 and Director Hajj were on seasonal Hajj Visa and they were not eligible for aqama hence they 
could not sign any document, whereas PW-42 is the only authority in Makkah and Jeddah having 
aqama, therefore, he signed the agreements as acting DG Hajj. He admitted before the Court that 
owners/Mustajars have given their undertakings for the process of registration, 10 hired buildings 
were beyond the limits of 2,000 meters from Harram Pak. He also stated before the Court that 
buildings Nos.4012 to 4015 were in tower shape and the same were under construction, however, 
those  were  completed  prior  to  arrival  of  Hujjaj  Karaam  and  5,500  Hujjaj  Karaam  were 
accommodated in these buildings. He further stated that 53 out of 81 buildings were having the 
capacity  of less  than 200 Hujjaj  Karaam  and the said  buildings  are not  in  accordance  with  the 
guidelines of Hajj Policy 2010. He further stated that the appellants have paid the amount of more 
than 30% to the owners/Mustajars of the 11 buildings in contravention of the guidelines and rules 
whereas  50%  payment  was  made  to  owners/Mustajars  of  Nukhba-I  and  Nukhba-II  while  the 
owner/Mustajar of Burj-ul-Haram was approximately paid 30%, all these practices are inconsistent 
with  Hajj Policy 2010.  PW-42 has  handed over a letter (Exh.PW-42/A/1-17) comprising of  all 
these details to the FIA, whereas the appellants have raised objection on the submission of the said 
documents. However, trial Court has not decided the same and left it undecided. In order to decide 
the veracity of Exh.PW-42/A1-17, I have gone through each and every document in detail whereas 
during  the  examination  of  all  these  documents  it  has  been  revealed  that  the  entire  record  is  as 
follows:- 

i. 

ii. 

Copy of personal file of Mr. Ahmad Fiaz and Muhammad Shafi 

Letter regarding compulsory due 

Letter regarding total 212 hired buildings along with its rent and accommodation 

iii. 
charges at Makkah Mukarma by ex-DG Hajj 

iv. 

Delegation visit for Hajj 2009 

v. 

Letter by ADG regarding application by Al-Amir Bangar bin Khalid 

vi.  Ministry  letter  dated  03.11.2010  regarding  application  by  Al-Amir  Bangar  bin 
Khalid 

 
 
vii. 

Correspondence of ministry for hiring of accommodation for Hajj 2010 

viii.  Copy of personal file of ex-DG 

ix. 

Copies relating to hiring of transport for Hujjaj Karaam (127 pages) 

x. 

Files relating to hiring of 212 buildings at Makkah Mukarma 

xi. 

Copy of personal file of Mr. Muhammad Usman Najdi, Legal Consultant. 

It  has  been  observed  from  the  perusal  of  above  mentioned  documents  that  all  these 
documents have been received and considered by the trial Court in violation of Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, 1984, on the following reasons:- 

a) 

All those documents are photocopies 

Majority  of  the  documents  are  in  Arabic  and  not  translated  from  any  official 

b) 
translator 

Documents have not been attested in accordance with the provisions of Qanun-e-

c) 
Shahadat Order, 1984 

Majority of the documents are from foreign jurisdiction which were not attested, 
d) 
verified through Saudi Government or Ministry of Foreign Affairs rather in order to fulfill 
the requirement, one stamp of green colour of Consulate General of Pakistan in Jeddah was 
embossed on each document, which is not in accordance with law. 

e) 
Official  record  keeper  or  author  of  documents  have  not  been  produced  and  no 
witness  has  been  produced  who  can  verify  the  contents  of  any  documents  of  the  hired 
buildings especially the owners/Mustajars of the buildings or their witnesses of agreements 
have not been produced to prove the contents and execution of the documents. 

f) 
PW-42 admits that the original record of Exh.PW-42/A/1-70 is not available in the 
Court and there is no certificate on record through which it can be stated that the record is 
copy of the original. 

In a nutshell, all the documents tendered by the PW-42 are inadmissible and could not be taken 
into consideration for any purposes as these documents not qualify the test of primary as well as 
secondary evidence under Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984. 

27. 
PW-42 was cross-examined by the appellant whereby he admitted that it is not his job to 
measure  the  distance  in  between  Haram  Pak  and  the  hired  buildings  nor  he  has  any  concern 
regarding the capacity and quality of the buildings. He even did not measure the distance between 
Haram Pak and the buildings. He also admitted before the Court that at the time of execution of 
contract of lease, a minimum 30% has to be paid or otherwise a bank guarantee of the amount in 
local  bank  of  Saudi  Arabia  has  to  be  furnished  in  favour  of  owners/Mustajars  and  the  bank 
guarantee can only be issued against a hard cash. He also admitted before the Court that during the 
period of posting of Rao Shakeel Ahmad no bank guarantee for remaining amount was given to 
the owners by the Government of Pakistan and PW-42 is the co-signatory of Directorate Account 
with  appellant  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad  and  all  the  cheques  issued  by  the  Hiring  Committee  were 
crossed-cheques and the amount given through crossed-cheques was transferred into the account 
of account holders/owners/Mustajars. PW-42 has also admitted before the Court that Rao Shakeel 
Ahmad  has  transferred  the  amount  through  Enjaz  Bank  in  Pakistan  which  includes  the  salary, 
allowances  and  transfer  grant  of  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad,  he  further  stated  that  the  appellant  has 
obtained loan of S.R.100,000/- from Aljazira Bank. 

PW-42 has also admitted before the Court that owner Faaiz Ahmad Alharsi has given an 
28. 
undertaking to Hajj Mission that if he failed to complete the construction of hired buildings he 
would  pay  S.R.  five  million  as  fine  and  buildings  Nos.4012  to  4015  were  hired  at  the  rate  of 

 
 
S.R.3,450/- per Haji without transport facility by the new Hiring Committee whereas the same 
buildings  were  hired  by  accused/appellant  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad  at  S.R.3,500/-  per  Haji  with 
transport facility for 5,000 Hajis. 

29. 
During  the  course  of  cross-examination  PW-42  further  admitted  before  the  Court  that 
owners/Mustajars  of  Nukhba-I  and  Nukhb-II  have  issued  undertakings  Exh.PW-42/DA  which 
were signed by PW-42 and the matter regarding Burjul Haram building was also taken up with 
Saudi  Government  whereby  the  Saudi  Government  has  decided  that  owner/Mustajar  of  Burjul 
Haram was bound to repay the entire amount to the Hajj Mission. He further admitted before the 
Court that appellant Rao Shakeel Ahmad had made correspondence with Government of Pakistan 
in respect of guidelines regarding hiring of buildings which were only instructions and guidelines. 

30. 
Keeping in view the testimony of PW-42, I am of the view that this star witness has not 
uttered anything against the appellants rather the documentary evidence submitted by him has been 
declared inadmissible, however he has acknowledged the nature of his job which does not include 
the  verification  of  buildings,  quality,  quantity  and  distance  of  the  buildings  from  Harram  Pak, 
therefore, his entire testimony is irrelevant/hearsay evidence which could not be verified through 
any independent source. 

31. 
PW-45 Shakir Hussain, Messenger Arabic Desk has also been produced by the prosecution, 
who  was  working  as  Messenger  in  the  Hajj  Mission  Makkah  Mukarma  for  6  years,  and  was 
appointed with Khudamul Hujjaj in Makkah Mukarma and Madina Munawwara, but later on he 
was  posted  at  Arabic  Desk  and  his  official  duty  relates  to  correspondence  in  between  Hujjaj 
Karaam, Mualmin Makatib and Moassassa South Asia. He stated before the Court that he was not 
summoned to perform his duty in the process of hiring of buildings but only to deliver the cheques 
to the owners/Mustajars and he stops the delivery of the cheques if any deficiency is observed in 
the papers. He has produced Exh.PW-45/1-9, a list of hired buildings at Makkah Mukarma which 
has no evidentiary value in the eyes of law and the same does not qualify the criteria discussed 
above in context of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984, however he stated the same details regarding 
Nukhba-I,  Nukhba-II  and  Burjul  Haram  and  almost  stated  the  same  details  of  rate  of  hired 
buildings per Haji i.e., S.R.3600/-, however during the course of cross-examination he admitted 
that the record was not available on the basis of which he has prepared the list. He admitted before 
the Court that all the cheques issued in the names of owners/Mustajars, were only payable to payee 
and  he  has  not  witnessed  any  agreement  nor  has  any  duty  or  role  in  the  process  of  hiring  of 
buildings and stated that the case for recovery of amount paid to the owners of Burjul Haram was 
filed in the Court of Governor, Saudi Arabia and the same is pending. In view of above referred 
statement, the status  of PW-45 is  just  as of a Messenger who  cannot  extend any benefit to  the 
prosecution, as he is not a witness of any event by virtue of his official position, he is just a delivery 
man conveying the cheques to the owners concerned which were encashed through their banks. 

PW-48 Muhammad Farooq, Investor/private person was produced by the prosecution, who 
32. 
is running a hotel business in Saudi Arabia, he has given his details regarding hiring of different 
buildings by the appellants and also provided the details of Ahmad Faiz accused, whereby he, on 
the  basis  of  some  statements  made  by  Ahmad  Faiz,  has  leveled  certain  allegations  against  the 
appellants in which he stated before the Court that he has to pay an amount to highups including 
Allama Hamid Saeed Kazmi, Minister for Religious Affairs of Pakistan, Rao Shakeel Ahmad DG 
Hajj and Aftab-ul-Islam Raja accused, however, he stated before the Court that he refused to work 
with Ahmad Faiz and submitted details in his affidavit Exh.PW-48/A against Ahmad Faiz which 
was actually in style of a complaint and available-on record but the status of the said affidavit has 
not been decided by the trial Court although an objection was raised by the appellants that the said 
affidavit is not admissible in terms of Article 140 of Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 1984, however, 
during the course of cross examination he admitted before the Court that he has no license to deal 
with the Hajj Mission for leasing out of buildings in Hajj 2010, he was not a marginal witness of 
any agreement nor he was party to any agreement, neither he has any relationship with Nukhba-I 
and Nukhba-II and all of the payments made by the Hajj Mission was through crossed cheques in 
the name of owners/Mustajars and he has no proof against Ahmad Faiz and he is not aware that 
Umar Ibrahim Hakmi, the owner of the building, has given an undertaking to the Hajj Mission for 

 
 
return of entire amount of S.R.650,000/-. The status of PW-48 is of a private person, who has no 
relationship with the entire case and who is not a witness to any occurrence, event or document 
nor he has any relationship with the owners/Mustajars of the buildings, despite the fact that he 
himself was working as a businessman in Saudi Arabia for the last 22 years but could not succeed 
to get the buildings required by the Hajj Mission and in this context he has recorded his statement 
rather  submitted  affidavit  Exh.PW-48/A,  which  has  no  evidentiary  value  in  the  eyes  of  law, 
therefore, his testimony is hereby discarded having no effect in this case. 

33. 
Similarly, prosecution has produced Muhammad Aslam PW-43, Room Attendant, of the 
Pakistan Hajj Mission, who was working with Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellant, stated before the 
Court that it was his duty to measure the distance of hired buildings and during the said process 
Ahmad Faiz remained with him as representative of Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi, Minister for Hajj. 
He  further  stated  that  appellant  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad  directed  him  to  measure  the  buildings  in 
presence of Ahmad Faiz and no measurement was made regarding 43 out of 87 buildings. He has 
submitted the list Exh. PW-43/A/1-6 which has a similar status as of document and was prepared 
through computer data which in fact is a printout and the same was not verified and confirmed 
through any documentary  evidence through which the details  could  be verified in  any manner, 
therefore, the statement and evidence of PW-43 is discarded having no effect in the instant case. 

34. 
In last, PW-51 Ch. Naimat Ali, Investigation Officer, was produced by the prosecution who 
stated the details  of entire case before the Court, however, he has admitted the following facts 
that:- 

i. 

He did not visit Saudi Arabia in connection to investigation of this case. 

All  the  recovery  memos  were  prepared  by  him  in  Islamabad  after  receiving  the 

ii. 
documents from Ministry of Religious Affairs. 

He did  not  receive any  document from  Hiring Review Committee of parliament 

iii. 
while receiving the report Exh.PA nor he recorded any witness of Exh.PA. 

Hajj Policy for the year 2010 was approved by the cabinet on 10.05.2010 and same 

iv. 
was announced on 02/03.06.2010. 

Decision of the majority of Hiring Committee has to prevail regarding selection of 

v. 
buildings as per Hajj Policy 2010. 

Hiring Review Committee was consisting of eight members who did not visit Saudi 

vi. 
Arabia except 4 personnel. 

vii.  He did not know as to when Hajj Policy 2010 was communicated to Hajj Mission 
in Saudi Arabia. 

viii.  Exh.PW-13/D/1-32 dated 04.02.2010 contains the guidelines provided by Ministry 
of Religious Affairs to DG Hajj whereby DG Hajj was Chairman of Spotting Committee 
who can only select, inspect and determine the rent of the buildings. 

As per policy, final approval regarding hiring of buildings can only be given by the 

ix. 
panel constituted in Pakistan. 

The minimum capacity of each building was relaxed due to scarcity of buildings in 

x. 
vicinity of Harram Pak. 

As per Hajj Policy 2010, maximum rent for accommodation in Makkah Mukarma 

xi. 
was S.R. 3600/- per Haji and maximum distance was 2000 meters. 

PW-51 relied upon the statement of Agha Sarwar Raza Qazilbash, Syed Sultan Ali Shah and Syed 
Khurshid  Hassan  Shah,  Deputy  Secretary,  to  form  his  opinion  regarding  the  buildings  hired  at 
exorbitant rates. He admits that the procedure for hiring of buildings in Makkah Mukarma and 

 
 
Madina Munawwara is different and it was settled that rate of 8 days cycle per Haji in Madina 
Munawwara is S.R. 500/- as referred in the advertisement. The offer for hiring of buildings from 
Manazil Company, Messrs Arq Group and Messrs Manazli al-Mukhtara in Madina Munawwara 
were directly submitted to Secretary Ministry of Hajj, Islamabad. He cannot enlighten the original 
document Exh.PA, not prepared the recovery memo of letter Exh.PA nor provided the information 
regarding  the  translated  documents  of  556  bidders  for  buildings  in  Makkah  Mukarma. 
Furthermore, he has not investigated the matter regarding preparation of list as he has not visited 
Saudi Arabia, he is not aware of the original documents of Exh.PW-13/E/1-28, list of 87 buildings 
hired by Rao Shakeel Ahmad, he cannot understand the Arabic language whereas English portion 
Exh. PW-13/H1 is incomplete with blank columns, he admits that Exh.PW-13/H/102, 103, 104, 
105, 109, 110, 111, 112, 116, 117, 119, 120, 121, 127, 128, 129, 167, 168, 169, 170, 173, 174, 
178, 181, 182, 185, 186, 190, 191, 192, 196, 199, 200, 206, 207, 209, 210, 270, 277, 278, 279, 
280, 281, 284, 285, 287, 290, 291, 293, 294, 295, 299, 300 and 303 are the documents in Arabic 
language and the same have not been translated and that he cannot interpret the contents of the 
documents as he does not know the Arabic language. He does not know the status of Sharai Wakeel 
and what is meant by Sharai Wakeel. He formed his opinion mentioned in the interim investigation 
report dated 03.01.2011 and on the basis of photocopies provided by Ministry of Religious Affairs 
which were prepared and signed in Saudi Arabia. 

35. 
Adding  more  to  the  preceding  position,  he  does  not  join  all  those  individuals  who  are 
authors of the documents which are collected by him during the investigation. He admits that his 
information is not first hand. He admitted that there was nothing in the inquiry report of Abdul 
Jaleel  Khan  AD  against  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  appellant,  nor  a  single  word  in  the  Hiring 
Review Committee Exh.PA, neither Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi was nominated in the FIR with any 
role. No forged document is available on record which can be attributed to Syed Hamid Saeed 
Kazmi. He further admitted that Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi has not misappropriated any amount, 
no official or private passport was issued to Ahmad Faiz on the recommendation of Syed Hamid 
Saeed  Kazmi  appellant.  The  recommendations  for  issuance  of  passport  to  Ahmad  Faiz  by  the 
Minister were canceled/withdrawn vide dated 03.09.2010 by the DG Hajj Jeddah with the approval 
of Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi appellant. There was no specific order of Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi 
for appointment of Ahmad Faiz as Building Supervisor. He has also admitted before the Court that 
it is correctly recorded in the report under section 173, Cr.P.C. dated 18.01.2012 that no evidence 
is available regarding criminal proceeds to connect it with income or assets of Syed Hamid Saeed 
Kazmi appellant nor there is any evidence available on record regarding receipt of bribe/kickbacks 
by Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi. 

The above referred evidence/statement of PW-13 PW-14, PW-15, PW-28, PW-36, PW-42, 
36. 
PW-43,  PW-45,  PW-48,  and  PW-51  has  brought  me  to  an  irresistible  conclusion  that  the 
prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  discharge  the  onus  for  hiring,  acquiring  and  utilization  of 
buildings in Saudi Arabia on exorbitant rates, receiving of kickbacks or any violation of law, rather 
the element of mismanagement is apparent from record even it is also established from record that 
guidelines for hiring of buildings issued by Ministry of Religious Affairs and Hajj Policy 2010 
conveyed on 2nd or 3rd June, 2010, have been violated but the fact remains the same that there are 
three  committees  constituted  for  the  purpose  of  hiring  of  buildings  which  include  a  Spotting 
Committee,  Hiring  Committee  and  Hiring  Review  Committee  but  surprisingly  all  the  three 
committees have not performed their duties in accordance with the terms of Hajj Policy 2010 rather 
the Hiring Committee which has been discussed in the initial portion of the judgment confers that 
the members of Hiring Committee under Hajj Policy 2010 are only sitting in Islamabad, Pakistan, 
wherefrom  they  can  give  their  approval  without  having  real  inspection  of  the  buildings  even 
otherwise the technical members of the committee i.e. the engineers, who were required for the 
purposes of inspection, capacity, distance and rates have never been sent to Saudi Arabia for the 
said function and Secretary Ministry of Religious Affairs PW-15, who was the head of the Hiring 
Committee, has not implemented the terms and conditions of Hajj Policy 2010 as prescribed by 
the Rules of Business, 1973. In essence, the entire mechanism evolved by the Hajj Policy 2010 
has been jeopardized, especially 87 buildings were hired on the recommendations and the consent 
of Ministry of Religious Affairs and on the basis of guidelines issued in February 2010, hence, it 
can safely be concluded that both the documents i.e. Guidelines for Hiring of Buildings 2010 and 

 
 
Hajj Policy 2010, have not been applied by the head of the Ministry under the law and the decision 
of the cabinet can only be implemented by the Secretary under the Rules of Business, 1973, even 
the Secretary has not verified the contents on the basis of any technical evaluation before the Court 
rather  based  his  point  of  view  and  opinion  on  the  basis  of  hearsay  evidence  and  testimonies, 
therefore, the charges of hiring of buildings in violation of any Hajj Policy or the guidelines, have 
not been substantiated even the entire documentary evidence collected by the prosecution is not 
admissible by any stretch of imagination and in last, the Investigation Officer admitted that they 
could not collect any evidence through which they can prove the alleged crime rather they have 
collected  the  documents  while  sitting  in  Pakistan  without  confirmation  of  authors,  witnesses, 
executants and translators of the documents, which just proves their incompetency and lack of 
knowledge of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984. 

Illegal Benefits 

The  other  major  charges  against,  appellants  are  transfer  of  money  and  accumulation  of 
37. 
illegal assets, however in order to prove these charges, prosecution has produced the following 
witnesses:- 

i. 

Transfer of money (Rao Shakeel Ahmad). 

PW-9, Muhammad Mushtaq (Steno) 

PW-10, Muhammad Aslam (Assistant/Cashier) 

PW-11, Muhammad Yasin (Driver) 

PW-12, Abdur Rasheed (Naib Qasid) 

PW-38, Riaz Ahmad (Naib Qasid) 

PW-39, Muhammad Saleem Akhtar (Driver) 

PW-42, Samiuallah (Assistant Accounts Officer) 

ii. 

Assets (Rao Shakeel Ahmad) 

PW-18, Muhammad Idrees Khan (Engr. FIA) 

PW-22, Ch. Shakeel Ahmed (X.En) 

PW-23, Azmat Javaid (Insp. FIA) 

PW-24, Muhammad Sarwar (Insp. FIA) 

The first portion of illegal benefits is related to Rao Shakeel Ahmad as referred by the prosecution 
through the witnesses whereby the charge of transfer of Money has been substantiated. In order to 
verify  the  said  charge  prosecution  has  produced  PW-9  Muhammad  Mushtaq  (Stenographer) 
Ministry of Religious Affairs, who was posted during the Hajj Mission from 2008 to 2012 and 
stated before the Court that Rao Shakeel Ahmad DG Hajj appellant, had delivered S.R.5,000/- to 
his wife Mrs. Rukhsana Aleem in Pakistan via Enjaz Bank through him in May 2010, S.R.10,000/- 
in  June  2010  and  S.R.10,000/-  for  the  third  time,  hence,  total  S.R.25,000/-  were  sent  to  Mrs. 
Rukhsana Aleem. He has also submitted his affidavit Exh.P.9/A which is under objection whereby 
he has not referred the details of the amounts in affidavit when the same was confronted to him. 
He also admits that the name of Mrs. Rukhsana Aleem was not referred in Exh.PW-9/DA. He has 
also  admitted  before  the  Court  that  his  statement  of  transmitting  S.R.25,000/-  handed  over  by 
appellant  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad  was  incorrect  rather  the  same  was  handed  over  by  PW-42 
Samiullah,  Assistant  Accounts  Officer.  Similarly,  the  prosecution  has  produced  PW-10 
Muhammad  Aslam,  Assistant  Incharge/Cashier,  posted  in  Hajj  Mission  during  2008  to  2011 
whereby he stated that he received a cheque along with S.R.10,000/- to send the same to Pakistan 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through  Enjaz  Bank  and  the  same  amount  was  deposited  in  bank  through  a  receipt  which  was 
handed over to Samiullah and has also submitted an affidavit Exh.P.10/A, however he admitted 
before the Court that the amount was given by PW-42 Samiullah Assistant Accounts Officer. PW-
11 Muhammad. Yasin (Driver), has sent S.R.6,000/- to Mrs. Rukhsana Aleem, wife of appellant 
Rao Shakeel Ahmad, on the instructions of PW-42 Samiullah through a banking channel of Enjaz 
Bank. PW-12 Abdul Rasheed, Naib Qasid, stated that he sent S.R.98,000/- through Enjaz Bank 
which was given to him by Samiullah Assistant  Accounts Officer, and produced these receipts 
marked  as  Mark-P12/1-10,  he  admitted  before  the  Court  that  during  the  course  of  cross-
examination  that  amount  was  given  to  him  by  PW-42  Samiullah  and  the  said  amount  was 
transmitted to Pakistan in installments on different dates spreading over periods in months. PW-
38 Riaz Ahmad, Naib Qasid stated before the Court that PW-42 Samiullah had given him cash on 
behalf of DG Hajj Rao Shakeel Ahmad for sending the same to Lahore through  Enjaz Bank in 
Pakistan and the total amount was S.R.62,000/-. Similarly, PW-39 Muhammad Saleem Akhtar, 
Driver, has stated before the Court that he deposited S.R.33,000/- in the account of Rao Shakeel 
Ahmad and the same was given by Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellant, and all these details have been 
confirmed through testimony of PW-42 Samiullah Assistant Accounts Officer, who has given the 
details in his testimony whereby he stated that S.R.176,000/- were sent to Pakistan through above 
mentioned  witnesses  on  behalf  of  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad,  however  he  stated  that  DG  Hajj  Rao 
Shakeel Ahmad has sent the cheque in Aljazira Bank for encashment and then amount was sent to 
Pakistan through the above mentioned PWs. Hence, it has been proved on record that appellant 
Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad,  in  the  first  instance,  has  encashed  the  amount  from  his  account  in  Saudi 
Arabia and then the same was delivered to his wife and other relatives with the help of PW-9, PW-
10, PW-11, PW-12, PW-38 and PW-30 through  PW-42 Samiullah Assistant  Accounts  Officer, 
there is nothing on record on the basis of which it can be even presumed that the said amount was 
illegal gratification obtained by Rao Shakeel Ahmad or the same was crime proceeds, hence, no 
offence had been committed as not a single witness ever stated before the Court regarding any 
crime process, illegal gratification, kickbacks and commission or any cash favour was received 
and delivered to Pakistan to the relatives of Rao Shakeel  Ahmad appellant, even otherwise the 
perks and privileges, salary and traveling grants received by the appellant in his salary account in 
Saudi Arabia, justifies the entire transactions and he has only sent amount through banking channel 
as proved by the prosecution, hence, no adverse inference could be drawn against the appellant 
rather prosecution proves that amount of S.R. 176,000/- was sent to Pakistan through a banking 
channel  and  presumption  goes  in  favour  of  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad  appellant  that  the  amount  is 
legitimate and the same was sent to his wife and other family members with justified reason. The 
above discussion proves that the appellant Rao Shakeel Ahmad has not obtained any illegal benefit 
by way of transfer of money from Saudi Arabia to Pakistan and this charge has not been proved 
against the appellant. Similarly, the prosecution has not produced a single witness through which 
they can justify similar kind of charges against Aftab-ul-Islam Raja appellant and even not a single 
witness alleged that he has transferred any amount through banking channel or he ever received 
any  kickbacks,  commissions,  illegal  gratification  or  favour  in  cash  from  any  of  the 
owners/Mustajars, therefore, no charge has been proved against the second appellant, Aftab-ul-
Islam Raja, regarding legal, benefit. 

Acquiring of Assets through Illegal Means 

38. 
The allegation of acquiring illegal asset through illegal means has also been leveled against 
Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellant by the prosecution whereby they have produced PW-18 Muhammad 
Idrees Khan (Engr. FIA) who sent PW-23 Azmat Javaid, Inspector, who got prepared a report from 
XEN Pak PWD Lahore but the said report Exh.PW-18/A was not allowed to be exhibited by the 
subsequent order of the Court as PW-18 is not the author of the report therefore, the report could 
not be exhibited in his statement and the same was rightly turned down by the trial Court. PW-22 
Ch. Shakeel Ahmad (XEN Pak PWD Lahore) has assessed the building Raj Event Concern situated 
at Gaju Matta, Lahore opposite Ibrahim Masjid while accompanying PW-23 Azmat Saeed and has 
submitted  his  report  Exh.PW-22/A,  whereby  the  property  was  valued  at  Rs.576,77,750/-.  He 
admitted during the course of cross-examination that he has not associated any property dealer nor 
referred the year of construction of the said buildings neither procured the site plan approved by 
the metropolitan and merely inspected the building from outside and resultantly on the information 

 
 
provided by overseer prepared the report. 

39. 
The prosecution has also produced PW-43 Azmat Javaid, Inspector FIA, who has prepared 
the report Exh.PW-43/A, visited the building Raj Event and stated before the Court that building 
is comprising of lawns and constructed area and the roofs were of concrete and one shed of Izhar 
Company was available on site. Muhammad Sarwar, Inspector, FIA Commercial Bank Circle, was 
produced in the Court as PW-24 who has provided the account details of M/s. Raj Event Concern 
Exh.PW-24/A, and issued notice Exh.PW-24/B which is under objection. He admitted before the 
Court that he has not investigated the transactions of the account or the history of the property. 
The  above  referred  four  witnesses  did  not  prove  anything  against  the  appellant  Rao  Shakeel 
Ahmad rather they have not investigated any of the allegations against the appellants. 

40. 
The prosecution, besides PW-51, has also submitted the evidence of other Investigation 
Officer, who appeared  as PW-52, Khalid Rasool, who is  under obligation to  prove the  case of 
prosecution  against  the  appellants,  however  he  was  cross-examined  at  length  whereby  he  has 
narrated the entire story before the Court and submitted the details of the recovered documents and 
submitted a challan dated 03.05.2011 and supplementary challan 18.01.2012 whereby he, in his 
challan, found all three appellants as guilty, however during the course of cross-examination, PW-
52 has admitted following facts that:-- 

i. 

ii. 

I cannot read or understand Exh.PW-13/D-4. 

I can read Exh.PW-13/H-102 to 104 but cannot understand the said documents. 

iii. 
I cannot understand from documents Exh.PW-13/H/102, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110, 
111, 112, 116, 117, 119, 120, 121, 127, 128, 129, 167, 168, 169, 170, 173, 174, 178, 181, 
182, 185, 186, 190, 191, 192, 196, 199, 200, 206, 207, 209, 210, 270, 277, 278, 279, 280, 
281, 284, 285, 287, 290, 291, 293, 294, 295, 299, 300 and 303. 

iv. 

All documents are written and in Arabic language which he does not understand. 

v. 
He admits that 200 Hujjaj Karaam performed Hajj, free of cost as they were sent 
by Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan and the issue of non-payment of dues was 
taken up by Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan through suo motu power. 

vi. 
A sum of S.R. 693,590/- was spent on boarding, transportation and food charges of 
200 Hujjaj Karaam and Rao Shakeel Ahmad appellant wrote a letter dated 23.01.2010 to 
Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  for  recovery  of  S.R.  693,590/-  from  Ministry  of  Interior, 
Government of Pakistan. 

The terms and conditions mentioned in the advertisement were in the knowledge of 

vii. 
Ministry of Religious Affairs. 

viii.  Amount  equal  to  50%  of  rent  regarding  buildings  Nukhba-I  and  Nukhba-II  was 
given as per approval and dispute regarding the same buildings arisen and Ministry of Hajj 
Saudi Arabia decided to cancel the agreement and directed the owners/Mustajars to return 
the amount to Pakistan Hajj Mission. 

Government has suffered loss of S.R. 1,307,000/- which was to be returned by the 
ix. 
owners/Mustajars  while  remaining  amount  was  received  by  Pakistan  High  Commission 
and  the  matter  of  recovery  of  S.R.  1,307,000/-  is  still  pending  with  Saudi  Arabia 
government. I visited Saudi Arabia in connection with the investigation of this case. 

I had seen buildings Nukhba-I and Nukhba-II from outside and did not measure the 

x. 
distance of the buildings from Harram Pak. 

Acting DG Hajj got the rent of said four buildings as S.R. 3,455/- per person against 

xi. 
S.R. 3,500/- per person. 

 
 
Rao Shakeel Ahmad did not recommend or ask any official to issue official/gratis 

xii. 
passport to Ahmad Faiz. 

xiii.  Rao Shakeel Ahmad terminated the services of Ahmad Riaz vide office order dated 
30.08.2010. 

xiv.  The official/gratis passport was not issued to Ahmad Faiz because his services were 
terminated by Rao Shakeel Ahmad. 

xv. 

No cheque was issued in favour of Ahmad Faiz. 

I did not visit Raj Event Concern and did not collect revenue record pertaining to 
xvi. 
Raj Event Concern and during the investigation it comes into my knowledge that Raj Event 
Concern was jointly owned by father and uncle of Rao Shakeel Ahmad. 

xvii. 

I did not collect any bank record from bank Aljazira. 

xviii. I did not investigate the case with regard to transactions in the bank account of Rao 
Shakeel Ahmad. 

xix. 

I did not take into possession the original copy of Exh.PA. 

xx. 

No document or evidence was provided to me along with report Exh.PA. 

87 buildings were hired by committee headed by Rao Shakeel Ahmad out of which 

xxi. 
6 buildings were de-hired. 

xxii.  129 buildings were got hired by 2nd Hiring Committee headed by Syed Sultan Ali 
Shah  Acting  DG  Hajj  and  Secretary  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  Agha  Sarwar  Raza 
Qazilbash. 

xxiii. I did not record statement of any owners/Mustajars of 120 buildings to corroborate 
the prosecution version. 

xxiv. I did not compare the certified copies of the buildings record with the original record. 

xxv.  Aftab-ul-Islam  Raja  accused  was  not  a  signatory  of  cheques  delivered  to 
owners/Mustajars  of  the  buildings  of  Phase-1.  He  was  also  not  a  signatory  of  lease 
agreement of above buildings of Phase-1. 

xxvi. Name of Aftab-ul-Islam Raja accused is not mentioned in report Exh.PA as well as 
in FIR Exh.PW-1/A. 

xxvii.  It  is  correct  that  Aftab-ul-Islam  Raja  recorded  note  dated  11.05.2010  which  is 
Exh.PW-52/D1 wherein he gave note that owner/Mustajar is bound and agreed to provide 
1415  and  2200  beds  in  buildings  of  Phase-1  and  Phase-2,  respectively,  according  to 
Tasreeh, otherwise payment bill will be made according to old Tasreeh. No further action 
was taken against other persons whose names were mentioned in their statement regarding 
hiring  of  buildings  despite  of  the  fact  that  corruption  charges  were  also  leveled  against 
them. 

xxviii. I did not record statement of any owners/Mustajars of the hired buildings hired. 

xxix.  No  direct  word  of  accusation  has  been  mentioned  in  report  Exh.PA  against  Syed 
Hamid Saeed Kazmi by Hiring Committee. 

xxx. Accused Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi was not nominated in the FIR. 

xxxi. As per record, the property measuring 344 Kanal agricultural land in Sadiqabad is a 

 
 
gifted property in favour of Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi, Syed Arshad Saeed Kazmi, Syed 
Mazhar Saeed Kazmi and Syed Rashid Saeed Kazmi. 

xxxii. It is correct that statement of one Ehsan Rashid is part of record where he mentioned 
an amount of Rs. 11,85,000/- was transferred online in the account of Syed Hamid Saeed 
Kazmi  maintained  in  MCB  Nishtar  Chowk  Branch,  Multan,  and  it  also  mentioned  in 
statement that amount transferred on the direction of Ehsan Shahid's cousin which was for 
relief of flood effectees. 

xxxiii.  As  per  record  no  property  was  purchased  by  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  or  his 
dependents during the year 2010 and the properties have no nexus with the subject matter 
of the FIR. 

xxxiv.  The  parliamentarian  have  to  submit  their  declaration  of  assets  under  the 
Representation of People Act, 1976 and they too can be dealt in accordance with law if any 
discrepancy is found. 

xxv. It is correct that matter of renewal of passport of Ahmad Faiz was taken up with DG 
Passport on 28.07.2010 by Ministry of Religious Affairs and at that time he was Building 
Supervisor Hajj Mission in Jeddah, services of Ahmed Faiz as Building Supervisor were 
terminated  on  31.08.2010  by  DG  Hajj  Rao  Shakeel  Ahmad.  The  recommendations  for 
issuance of passport to Ahmad Faiz were withdrawn on 01.09.2010 as he seized to be a 
Building Supervisor in Hajj Mission Jeddah. 

41. 
Similarly,  the  prosecution  has  produced  PW-54  Ghazanfar  Abbas,  Inspector  FIA/SIU, 
Islamabad,  who  investigated  the  matter  being  member  of  investigation  team  and  recorded 
statement  of  five  witnesses  and  has  given  the  evidence  regarding  British  Pounds  13,348/- 
transferred from UK National Bank London, however he stated before the Court that during the 
course of cross-examination his opinion about the role of Rao Shakeel Ahmad was based upon the 
opinions already formulated by previous Investigation Officers in their previous reports and he has 
not collected any new evidence against Rao Shakeel Ahmad. He admitted before the Court that 
documents and recovery memos pertaining to the account of Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi maintained 
in Faysal Bank, Bosan Road, Multan, dated 28.02.2011 amounting to British Pounds 13,348/- is 
not a part of judicial record. He admitted before the Court that there is not a single incriminating 
word  against  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  and  he  has  not  collected  any  evidence  to  connect  the 
incomes/assets of Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi with any criminal proceeds and this fact was recorded 
by  previous  Investigation  Officers  in  their  report  under  section  173,  Cr.P.C.  Hence,  all  the 
Investigation  Officers  have  categorically  admitted  before  the  Court  that  there  is  nothing 
incriminating against the appellants rather they have not collected any incriminating material on 
the basis of which they could connect the appellants with the commission of offence referred in 
the charge framed by trial Court even there is no evidence of illegal assets, illegal benefits or even 
receiving of any kickbacks or commission as the Investigation Officers have not produced a single 
witness  during  their  investigation  through  which  they  can  even  allege  that  any  foreign 
national/Saudi  national,  owner/Mustajar  of  the  buildings,  even  paid  a  single  Saudi  Riyal  as 
kickback to the appellants. If for all intents and purposes it could be assumed only for the sake of 
arguments in favour of prosecution that any kickback/commission was received by the appellants, 
then why the prosecution could not recover the same, dig out the mode of receipt of kickbacks and 
channels through which these ill gotten amounts were transferred? 

42. 
In  a  nutshell,  the  Investigation  Officers  have  just  wasted  time,  money  and  resources  of 
Government of Pakistan and have not collected any substantial evidence to connect the appellants 
with the commission of offence. 

43. 
After the conclusion of evidence all the appellants have recorded their statements under 
section 342, Cr.P.C. whereby they have denied the charges referred in the trial and gave detailed 
account of their version which has been corroborated from the evidence of I.O. The prosecution 
has  not  tendered  a  single  document,  got  exhibited,  lease  agreement,  approvals  or  violations 
referred by them in evidence against the appellants in their statements even the series of documents 

 
 
starting  from  Exh.PA  to  list  of  87  buildings  have  not  been  confronted,  hence,  it  can  safely  be 
concluded that all those documents could not be taken into consideration in trial while convicting 
the appellants. Reliance is placed upon 2017 SCMR 148 titled as Qaddan and others v. The State 
wherein it was held that:- 

"Statement of an accused recorded under S. 342, Cr.P.C.---Any piece of evidence not put 
to an accused person at the time of recording of his statement under S. 342, Cr.P.C. could 
not be considered against him". 

Although  the  appellants  have  explained  the  reasons  and  factors  which  lead  to  an  irresistible 
conclusion that the mandatory tools have not been framed by the government, only Hajj Policy 
2010 was announced and approved, which was sent to Jeddah Hajj Mission in June 2010 whereas 
87 buildings had already been hired on the basis of guidelines referred by Ministry of Religious 
Affairs. The key factors which are under consideration have been referred in the Hajj Policy 2010, 
are  basically  four  factors  in  which  the  maximum  rate  per  pilgrim  is  S.R.3600/-  and  buildings 
should be within the range of 2000 meters from Harram, Makkah and in Madina Munawwara 50% 
of  the  hired  buildings  should  be  in  Markizia  whereas  the  rate  for  any  hired  buildings  for 
accommodation per pilgrim per cycle is S.R.500. The most astonishing factor which has not been 
considered  by  the  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  is  the  role  of  the  Hiring  Committee  which 
comprises of seven different persons including the appellants who are the Chairman and Member 
but Ministry of Religious Affairs and Secretary PW-15 have not agitated the matter as to why a 
proper  committee  has  not  been  constituted  or  the  composition  of  the  committee  is  not  in 
accordance with the Hajj Policy 2010 and Secretary being the Chairman has to look into the matter 
even  the  technical  staff  which  are  members  of  the  Hiring  Committee  includes  nominee  of 
NESPAK, Chief Architect NESPAK and nominee of engineering council have not been referred 
as witnesses nor they ever proceeded to Makkah Mukarma or Madina Munawwara to give their 
technical findings regarding the status, quality, quantity, distance and rate of the those buildings 
which were hired by the committee. It is also visible from the record that the entire working for 
hiring of buildings has been managed and conducted contrary to procedure given in the Hajj Policy 
2010 wherein the Spotting Committee has already performed its duties and the Hiring Committee 
in Pakistan has given the approvals and for the sake of arguments if it is assumed that the Hiring 
Committee  headed  by  Secretary  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  in  Pakistan  has  not  given  any 
approval accordance with the procedure defined in the guidelines or in the Hajj Policy 2010 then 
it could not be possible to pay millions of Saudi Riyal as advance payment to the owners/Mustajars 
of buildings through crossed-cheques by the appellants in Saudi Arabia. The said fact is admitted 
on record that the amount paid in advance through crossed-cheque to the owners/Mustajars is the 
proof  of  the  fact  that  the  Hiring  Committee  in  Pakistan  has  given  the  approval  although  the 
prosecution has not tendered any such evidence on record but the role of the Hiring Committee 
referred  in  the  Hajj  Policy  2010  has  not  been  placed  on  record  through  any  convincing  mode, 
similarly, the Hiring Review Committee is comprising of members who have to visit Saudi Arabia 
and submit their report containing the suitability of the buildings or otherwise, the report Exh.PA 
was prepared and placed on record but the author of the document has not been called nor the 
members have substantiated their report through any witness or document, therefore, its value for 
the purposes of prosecution could not be assumed, except the document can only be looked into 
by the Prime Minister of Pakistan as referred in the Hajj Policy 2010. 

44. 
In  order  to  understand  the  working  of  cabinet  and  its  members  in  terms  of  Rules  of 
Business, 1973, we have to discuss the concept of rules with reference to the Hajj Policy 2010, 
which  was  approved  in  the  cabinet  meeting  held  on  12.05.2010  and  conveyed  to  DG  Hajj  on 
03.06.2010.  As  per  Rule  5(5)  of  Rules  of  Business,  1973  which  deals  with  the  transaction  of 
business, whereby the Minister shall be responsible for policy concerning for his division and Rule 
5(9)(b) of Rules of Business, 1973 says that:-- 

"The Secretary shall duly execute the sanction policy and he is responsible for the careful 
observance  of  these  rules  and,  where  he  considers  that  if  there  has  been  any  material 
departure from it, either in his own or in any other division, he shall bring the matter to the 
notice of Minister in-charge and, if he thinks necessary, to the notice of the Prime Minster 

 
 
or the cabinet". 

The above referred provision of Rules of Business, 1973 clearly fix the responsibility upon the 
Secretary  being  head  of  the  Ministry  for  efficient  administration  and  discipline  as  well  as  due 
execution of the sanction policy but the entire record is Silent regarding the conduct of Secretary 
even  otherwise  the  Rules  of  Business,  1973  does  not  provide  any  penalty  for  violation  of  any 
policy  decision  although  the  Prime  Minister  of  Pakistan  or  the  head  of  the  Ministry  being  the 
responsible  officers  have  to  take  action  in  accordance  with  law,  i.e.,  Government  Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 against the concerned public servant for non-compliance 
of directions or orders of the Government of Pakistan as the same amounts to a. misconduct on the 
part of civil servant. 

45. 
I have gone through the evidence and documents tendered by the prosecution but could not 
find any mens rea to justify, the criminal intent for conviction rather it is a case of negligence on 
the part of Ministry of Religious Affairs, Secretary and officials of Hajj Mission which is only to 
be  seen  in  the  light  of  departmental  action  as  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  connect  any  of  the 
appellant with the alleged crime. 

The main allegations against the officials/appellants are criminal breach of trust, section 
46. 
409,  P.P.C.  and  misuse  of  official  position  in  terms  of  section  5(2)  47,  P.C.A.  whereas  under 
criminal  breach of trust  by a public servant,  a criteria  is  laid down in  which the ingredients of 
entrustment, dishonest misappropriation or conversion to his own use by the person in whom the 
confidence reposed, dishonest use or disposal of property in violation of any direction of law and 
dishonest misappropriation or conversion to his own use by the person in whom the confidence 
reposed, dishonest use or disposal of property in violation of any direction of law and dishonest 
use or disposal of property in violation of any legal contract are the key factors whereas I could 
not find any element of entrustment although the rent paid to the owners/Mustajars of the buildings 
in Saudi Riyal have been entrusted to Rao Shakeel Ahmad and the Assistant Accounts Officer of 
Hajj  Mission  Jeddah  but  the  mechanism  provided  for  the  release  of  those  payments  imposes  a 
restriction to pay the amount through crossed-cheques and the entire case reveals that the amount 
has  only  been  paid  through,  crossed-cheques  after  execution  of  lease  agreements  with 
owners/Mustajars of the buildings. The offence could not be proved unless the later portion of the 
offence stands proved by way of independent evidence especially when the usage and conversion 
of the entrusted property by the accused person is not established beyond any shadow of doubt. 
The entire evidence of prosecution only justifies the loss of amount on the basis of comparison of 
87  buildings  with  129  buildings  which  were  hired  after  the  removal  of  DG  Hajj  Rao  Shakeel 
Ahmad  but  in  order  to  discharge  the  onus,  the  prosecution  has  not  adduced  any  evidence  of 
owners/Mustajars of the buildings who could allege that they have paid any amount as kickbacks 
or commission to the appellants. This shows that the ingredients of personal benefit from the entire 
misappropriation plays, a key role and the same is a missing link in the evidence. Although the 
prosecution has tried to connect the appellants being DG Hajj Rao Shakeel Ahmad and Aftab-ul-
Islam  Raja  Ex-Joint  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  with  criminal  breach  of  trust  and 
misuse  of  official  position  but  I  could  not  overlook  the  fact  that  cheques  were  issued  to  the 
owners/Mustajars who have not filed any such complaint even otherwise the dominions over the 
property by the public servant is dependent upon the approval of the Hiring Committee in Pakistan 
under Hajj Policy 2010 whereas the Secretary Ministry of Religious Affairs being the head of the 
Hiring Committee never agitated the matter before the relevant quarters. At the most it could be a 
case of error of opinion/negligence while hiring the buildings on higher rates but surprisingly the 
appellants have not crossed the limit fixed by the Government of Pakistan, i.e. the rent should not 
exceed S.R. 3600/- in Makkah Mukarma and S.R. 500/- in Madina Munawwara for each pilgrim 
while  hiring  the  accommodation.  This  shows  that  the  only  dispute  left  is  the  distance  of  the 
buildings from  Harram  Pak. Although the prosecution has tendered huge number of record  for 
comparison of 87 buildings with subsequently hired 129 buildings but surprisingly the documents 
have not been proved in accordance with the terms of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 nor they 
were tendered in the legal manner even otherwise all those documents have no evidentiary value 
in the eyes of law, therefore, the rest of the case is only based upon the verbal statements of hearsay 
evidence  by  non-technical  persons  as  not  a  single  witness  holds  any  technical  qualification  to 

 
 
justify  the  comparison  of  buildings  in  form  of  its  structure  capacity,  rate  of  rent,  quality  and 
distance  from  Harram  Pak  butt  the  prosecution  has  not  considered  this  aspect  even  only  one 
Investigation Officer has visited the buildings in Saudi Arabia but he has not recorded statement 
of  a  single  witness.  Even  the  said  I.O.  could  not  substantiate  the  allegations  of  kickbacks  or 
technical subject of the hired buildings. The ingredients of section 409, P.P.C. are lacking in the 
present case as the prosecution failed to prove all the elements specially the misappropriation or 
conversion to his own use or dishonest disposal of the property. Reliance in this regard is placed 
upon 2009 SCMR 517 (Abdul Rashid Nasir v. The State). Therefore, appellants are entitled to 
benefit of doubt. 

47. 
It is also pertinent to mention here that nothing is available on record to show the intentional 
loss caused to the public exchequer or a wrongful gain by the appellants which is necessary to 
bring the case into the term mens rea, although some element of negligence is apparent but the 
same does not fulfill the requirements. Reliance in this aspect is placed upon 1996 MLD 2624 
[Lahore] (Qazim Raza v. The State). The initial burden is upon the prosecution to prove the illegal 
benefit,  illegal  gratification  or  kickback  against  the  public  servants  but  in  the  instant  case 
prosecution has produced almost ten witnesses through which the evidence of sending money to 
Pakistan by the public servants and evaluation of properties have been brought on record but the 
appellants have explained each and every transaction in their statements under section 342, Cr.P.C. 
which seems to be reasonable and appeal to a prudent mind, therefore, it has not been proved by 
the  prosecution  that  any  amount  has  been  received  as  illegal  gratification,  kickback  or  crime 
proceeds, and the same cast a serious doubt in prosecution case. On the other hand, version of the 
accused persons seem to be strong on evaluation of the case of prosecution and defence version if 
put  in  juxtaposition,  benefit  of  doubt  emerges  from  record  and  same  goes  in  the  favour  of 
appellants. Reliance in this regard is placed upon 2001 SCMR 41 (Rashid Ahmad v. The State). 

48. 
In order to view the case of appellants in terms of section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. the word "criminal 
misconduct" has to be considered which has been used in the said law, whereas it can only be 
proved if any gratification, reward referred in section 161, P.P.C. or any consideration received by 
the appellants in their official capacity for themselves has been proved or appellants dishonestly 
or fraudulently misappropriated or converted for their own use, any property entrusted to them, 
then it amounts to a criminal misconduct, whereas it is necessary for prosecution to establish guilt 
of accused beyond any shadow of doubt but in the instant case the prosecution could not justify 
the illegal gratification or bribe in any manner which is the substantive ingredient of the said crime 
nor they have prepared any forged document, therefore, prosecution failed to prove the case to the 
extent of offence under section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. Reliance, keeping this fact in mind, is placed upon 
1998 PCr.LJ 162 [Lahore] (Main Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. Special Court and others). 

49. 
In order to prove the charge of misuse of authority, at least two basic ingredients i.e., mens 
rea and actus rea of crime have to be necessarily established and in case, any of them if found 
missing,  offence  could  not  be  constituted  whereby  mens  rea  in  context  to  misuse  of  authority 
means,  to  act  in  disregard  of  law  with  conscious  knowledge  that  act  was  being  done  without 
authority of law which resulted into illegal gain or undue benefit. Reliance is placed upon 2008 
SCMR 1118 (The State and others v. Muhammad Idrees Ghouri). 

50. 
The allegations against Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi appellant are distinct in nature as he was 
the Minister for Religious Affairs at the relevant time and he being the member of the cabinet has 
approved the Hajj Policy 2010, although the buildings were hired prior to the said event by the 
official  appellants  in  Saudi  Arabia  but  prosecution  has  not  uttered  a  single  word  against  Syed 
Hamid Saeed Kazmi appellant to charge him with any misappropriation of funds, wrongful gain 
or  misuse  of  authority  while  hiring  the  buildings  or  violation  of  any  Hajj  Policy  terms  and 
conditions, therefore, the charges have not been proved with reference to criminal breach of trust 
in terms of section 409, P.P.C., whereas the prosecution has tried to prove the illegal accumulation 
of  certain  assets  although  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  being  accused  in  the  case  has  given  the 
explanation that in terms of section 42-A the Representation of People Act, 1976, he is bound to 
submit  his  annual  statement  of  assets  and  liabilities  belonging  to  him  and  of  his  spouse  and 
dependents to the Election Commission of Pakistan and if the said statement of assets found to be 

 
 
counterfeited  in  material  particulars,  he  may  be  proceeded  against  under  section  82  of 
Representation of People Act, 1976 for committing offence of corrupt practices, whereby he can 
be awarded punishment upto 3 years with fine but surprisingly the prosecution has not tendered 
any document from the Election Commission of Pakistan record from which it can be proved that 
Syed  Hamid Saeed Kazmi has mis-declared or  given any  false statement  if compared  with  the 
present  assets  even  there  is  no  direct  evidence  of  criminal  breach  of  trust  and  the  misconduct 
referred against him. Even otherwise section 5(2) of 47, P.C.A. imposes certain conditions upon 
the public servant to furnish the details of his properties and liabilities whereby Syed Hamid Saeed 
Kazmi has given the details of each and every asset in his statement under section 342, Cr.P.C. 
and denied the allegations but fact remains the same as onus was upon the prosecution to prove 
that all the assets and properties owned and possessed by Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi appellant, 
have been achieved and owned through illegal gratification and crime proceeds. The prosecution 
tried to prove their case that Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi being Minister of the Ministry of Religious 
Affairs is responsible for the affairs of Ministry whereby a co-accused Ahmad Faiz was appointed 
on his recommendation although it was proved in evidence that Ahmad Faiz was removed prior to 
any action and even no passport has been issued to him. The Hajj Policy 2010 is the decision of 
the  Government  of  Pakistan  whereby  elected  representatives  have  been  placed  in-charge  of 
departments  of  government  and  are  not  expected  to  carry  with  them  a  deep  insight  in  the 
complexities  of  the  administration,  the  duty  of  a  bureaucrat  is  to  appraise  the  elected 
representatives, the nicety of the administration and provide them correct guidelines and discharge 
of their functions in accordance with law as held in PLD 1995 Supreme Court 530 (Zahid Akhtar 
v. Government of Punjab), wherein it was held that it was the duty of Secretary concerned to have 
pointed out the Minister concerned to the extent of his authority. Guidelines mentioned in policy 
directives of the government and provisions of the Rules of Business, 1973 should be kept in view 
by all the concerned, therefore, the allegations against the Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi have not been 
substantiated as he was not nominated in Exh.PA, the report of the parliamentary committee/Hiring 
Review Committee, in FIR or even for the purpose, the Investigation Officer has exonerated the 
appellant Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi from all the charges as he has not brought any evidence against 
him in the instant matter. 

51. 
In last, the prosecution has failed to tender any evidence against Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi 
regarding withholding of 7098 seats for hardship cases without approval of the cabinet, the said 
allegation  has  never  been  discussed  by  any  of  the  witness  nor  even  any  document  has  been 
produced to substantiate the said allegation. In addition to above, the prosecution has also alleged 
against Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi that he caused loss to the government exchequer whereby 200 
persons of Ministry of Interior were allowed to perform Hajj free of cost who stayed in the hired 
buildings. It has been observed from record that the charge Nos. 8 and 9 regarding 200 persons, 
who performed Hajj free of cost, have not been substantiated, especially when it is proved from 
record that the entire prosecution case has been set into motion when Rao Shakeel Ahmad claimed 
the amount/expenses of 200 persons from Ministry of Interior, who had enjoyed the Hajj Package 
in 2009 free of cost but the cost had not been paid to the Ministry of Religious Affairs. it has further 
been observed from  evidence of PW-17 that Exh.PW-17/A was tendered  in  evidence in  which 
7098 seats were kept reserved for hardship cases and the said PW-17 admitted the fact in cross-
examination that balloting was conducted for 57370 seats, hence, it can safely be concluded that 
it was the decision of Ministry of Religious Affairs to reserve those seats, therefore, the same could 
not be considered as an offence. 

Therefore, the prosecution has failed to prove the entire case against all three appellants by 
52. 
cogent/confidence inspiring evidence rather the chain of evidence is missing which does not bring 
the guilt of the appellants to home. The benefit of doubt in the entire evidence goes to the appellants 
and charges have not been proved as the entire documentary evidence is inadmissible, no recovery 
of  crime  proceeds  has  been  established  by  the  Investigation  Officers,  no  connection  has  been 
established  through  an  independent  evidence  that  appellants  have  received  any  kickback, 
commission  or  cash  favour  from  any  owners/Mustajars  of  the  87  buildings  hired  in  Makkah 
Mukarma or in Madina Munawwara. The prosecution has also failed to establish that the properties 
and assets of the appellants have been acquired from illegal means or from any amount received 
from Saudi Arabia in this regard. There is no evidence available on record to prove that amount 

 
 
transferred  from  Saudi  Arabia  to  Pakistan  was  part  of  an  illegal  gratification,  kickback  or 
commission. In last, the entire case is based upon violation of Hajj Policy 2010 Exh.PW-13/A1-
32 and Policy Guidelines Exh.PW-13/B1-32 which is not an offence under any law and the same 
does not fall within the definitions of sections 409, 420, 467, 468, 471, 109/34, P.P.C. read with 
section 5(2) 47, P.C.A. in any manner. 

53. 
For all the reasons mentioned above, Crl. Appeal No. 119/16, Crl. appeal No. 117/16 and 
Crl. Appeal No. 122/16 are allowed. Resultantly, all the appellants are hereby acquitted from the 
above  referred  charges.  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  appellant  shall  be  released  forthwith  if  not 
required in any other case and sureties submitted by the other two appellants (on bail) are hereby 
discharged. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
