Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.3748/2019 

Hafiz Hamdullah Saboor 

VS

Government of Pakistan  
through its Secretary Ministry of Interior & 2 others 

Petitioners by 

: 

Mr Adil Aziz Qazi, Advocate. 
Mr Kamran Murtaza, Advocate. 
Mr Arif Majeed, Advocate.  
Mr Noman Malik, Advocate. 
Mr Naveed Rajpoot, Advocate. 
Malik Mushtaq Ghanjera, Advocate. 
Mr Muhammad Mubashir Bhatti, Advocate. 
Mr Rizwan Ejaz, Advocate. 
Mr Aftab Rashid, Advocate. 
Raja Qaisar Ali, Advocate. 
Mr Sajidur Rehman Mashwani, Advocate.  

Respondents by 

: 

Syed Muhammad Tayyab, Dy. Attorney General. 

Mr Obaid Ur Rehman, Law Officer, NADRA. 
Mr Khalid Ishaque, Law Officer, NADRA. 
Syed Junaid Jaffar, Law Officer, NADRA. 

Mr Jalal Haider, Advocate for PEMRA. 
Ms Laraib Kanwal, Advocate for PEMRA. 
Mr Usama Akbar, Advocate for PEMRA. 

Mr Zeeshan Ul Haq, Dy. Director (Ops.), NADRA. 
Mr Mohsin Hameed Dogar, DGM/Legal, PEMRA. 

Dates of Hearings 

: 

22-04-2020, 07-05-2020, 13-10-2020, and  
19-05-2021. 

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.- 

What would happen to a person if the latter is stripped of 

his or her citizenship and who does not have such a relationship with 

any  another  State?  Such  a  person  would  definitely  be  rendered 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 2 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

Stateless.  As  aptly  stated  by  Chief  Justice  of  the  United  States 

Supreme  Court,  Earl  Warren  in  his  dissenting  opinion  in  the  case 

titled  “Clemente  Martinez  Perez  v.  Herbert  Brownell,  Jr.,  Attorney 

General  of  the  United  States  of  America”  [356  U.S  44  (1958)]  that 

'citizenship is mans‟ basic right for it is nothing less than the right to 

have  rights.  Remove  this  priceless  possession  and  there  remains  a 

stateless  person,  disgraced  and  degraded  in  the  eyes  of  his 

countrymen.' The petitioners  in the petitions listed in  „Annexure A’, 

attached  to  the  judgment,  complain  that  they  have  been  arbitrarily 

stripped  of  citizenship  by  an  authority  which  had  no  jurisdiction  and 

that by doing so they have been rendered Stateless.    

2. 

 The  petitioners  have  raised  questions  of  pivotal  public 

importance,  affecting  the  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  'Constitution').  The  petitioners  are  aggrieved 

because  their  respective  registration  as  citizens  of  the  Islamic 

Republic 

of 

Pakistan 

has 

either 

been 

suspended 

or 

cancelled/withdrawn.  In  almost  all  these  cases  the  effect  of  the 

suspension,  withdrawal  or  cancellation,  as  the  case  may  be,  of  the 

registration  is  that  the  affected  citizens  have  lost  their  citizenship  of 

Pakistan  and  have  become  'stateless'.  In  all  these  petitions,  the 

aggrieved  petitioners  assert  that  they  were  born  in  Pakistan  and, 

pursuant to fulfilling the requirements prescribed under the law, they 

were duly registered and thereafter respective Computerized National 

Identity  Cards  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  „CNICs‟)  were  issued  by 

the  National  Database  and  Registration  Authority  (hereinafter 

 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

referred to as the „Authority‟) in exercise of powers conferred under 

the  National  Database  and  Registration  Authority  Ordinance,  2002 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  „Ordinance  of  2002‟).  The  CNIC's 

have either been blocked/suspended or cancelled/withdrawn pursuant 

to reports received from various agencies which are under the control 

of  the  Federal  Government.  The  CNICs  of  the  petitioners  were 

blocked  or  cancelled  on  the  sole  ground  that  the  agencies  had 

reported  that  they  were  not  citizens  of  Pakistan.  The  Authority  had 

issued notices and, thereafter, the registrations were either blocked, 

suspended or withdrawn. The entire proceedings were conducted in a 

perfunctory  and  superficial  manner.  In  order  to  appreciate  the 

controversy involved in all  these petitions and by way of illustration, 

the facts relating to the petitioner in W.P. No. 3748/2019 titled „Hafiz 

Hamdullah  Saboor  v.  Government  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 

Ministry of Interior, etc.‟ will be briefly discussed.  

3. 

The  petitioner,  namely  Hafiz  Hamdullah  Saboor 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  'petitioner')  was  born  in  a  remote 

town  of  the  Province  of  Baluchistan  on  19-10-1968  and  this  crucial 

fact  has  not  been  denied.  His  father,  namely  Qari  Wali  Muhammad, 

son  of  Bor  Muhammad,  was  employed  by  the  Government  of 

Baluchistan. Pursuant to a license granted by the competent authority 

on  03-04-1971,  the  petitioner‟s  father  had  established  a  religious 

educational 

institution,  namely  Madrassa  Taleem  Ul  Quran 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  „Institution‟)  and  the  building  was 

constructed on the private property owned by the latter. It has been 

asserted  by  the  petitioner  that  the  said  land  had  been  privately 

acquired  by  his  father  in  1965.  The  petitioner  was  successful  in  the 

 
 
 
Page - 4 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

secondary  school  examinations  and  this  fact  was  confirmed  by  the 

Board  of  Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education  Baluchistan,  Quetta 

vide  certificate,  dated  19-02-1986.  The  University  of  Baluchistan, 

Quetta, conferred upon the petitioner the degree of Bachelors of Arts, 

which  was  formally  awarded  on  20-08-2002.  On  14-07-1986,  the 

District  Education  Officer,  Pishin,  had  confirmed  the  appointment  of 

the  petitioner  as  a  Teacher.  The  petitioner,  his  father  and  other 

family  members  were  duly  issued  travel  documents  under  the 

Passports Act 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the „Passports Act‟). 

The  petitioner  contested  in  the  general  elections  held  in  2002  and 

was  notified  as  a  returned  candidate  to  the  Provincial  Assembly  of 

Baluchistan  from  the  constituency  PB-11  Qilla  Abdullah  1.  The  latter 

also served as a member of the provincial cabinet. The petitioner was 

later  declared  successful  vide  notification,  dated  06-03-2012,  as  a 

member  of  the  Upper  House  of  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  i.e. 

the  Senate  of  Pakistan.  The  petitioner‟s  children  are  registered  as 

citizens  of  Pakistan  and  one  of  them  has  the  distinction  of  being 

accepted  as  a  commissioned  officer  in  the  Pakistan  Army.  The 

Authority asserts that a report was received from one of the agencies 

alleging  that  the  petitioner  was  not  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and, 

therefore,  proceedings  were  initiated  to  verify  his  status.  It  is  noted 

that the relevant public functionaries had confirmed the status of the 

petitioner  and  his  antecedents.  However,  the  Authority  vide  the 

impugned  order,  dated  11-10-2019,  purportedly  cancelled  the 

petitioner‟s  CNIC  bearing  No.54201-4851394-7  and  further  directed 

him  to  surrender  his  card  within  fifteen  days.  It  is  noted  that  the 

manual  National  Identity  Card  No.602-92-033673  was  issued  in 

 
Page - 5 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

favour of the petitioner in 1992. On the basis of the order passed by 

the  Authority,  the  Pakistan  Electronic  Media  Regulatory  Authority 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  „PEMRA‟)  vide  order,  dated  26-10-2019, 

restrained  TV  Channels  (News  &  Current  Affairs)  from  “inviting  and 

projecting the petitioner in their programmes/talk shows, news, etc.”. 

The  petitioner  has,  therefore,  challenged  the  orders  passed  by  the 

Authority  and  PEMRA  and  all  subsequent  actions  or  proceedings.  In 

the other petitions  the petitioners  also  assert that they were born in 

Pakistan  and  pursuant  to  being  duly  registered,  the  Authority  had 

issued  their  respective  CNICs.  All  the  petitioners  have  asserted  that 

they  are  aggrieved  because  the  Authority  had  either  blocked  or 

cancelled  their  respective  CNICs  on  the  sole  ground  that  they  were 

not citizens of Pakistan.  

Arguments on behalf of the parties: 

4. 

The  learned  counsels  for  the  petitioners  have  argued 

that;  the  Authority  is  bereft  of  jurisdiction  to  suspend  or  cancel  a 

CNIC  on  the  ground  that  its  holder  is  not  a  citizen  of  Pakistan; 

citizenship is the most valuable human right and a person cannot be 

made  stateless  in  an  arbitrary  manner;  no  power  vests  in  the 

Authority to adjudicate the question of citizenship; the registration of 

a  person  under  the  Ordinance  of  2000  is  affirmation  of  the  latter's 

citizenship  and  it  cannot  be  suspended,  let  alone  cancelled,  in  a 

perfunctory  manner;  the  petitioners  were  born  in  Pakistan  and, 

therefore,  their  status  as  citizens  of  Pakistan  cannot  be  altered, 

changed or prejudiced in any manner whatsoever by the Authority. 

 
 
 
 
 
Page - 6 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

5. 

The  learned  counsel,  who  has  appeared  on  behalf  of  the 

Authority, has contended that; the latter is empowered under section 

18  of  the  Ordinance  of  2000  to  cancel,  impound  or  confiscate  cards 

and that the procedure for doing so has also been prescribed therein; 

the  Ordinance  of  2000  empowers  the  Authority  to  seek  advice  and 

assistance from agencies of the Federal Government to carry out the 

purposes  ibid;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  „Muhammad  Umar  v. 

Federation  of  Pakistan,  through  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior 

Islamabad  and  2  others‟  [PLD  2017  Karachi  585],  „Najeebullah  and 

others v. Director NADRA, Balochistan, Quetta and others‟ [PLD 2016 

Quetta  1],  „Khan  Zaman  v.  Government  of  Pakistan  through 

Secretary  Ministry  of  Interior,  Islamabad  and  5  others‟  [PLD  2011 

Peshawar  47];  reference  has  also  been  made  to  an  order  passed  by 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  C.P.  No.1829/2019  titled  „NADRA  v. 

Gulab  Shah  and  others‟  which  was  disposed-of  by  the  apex  Court 

pursuant to consent given by the parties.  

6. 

The  learned  counsels  have  been  heard  and  the  record 

perused with their able assistance.  

Opinion of the Court: 

7. 

The  admitted  facts  are  that  the  petitioners  were  duly 

registered  by  the  Authority  under  the  Ordinance  of  2000  after  they 

had applied for issuance of their respective CNICs in accordance with 

the  prescribed  procedure  and  fulfilling  the  mandatory  requirements. 

The registration was followed by the issuance of the respective CNICs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 7 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

by acknowledging the crucial fact that the petitioners were citizens of 

Pakistan. Prior to the issuance of CNICs, most of the petitioners  had 

obtained  manual  national  identity  cards  issued  under  the  National 

Registration  Act  1973.  It  is  not  the  case  of  the  Authority  that  the 

petitioners  have  acquired  citizenship  of  another  sovereign  state  or 

that  the  authority  competent  under  the  relevant  law  had  revoked, 

withdrawn or cancelled their citizenship. It has also not been alleged 

that  the  petitioners  had  given  false  information  regarding  their  birth 

in  Pakistan  when  they  had  applied  for  the  issuance  of  the  CNICs. 

There  is  nothing  on  record  to  show  how  the  Authority  or  the 

concerned  intelligence  agency  had  concluded  that  the  petitioners 

were  not  citizens  of  Pakistan.  As  would  be  discussed  later  in  more 

detail,  the  Authority  nor  the  intelligence  agencies  are  competent  to 

determine the question of citizenship of a person.  The suspension  of 

a duly issued CNIC or cancellation thereof has a profound and grave 

consequence because it virtually brings the life of an affected person 

to  a  halt  and  the  latter,  by  implication,  is  denied  the  exercise  of 

fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 

Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (hereinafter  referred 

to  as 

the 

„Constitution‟). Such a person loses the right of employment, access 

to  his  or  her  own  bank  accounts,  the  right  to  engage  in  trade, 

business or profession. Moreover, access to education, health, etc. is 

denied. The family members are also equally affected. In a nut shell, 

the  right  to  life  guaranteed  under  Article  9  is  virtually  taken  away. 

This  phenomenon  of  blocking  or  cancelling  the  CNICs  of  citizens  by 

the  Authority  in  a  perfunctory  and  arbitrary  manner  has  remained 

prevalent  for  a  long  time  because  similar  grievances  have  been 

 
Page - 8 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

frequently  agitated  before  this  Court.  This  Court  has  consistently 

observed  that  the  Authority  was  bereft  of  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate 

upon  a  question  which  involves  the  determination  of  the  status  of  a 

person  as  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and  that  too,  on  the  basis  of  reports 

received from intelligence agencies which are under the control of the 

Government. It was observed in several cases that the petitions had 

been  disposed  of  in  the  past  because  the  concerned  intelligence 

agency, after reconsideration, had changed its opinion. The petitions 

in hand and the grievances involved therein have raised questions of 

paramount  public  importance;  whether  the  Authority  is  vested  with 

jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  upon  and  thus  determine  the  status  of 

citizenship  of  a  person  and,  on  that  basis,  suspend,  block,  cancel  or 

revoke  the  registration  granted  under  the  Ordinance  of  2000; 

whether the intelligence agencies are competent to report the factum 

of citizenship  to the Authority; if the answer  is in the negative, then 

which  authority  is  competent  and  under  what  law  can  a  person  be 

deprived  of  being  a  citizen  of  Pakistan;  whether  a  citizen  can  be 

rendered stateless and thus deprived from enjoying the fundamental 

rights guaranteed under the Constitution.  

8. 

The  two  relevant  statutes  which  are  required  to  be 

examined  in  order  to  answer  the  aforementioned  questions  are;  the 

Pakistan  Citizenship  Act  1951  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

„Citizenship Act‟) and the Ordinance of 2000. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 9 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

The Citizenship Act. 

The  expression  “citizen”  has  been  defined  under 

Article  260  of  the  Constitution  as  meaning  “a  citizen  of 

Pakistan  as  defined  by  law”.  Section  2(e)  of  the 

Ordinance  of  2000  defines  'citizen'  as  meaning  a  person 

who is, or is deemed to be a citizen of Pakistan under the 

Citizenship  Act.  The  distinct  categories  of  citizenship  are 

described  under 

the 

respective  provisions  of 

the 

Citizenship Act which was promulgated and notified in the 

official gazette on 13-04-1951. The preamble declares its 

object  as  to  make  provisions  for  citizenship  of  Pakistan. 

The  expression  “alien”  has  been  defined  in  section  2  as 

meaning  a  person  who  is  neither  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  or 

the Commonwealth. Section 3 is a deeming provision and 

describes the categories of persons who were deemed to 

be  citizens  of  Pakistan  on  the  date  of  commencement  of 

the  Citizenship  Act.  Section  4  is  most  crucial  for  the 

purposes  of  the  adjudication  of  the  petitions  in  hand 

because  it  explicitly  declares  that  every  person  born  in 

Pakistan after commencement of the Citizenship Act shall 

be a citizen by birth. The two exceptions are mentioned in 

clause  (a)  and  (b)  ibid.  The  scope  of  the  exceptions  is 

limited  and  restricted  to  only  two  clearly  described 

eventualities. Birth creates a right to become a citizen of 

Pakistan by operation of law. The legislature has used the 

expression  'shall'  and  thus  birth  in  Pakistan  is  the  sole 

ground to become a citizen. Section 5 describes the right 

 
 
Page - 10 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

to citizenship on the basis of 'descent' and the conditions 

and  exceptions  have  been  explicitly  mentioned  by  the 

legislature.  Section  5  empowers  the  Federal  Government 

to register a person as a citizen who has been granted a 

certificate  of  domicile  in  exercise  of  powers  conferred 

under  section  17  and  provided  the  latter  fulfils  other 

conditions  prescribed  in  the  provision.  Section  8  confers 

powers  on  the  Federal  Government  to  register  a  person 

as  a  citizen  residing  abroad  and  who  meets  the 

prescribed  conditions.  Section  9  vests  the  power  in  the 

Federal  Government  to  register  a  person  as  a  citizen  of 

Pakistan  'by  naturalization'  who  has  been  granted  a 

certificate  of  naturalization  under  the  Naturalization  Act 

1926  and  the  proviso  empowers  to  register  such  person 

under this category even if no certificate has been issued. 

Section 10 recognizes the right to citizenship of a married 

woman  and  the  conditions  in  this  regard  have  been 

prescribed.  Subject  to  the  conditions  prescribed  under 

section  11  the  Federal  Government  may  register  a  child 

as  a  citizen.  Section  13  describes  the  conditions  and 

procedure  whereby  the  President  may,  by  order,  specify 

the  persons  who  shall  be  citizens  on  account  of 

incorporation  of 

territory.  Section  14  B  describes 

conditions regarding citizenship of subjects of Jammu and 

Kashmir.  Section  20  describes  the  powers  of  the  Federal 

Government to register a citizen of the Commonwealth or 

who enjoys the status of a British protected person.  

 
Page - 11 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

Section  14  A  was  inserted  through  the  Pakistan 

Citizenship  (Amendment)  Act  1972  and  it  prescribes  the 

conditions  and  procedure  regarding  'renunciation'  of  the 

citizenship  of  Pakistan.  Section  16  describes  the  power, 

conditions  and  procedure  relating  to  'depriving'  a  person 

of  citizenship  of  Pakistan.  Sub  section  2  empowers  the 

Federal Government to deprive a citizen of the citizenship 

if it is satisfied that the latter had obtained the certificate 

of  domicile  or  naturalization,  as  the  case  may  be,  by 

means  of  fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of 

any  material  fact.  This  power  is  thus  restricted  to  two 

categories i.e. 'citizenship by migration' or 'citizenship by 

naturalization'  under  sections  6  and  9  respectively. 

Subsection  3  describes  the  power  to  deprive  a  person  of 

citizenship  by  naturalization  on  one  of  the  eventualities 

mentioned in clauses a to c. Subsection 4 vests the power 

in  the  Federal  Government  to  deprive  a  person  of 

citizenship  if  it  is  satisfied  that  the  latter  has  been 

ordinarily  a  resident  of  another  country  for  a  continuous 

period  of  seven  years  and,  during  this  period  neither  of 

the  two  events  described  in  clauses  a  and  b  have 

happened.  Subsection  5  imposes  an  additional  condition 

i.e.  that  the  Federal  Government  will  not  make  an  order 

under  section  16  unless  it  is  satisfied  that  it  is  in  the 

public interest that the person should not continue to be a 

citizen  of  Pakistan.  As  a  corollary,  the  power  of 

 
 
Page - 12 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

renunciation  under  subsections  2,  3  and  4  is  subject  to 

fulfillment of the condition unambiguously provided under 

subsection 5. Subsection 6 binds the Federal Government 

to  observe  the  principles  of  due  process  highlighted 

therein  before  making  an  order  under  section  16. 

Subsection 7 vests a right in favour of the person who is 

proposed  to  be  deprived  of  citizenship,  to  ask  for 

referring  his/her  case  to  the  'Committee  of  Inquiry'.  The 

composition of the said Committee has been described by 

the  legislature.  Section  16  A  was  inserted  vide  the 

Pakistan  Citizenship  (Amendment)  Act  1978  and  it 

describes  how  citizenship  issues  would  be  dealt  with  in 

the context of the separation of East Pakistan. Section 19 

refers  to  the  power  to  issue  a  certificate  of  citizenship 

pursuant  to  the  filing  of  an  application  by  a  person  if 

doubts exist regarding the latter's citizenship. Section 18 

vests  the  power  in  the  Federal  Government  to  delegate 

any  power  conferred  upon  it  or  duty  imposed  under  the 

Citizenship  Act.  Pursuant  to  powers  conferred  under 

section  23,  the  Federal  Government  has  framed  the 

Pakistan  Citizenship  Rules,  1952  (hereinafter  referred  to 

as  the  „Citizenship  Rules‟).  The  Rules  prescribe  the 

procedure  and  requirements  required  to  be  fulfilled  in 

relation  to  obtaining,  renunciation  or  resumption  of 

citizenship.  Rule  8  sets  out  the  procedure  in  case  of  a 

person  who  claims  citizenship  under  section  4  i.e. 

citizenship by birth.   

 
Page - 13 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

A  careful  reading  of  the  Citizenship  Act  as  a  whole 

unambiguously shows that it is a complete self-contained 

special  statute  to  deal  with  all  matters  relating  to 

'citizenship'  of  the  State  of  Pakistan.  The  distinct 

categories have been expressly dealt with. Citizenship by 

birth or descent, as the case may be, are distinguishable 

from the other categories. In case of 'citizenship by birth' 

the  person  becomes  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  automatically 

i.e. by operation of law. The status of such a person as a 

citizen is not subject to discretionary powers vested in the 

State as in the case of other categories e.g. citizenship by 

migration, naturalization etc. Rule 8 of the Citizens Rules 

would  become  relevant  and  attracted  in  cases  where  a 

person 'claims' to be a citizen by birth and seeks to obtain 

a  certificate 

from  the  competent  authority  as  an 

acknowledgment.  No  such  process  is  required  to  be 

adopted by persons who are citizens by birth because it is 

by  operation  of  law.  Section  16  empowers  the  Federal 

Government to deprive a person of citizenship of Pakistan 

in  certain  specific  and  clearly  described  circumstances. 

The powers of the Federal Government under subsections 

2  and  3  do  not  extend  to  'citizenship  by  birth'  nor 

'citizenship  by  descent'.  The  power  of  the  Federal 

Government in the case of circumstances described under 

sub  section  4  of  section  16  covers  'any  citizen'  but  to 

justify  exercising  the  power,  the  onus  would  be  on  the 

 
 
Page - 14 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

competent  authority 

to  establish 

the  eventualities 

explicitly  mentioned  in  the  provision  and,  in  addition, 

explain the reasons for being satisfied that it would be in 

the  public  interest  to  deprive  a  citizen  of  the  latter's 

citizenship.  A 

citizen  who 

renounces 

citizenship 

voluntarily  under  section  14-A  may  resume  it  in  the 

manner provided under rule 19 B of the Citizenship Rules. 

Moreover, in certain specific cases, citizenship can be lost 

as described under section 16-A of the Citizenship Act. In 

a nutshell, a person cannot be denied the right of being a 

citizen nor deprived of it otherwise as provided under the 

Citizenship Act.   

The Ordinance Of 2000. 

The Ordinance of 2000 was published in the official 

gazette  on  10-03-2000.  The  object  of  its  promulgation 

has been stated in its preamble, inter alia, to provide for 

the  registration  of  all  persons  and  for  the  establishment 

and  maintenance  of  a  multipurpose  database,  data 

warehouses,  etc.  Section  2  defines  various  expressions. 

The expression “citizen” has been defined in clause (e) as 

meaning a person who is, or is deemed to be a citizen of 

Pakistan  under  the  Citizenship  Act.  Clauses  (f)  and  (g) 

define  the  expressions  “emigrant”  and  “foreigner”, 

respectively.  The  Authority  has  been  established  under 

section  3  and  its  purpose,  object,  functions  and  powers 

 
 
 
Page - 15 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

are  described  under  sections  5  and  6.  Section  8 

empowers  the  Federal  Government  to  frame  rules  in 

order  to  provide  for  the  registration  of  different  persons 

or  classes  thereof,  including  citizens,  foreigners  and 

emigrants  and  for  different  things  or  classes  thereof. 

Section  9  provides  for  the  registration  of  citizens  of 

Pakistan  and  the  requirements  required  to  be  fulfilled  by 

an  applicant  have  been  prescribed  therein.  Section  10 

provides that the Authority, after registering a person as 

a  citizen,  shall  issue  or  renew,  or  cause  to  be  issued  or 

renewed, in such manner and on terms and conditions, a 

card  to  be  called  a  National  Identity  Card.  Section  12 

empowers the Authority to issue Overseas Identity Cards 

to  such  prescribed  class  of  citizens  resident  abroad  or 

such  prescribed  class  of  emigrants  who  have  got 

themselves registered in the prescribed manner and such 

cards  are  called  Overseas  Identity  Cards.  Section  13 

empowers  the  Authority  to  issue  or  renew  in  the 

prescribed  manner  and  on  the  basis  of  the  prescribed 

criteria,  terms  and  conditions,  cards  to  such  classes  of 

foreigners 

resident 

in  Pakistan,  whether 

legal  or 

otherwise,  who  have  got  themselves  registered  in  the 

prescribed manner. Section 18 vests in the Authority the 

power  to  cancel,  impound  or  confiscate  a  card  issued 

under  the  Ordinance  of  2000.  Sub  section(1)  empowers 

the  Federal  Government,  through  an  order  in  writing,  to 

return  the  card  liable  to  be  cancelled,  impounded  or 

 
Page - 16 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

confiscated  through  separate  orders.  However,  the 

legislature  has  explicitly  provided  that  no  order  shall  be 

made  unless  the  person  has  been  given  notice  in  writing 

calling  upon  him  to  show  cause  as  to  why  the  order 

should  not  be  made.  Sub  section  (2)  of  section  18 

restricts the scope of the powers vested in sub section (1) 

and the same is reproduced as follows.- 

“(2)  An  order  under  sub-section 

(1) 

canceling,  impounding  or  confiscating  a  card  may 

be made only if there is reason to believe that-- 

(a)   the card has been obtained by a person 

who   is  not  eligible  to  hold  such  card, 

by posing himself as eligible; 

(b)   more 

than  one  cards  have  been 

obtained  by  the  same  person  on  the 

same eligibility criteria; 

(c) 

the  particulars  shown  on  the  card  have 

been  obliterated or tampered with; or 

(d)   the card is forged.” 

Pursuant to powers conferred under section 44, the 

Federal Government has made the National Database and 

Registration Authority (Pakistan Origin Card) Rules, 2002 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  „Pakistan  Origin  Card 

Rules‟)  and  the  National  Database  and  Registration 

Authority 

(National 

Identity  Card)  Rules,  2002 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  „National  Identity  Card 

Rules‟).  Moreover,  the  Authority,  in  exercise  of  powers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 17 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

conferred under section 45 of the Ordinance of 2000, has 

made  the  National  Database  and  Registration  Authority 

(Application for National Identity Card) Regulations, 2002 

(hereinafter referred to as the „Regulations of 2002‟). 

A  combined  reading  of  the  Ordinance  of  2000,  the 

Rules of 2002 and the Regulations of 2002 shows that the 

Authority has  been established for a specific purpose i.e. 

to  register  persons  and  to  maintain  the  databases  etc. 

The  different  categories  of  cards  and  the  criteria  for 

eligibility  of  each  have  been  described  under  distinct 

provisions.  For  the  adjudication  of  the  petitions  in  hand, 

the  discussion  will  be  confined  to  the  Computerized 

National  Identity  Card  because  of  its  relevance.  The 

eligibility  criterion  for  issuance  of  the  card  has  been 

explicitly prescribed under section 10 read with section 9 

i.e.  a  citizen  who  has  attained  the  age  of  eighteen  years 

and has been registered under section 9. The registration 

of a person and issuance of CNIC under sections 9 and 10 

is an affirmation by the State that the latter is a citizen of 

Pakistan.  After  issuance  of  the  card,  its  particulars  can 

only  be  modified,  altered  or  changed  in  accordance  with 

the  procedure  and  fulfillment  of  requirements  described 

under  Rule  13  of  the  Rules  of  2002.  There  is  no  cavil  to 

the  proposition  that  the  presumption  of  truth  is  attached 

with  the  card  and  the  particulars  recorded  therein.  The 

scheme of the Ordinance of 2000, read with the Rules of 

2002,  envisages  registration  and  then  issuance  of  the 

 
 
Page - 18 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

card  on  the  basis  of 

information  and  documents 

submitted  by  the  applicant.  The  alteration,  modification 

or changes in an already issued card are also pursuant to 

an  application  filed  by  the  holder  thereof.  Section  18 

empowers the Authority to cancel, impound or confiscate, 

subject to the happening of the eventualities described in 

clauses  (a)  to  (d)  of  sub  section  (2)  ibid.  The  legislature 

has explicitly confined the power vested under section 18 

(1)  to  the  four  grounds  described  under  section  18  (2). 

Moreover, exercising the power is subject to fulfillment of 

the  requirements  of  due  process  i.e  issuance  of  a  show 

cause  notice.  However,  if  disputed  and  contentious 

questions  are  involved  which  require  the  recording  of 

evidence,  then  there  is  no  provision  in  the  Ordinance  of 

2000 empowering the Authority to adjudicate the matter. 

The  Authority  is  definitely  not  empowered  to  adjudicate 

upon  the  question  of  citizenship  of  a  person  because  it 

has to be exclusively dealt with under the Citizenship Act. 

Once  a  card  has  been  issued  then  the  incorporated 

particulars  can  only  be  changed,  modified  or  altered  in 

accordance  with  the  manner  prescribed  under  rule  13  of 

the  Rules  of  2002.  The  said  rule  does  not  entitle  a  third 

party  to  have  the  particulars  changed.  Nonetheless, 

changes  or  modifications  can  be  made  in  execution  of  a 

decree or order passed by a competent court. Likewise, a 

card can be blocked pursuant to an order by a competent 

court  e.g.  in  the  case  of  a  person  declared  as  an 

 
Page - 19 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

absconder  under  the  law.  In  case  of  renunciation, 

deprivation  or 

loss  of  citizenship, 

the  blocking, 

cancellation or revocation of the card would be subject to 

completion of proceedings and passing of an order by the 

respective  competent  authorities  under  the  Citizenship 

Act.  The  Authority  is  bereft  of  jurisdiction  to  initiate 

proceedings  on  the  basis  of  reports  received  from 

intelligence agencies regarding the status of citizenship of 

a person who has been registered as a citizen. The latter, 

at  best,  can 

report  a  case  of  alleged 

fraud, 

misrepresentation or concealment of material facts along 

with  the  relevant  material,  to  the  competent  authority 

empowered under the Citizenship Act. It is noted that the 

reports of intelligence agencies have to be processed and 

placed before the competent authority in accordance with 

the  prescribed  procedure  and  in  the  manner  provided 

under  the  Rules  of  Business,  1973.  Nonetheless,  the 

Authority,  on  the  basis  of  such  reports,  cannot  assume 

jurisdiction otherwise vested in the prescribed competent 

authority  under  the  Citizenship  Act.  The  right  of  appeal 

provided  under  sub  section  2  of  section  18  of  the 

Ordinance of 2002 cannot be a substitute to the exercise 

of  powers  vested  in  the  Federal  Government  under  the 

Citizenship Act. The learned counsels who have appeared 

on  behalf  of  the  Authority  have  confirmed  that  the 

Federal  Government  has  not  delegated  its  powers  to 

deprive a citizen of citizenship.        

 
Page - 20 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

Conclusion:  

9. 

The  survey  of  the  two  aforementioned  statutes  clearly 

shows  that  all  matters  relating  to  or  in  connection  with  the 

'citizenship'  of  a  person  are  covered  and  dealt  with  under  the 

Citizenship  Act  whereas  the  Ordinance  of  2000  has  a  distinct  object 

and  purpose.  The  Authority,  after  a  person  has  fulfilled  all  the 

prescribed  requirements,  registers  the  latter  as  a  citizen  under 

sections 8 and 9 and thereafter issues  a CNIC under section 10 ibid. 

The  registration  and  issuance  of  a  CNIC  is  a  certification  or 

acknowledgment  that  the  person  was  an  eligible  citizen  of  Pakistan. 

The  CNIC  is  a  testament  on  behalf  of  the  State  of  Pakistan  that  its 

holder  is  a  citizen  and  thus  a  presumption  of  truth  is  attached  to  it. 

The  Authority,  under  section  18(2)(a)  of  the  Ordinance  of  2000,  is 

empowered  to  cancel,  impound  or  confiscate  a  CNIC  issued  under 

section  10  if  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that  the  holder  was  not 

eligible  and  had  obtained  the  card  by  posing  to  be  eligible.  In  the 

petitions  in  hand  the  question  of  eligibility  is  in  the  context  of 

citizenship  of  the  petitioners.  The  Authority,  pursuant  to  receiving  

information  from  one  of  the  agencies,  had  purportedly  initiated 

proceedings  by  blocking  the  CNIC  or  had  recklessly  adjudicated  the 

status  of  an  already  registered  citizen  and  consequently  cancelled, 

impounded  or  confiscated  the  card.  In  essence  the  Authority,  on 

mere  suspicion  or  after  adjudicating  upon  the  status  of  a  registered 

citizen,  had  either  blocked  or  cancelled  the  cards,  as  the  case  may 

be. Was the Authority vested with jurisdiction to initiate proceedings 

regarding  'eligibility'  stemming  from  'citizenship'?  The  answer  is  an 

 
 
 
 
Page - 21 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

emphatic  NO.  It  is  noted  that  the  question  of  'eligibility'  having  a 

nexus  with  'citizenship'  could  only  have  been  adjudicated  by  the 

competent  authority  vested  with  jurisdiction  in  this  regard  and  that 

too  in  the  manner  provided  under  the  Citizenship  Act  read  with  the 

Citizenship  Rules.  The  procedure  adopted  by  the  Authority  whereby 

cases  are  referred  to  District  Committees  has  no  backing  of  the  law 

and ultra vires the Citizenship Act and the Citizenship Rules. Once the 

person  was  declared  as  not  being  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and 

adjudication  under  the  aforementioned  statute  had  attained  finality 

only  then  would  the  Authority  have  been  empowered  to  exercise  its 

powers  under  the  Ordinance  of  2000,  particularly  under  section 

18(2)(a)  ibid.  As  discussed  above,  the  Citizenship  Act  is  a  complete 

self  contained  statute  governing  all  matters  relating  to  and  in 

connection  with  the  status  of  a  person  as  a  'citizen'.  The  legislature 

has  clearly  described  the  various  categories  of  'citizenship'  and  has 

provided  statutory  safeguards  so  that  no  person  is  deprived  of  the 

right of citizenship arbitrarily or in a reckless manner. No person can 

be  deprived  of  citizenship  except  in  the  manner  and  subject  to  the 

conditions provided under section 16 of the Citizenship Act. Moreover, 

in  the  case  of  birthright  citizenship  explicitly  acknowledged  under 

section 4, if the competent authority i.e. the Federal Government on 

the basis of credible information has reasons to believe that a person 

is  not  eligible  as  a  citizen  then  it  may  proceed  under  subsections  6 

and 7 of section 16 or adopt the procedure prescribed under rule 8 of 

the  Citizenship  Rules.  The  course of  action  adopted  by  the  Authority 

in order to determine the eligibility of an already registered citizen on 

the  basis  of  the  citizenship  of  the  latter  is  ultra  vires  the  Citizenship 

 
Page - 22 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

Act read with the Citizenship Rules. The procedure regarding referring 

the  cases  to  the  purported  District  Committees  is  also  alien  to  the 

statutory  provisions 

and 

safeguards  provided  under 

the 

aforementioned statute. The legislature, in its wisdom, has not vested 

the  Authority  with  the  power  to  suspend  or  block  a  CNIC  and  as 

already noted, in order to do so a judicial order by a competent court 

would  be  required.  Blocking  a  card  would  tantamount  to  suspending 

the  citizenship  of  a  registered  citizen  and  exposing  the  latter  to  the 

horrendous  consequences  that  follow.  It  is,  therefore,  declared  that 

the Authority is bereft of jurisdiction or power to directly or indirectly 

determine  or  adjudicate  upon  the  status  and  eligibility  of  a  person's 

citizenship who has already been registered as a citizen. It is further 

declared that the exercise of powers conferred under section 18(2)(a) 

of  the  Ordinance  of  2000  on  the  ground  of  eligibility  relating  to 

citizenship are subject to determination or adjudication made by the 

competent  authority  and  in  the  manner  provided  under  the 

Citizenship Act read with the Citizenship Rules. The Authority is bereft 

of the power to block, suspend, impound or confiscate a CNIC on the 

ground of eligibility relating to citizenship  unless an order passed  by 

the  competent  authority  under  subsection  6  of  section  16  of  the 

Citizenship  Act  has  attained  finality  or  the  Authority  has  been 

informed  that  the  competent  authority  has  either  confirmed 

renunciation  of  citizen  ship  under  section  14  A  or  its  loss  under 

section 16 A, as the case may be.                                

10. 

The  petitioners  assert  that  they  were  born  in  Pakistan 

and,  on  the  basis  of  reports  received  from  one  of  the  intelligence 

agencies,  the  Authority,  without  having  jurisdiction  and  in  an 

 
                  
 
Page - 23 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

arbitrary  manner,  blocked  or  cancelled  their  CNICs.  The  respective 

agencies  had  reported  that  the  petitioners  were  not  citizens  of 

Pakistan.  The  Authority  issued  notices.  Perusal  of  the  notices  shows 

that  particulars  of  the  petitioners  were  filled  in  a  pre-published 

standard form. Without disclosing the material to the petitioners and 

denying  them  the  right  of  response  on  the  touchstone  of  the 

principles  of  due  process,  the  Authority  either  blocked  or  in  some 

cases cancelled the CNICs of the petitioners. In a perfunctory manner 

the  petitioners  were  deprived  of  being  citizens  of  Pakistan  merely 

because  an  intelligence  agency  had  reported  so.  Despite  the 

devastating  impact  of  rendering  the  petitioners  Stateless,  no 

reasoned  order  was  passed  by  the  Authority.  The  sole  ground  for 

blocking or cancellation of the CNICs of the petitioners was that they 

had falsely declared themselves as citizens of Pakistan.  

11. 

Citizenship  is  the  most  valuable  basic  right  of  a  human. 

All  other  rights,  whether  social  or  political,  cannot  be  enjoyed  if  a 

person  does  not  have  a  bond  of  citizenship  with  a  State.  The 

fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  are  rendered 

meaningless if a person is stripped of citizenship. It has a devastating 

impact on human lives. A person once registered as a citizen cannot 

be  deprived  of  citizenship  otherwise  than  as  is  provided  under  the 

law.  Article  15  of  the  1948  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights 

declares  that  'everyone  has  the  right  of  nationality.  No  one  shall  be 

arbitrarily  deprived  of  his  nationality  nor  denied  the  right  to  change 

his  nationality'.  Article  7  of  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  a  Child 

recognizes that every child has the right to acquire a nationality. The 

1954  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Stateless  Persons  and  the 

 
 
 
Page - 24 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

1961  Convention  on  the  Reduction  of  Statelessness  discourages 

States  from  creating  statelessness.  In  a  nut  shell,  citizenship  is  the 

sole and effective bond between a State and a human which enables 

the latter to enjoy all the rights guaranteed under the Constitution. It 

entitles the individual to the protection of the State and to enjoy civil 

and political rights. A State cannot adopt policies which will have the 

effect  of  even  inadvertently  rendering  a  person  stateless.  The 

Citizenship Act and the Citizenship Rules and the statutory safeguards 

prescribed  therein  are  consistent  with 

the  mandate  of  the 

Constitution  and  the  international  obligations.  Citizenship  is  so 

precious  a  right  that  cannot  be  taken  away  in  a  reckless  or 

perfunctory  manner.  The  facts  relating  to  one  of  the  petitioners, 

namely Hafiz Hamdullah Saboor, have been discussed above. It is not 

even denied that he was born within the territory of Pakistan. He and 

his  father  have  lived  in  Pakistan  all  their  lives.  They  own  properties 

and  the  petitioner  has  held  various  public  offices  as  an  elected 

representative.  His  son  has  the  distinction  and  privilege  of  having 

been accepted as a commissioned officer in the Armed Forces. There 

could not have been a more glaring example of arbitrary and reckless 

action by the Authority of purportedly depriving a registered citizen of 

his citizenship and that too when the latter had no jurisdiction under 

the  Ordinance  of  2000  to  do  so.  In  all  the  other  petitions  the 

petitioners assert that they were born in Pakistan and this factum has 

neither  been  verified  nor  adjudicated  upon  by  the  competent 

authority in accordance with the provisions of the Citizenship Act read 

with  the  Citizenship  Rules.  The  Authority  has  exposed  itself  to  be 

 
Page - 25 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

sued  for  claim  of  damages  for  the  devastating  consequences  and 

unimaginable mental agony suffered by the petitioners.                                   

12. 

The  Citizenship  Act  and  the  Ordinance  of  2002  have 

already been discussed. The purpose and object of the two statutes is 

distinct.  All  matters  relating  to  citizenship  are  dealt  with  under  the 

Citizenship  Act.  The  legislature,  in  its  wisdom,  has  expressly 

recognized  and  upheld  birthright  citizenship  as  a  right.  A  plain 

reading  of  section  4  unambiguously  shows  that  the  right  is  not 

subject to any condition.  Birthright citizenship automatically makes a 

person who is born in Pakistan a citizen and in this regard the latter 

does not have to fulfill any prerequisites to become a citizen unlike in 

the case of other categories such as 'citizenship by naturalization' or 

'citizenship by immigration'. It is not a privilege granted by the State 

but  a  right  acquired  by  law.  The  onus  is  on  the  State  to  establish 

that,  despite  having  been  born  in  Pakistan,  the  person  would  not 

come  within  the  mandate  of  section  4  of  the  Citizenship  Act.  There 

are  about  thirty  five  countries  across  the  globe  which  have 

incorporated birthright citizenship in their domestic laws and Pakistan 

is  one  of  them.  There  appear  to  be  some  countries  where  birthright 

citizenship  is  offered  on  conditional  basis  but  that  is  not  the  case 

under the Citizenship Act. The United States of America, following the 

Civil  War,  had  declared  birthright  citizenship  in  1868  and  it  was 

accordingly  incorporated  as  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  in  the 

Constitution. The United Kingdom withdrew this privileged legal right 

more  than  three  decades  ago.  Section  4  of  the  Citizenship  Act  is 

unambiguous  and  the  right  is  unqualified  nor  subject  to  fulfilling 

conditions. It is a right acquired by operation of law unless the State 

 
 
 
Page - 26 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

of  Pakistan  is  able  to  discharge  its  onus  of  establishing  that  the 

person does not fall within its ambit.  

13. 

It was argued before this Court that due to wrong policies 

in  the  past  ineligible  persons  had  managed  to  obtain  CNICs.  If  so, 

then  the  policy  makers  or  public  office  holders  responsible  for 

formulating  such  policies  and  misgovernance  ought  to  be  made 

accountable but  this definitely does not justify  reckless and arbitrary 

proceedings in violation of laws enforced in Pakistan. In each case the 

competent  authority  is  required  to  make  determination  of  status  of 

the  person  in  accordance  with  and  in  the  manner  prescribed  under 

the  law.  It  is  the  constitutional  duty  of  public  functionaries  to  act 

strictly  in  accordance  with  the  mandate  of  law.  No  innocent  and 

eligible citizen can be allowed to suffer the devastating consequences 

of statelessness on account of reckless actions of public functionaries 

as appears to be the case in the petitions in hand. If the intelligence 

agencies  have  credible  information  to  the  effect  that  ineligible 

persons  have  been  registered  as  citizens,  then  they  are  required  to 

report  the  matter  alongwith  credible  material  to  the  respective 

administrative  Ministry  or  Division,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  latter  if 

satisfied  that  a  prima  facie  case  is  made  out  would  then  refer  the 

case  for  determination  to  the  designated  competent  authority  under 

the  Citizenship  Act  read  with  the  Citizenship  Rules.  The  intelligence 

agencies  are  bound  to  adopt  the  procedure  prescribed  under  the 

Rules  of  Business,  1973  and  also  to  ensure  that  the  fundamental 

rights of eligible citizens are protected and that they are not exposed 

to the consequences of statelessness.   

 
 
 
 
Page - 27 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

14. 

It  is  the  duty  of  this  Court  to  interpret  the  law 

promulgated  by  the  legislature  and  it  cannot  read  into  a  statute 

something  not  provided  therein.  The  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  is 

the  competent  Constitutional  forum  to  amend  the  law.  Nonetheless, 

the factum of birth in Pakistan or depriving a person from citizenship 

can  only  be  competently  adjudicated  upon  and  determined  by  the 

competent  authority  declared  for  this  purpose  and  in  the  manner 

provided  under  the  Citizenship  Act  read  with  the  Citizenship  Rules 

and  once  the  question  of  eligibility  had  attained  finality  only  then 

could  the  Authority  have  competently  exercised  its  powers  provided 

under  section  18(2)(a)  of  the  Ordinance  of  2000.  The  petitions  are 

held  to  be  maintainable  on  the  touchstone  of  the  law  enunciated  by 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  titled  “Lt.  Col.  Nawabzada 

Muhammad Amir Khan VS The Controller of Estate Duty and others‟, 

[PLD 1961 SC 119],  “The Muree Brewery Co.Ltd vs Pakistan through 

the  Secretary  to  Government  of  Pakistan,  Works  Division  and  2 

others‟,  [PLD  1972  SC  279],  „Commissioner  of  Income  Tax, 

Companies-II and another VS Hamdard Dawakhana (Waqf), Karachi‟, 

[PLD  1992  SC  847],  and  „Khalid  Mehmood  vs  Collector  of  Customs, 

Customs  House,  Lahore‟,  [1999  SCMR  1881]    because  the  actions, 

proceedings and orders passed by the Authority in the cases in hand 

were wholly bereft of authority and  jurisdiction.               

15. 

The  order,  dated  26-10-2019,  issued  by  PEMRA  and 

impugned in W.P. No.3748/2019 whereby the TV Channels have been 

restrained  from  “inviting  and  projecting  the  petitioner  in  the 

programs/talk shows, news, etc” was an obvious misuse of authority 

vested  under  the  Pakistan  Electronic  Media  Regulatory  Authority 

 
 
 
 
Page - 28 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

Ordinance, 2002. It was issued in derogation of the rights guaranteed 

under  Articles 19 and 19-A of the Constitution.  The said  statute and 

the  rules/regulations  made  thereunder  do  not  vest  absolute  and 

unbridled powers in PEMRA to regulate the content or participants of 

a  programme.  There  is  nothing  on  record  to  justify  passing  of  the 

impugned order by PEMRA. The order, dated 26-10-2019, is declared 

to  have  been  issued  illegally  and  wholly  without  authority  and 

jurisdiction.  

16. 

In  the  light  of  the  above  the  petitions  are  allowed.  The 

Authority is directed to restore the CNICs of the petitioners forthwith. 

Needless  to  mention  that  the  competent  authority  under  the 

Citizenship  Act,  read  with  the  Citizenship  Rules,  would  not  be 

precluded  from  proceeding  in  the  prescribed  manner  in  case  it  is  of 

the  opinion  that,  based  on  credible  material,  a  prima  facie  case  is 

made out to deprive a person of citizenship or that the latter was not 

eligible for it.       

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Approved for reporting.  

Luqman Khan/* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 29 
W.P. No.3748/2019 

ANNEXURE - A 

S. No. 

Writ Petition 

1.   

2.   

3.   

4.   

5.   

6.   

7.   

8.   

9.   

10. 

11. 

W.P. No.3748/2019  
“Hafiz  Hamdullah  Saboor  v.  Government  of 
Pakistan, etc.” 
W.P. No. 1050/2020 
“Abdul Raheem & 4 others v. Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary Ministry of Interior& 2 others”  
W.P. No. 3847/2018  
“Naik  Muhammad,  etc.  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan, 
etc.” 
W.P. No. 4546/2018  
“Muhammad  Hanif  Khan,  etc.  v.  Government  of 
Pakistan, etc.” 
W.P. No. 484/2019  
“Mst.  Sahib  Jan,  etc.  v.  Government  of  Pakistan, 
etc.” 
W.P. No.2175/2019  
“Mubarak  Khan,  etc.  v.  Government  of  Pakistan, 
etc.” 
W.P. No.3395/2019  
“Lal Muhammad, etc. v. NADRA” 
W.P. No. 3497/2019  
“Hayat Khan, etc. v. Chairman NADRA, etc.” 
W.P. No. 308/2020  
“Shah Mardan v. Chairman NADRA” 
 W.P. No. 527/2020  
“Muhammad Hanif v. NADRA” 
 W.P. No.1585/2020  
“Najeebullah, etc. v. Federation of Pakistan, etc.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
