Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

               WRIT PETITION NO. 4227 OF 2021 

                                         Mst. Mumtaz Bibi  

   VS 

Qasim and others  

PETITIONER BY:      Ms. Sadaf Sehar Moon, Advocate. 

RESPONDENTS BY:  Mr. Shazeb Nawaz Khan, State Counsel.  
Ms.  Nosheen  Gul  Kharal,  Advocate  for 
respondents No. 1 to 3.  
Mr. Talat Mehmood, S.I, P.S Golra Sharif, 
Islamabad.  

DATE OF HEARING:  03.01.2022. 
========================================  

  BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  The  petitioner  is  aggrieved  by  the 

abduction  of  her  daughter,  Swera  Falak  Sher  (“Minor”),  who 

was born on 07.03.2006, and seeks her recovery. 

2. 

Learned  counsel 

for  the  petitioner  stated  that  an 

application  for  registration  of  FIR  was  made  by  the  son  of  the 

petitioner  after  the  incident  of  abduction  dated  18.05.2021  and 

FIR  No.351/2021  was  subsequently  registered  on  06.06.2021 

under  section  365-B/34  of  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860  (“PPC”) 

at  Police  Station  Golra  Sharif,  Islamabad  against  respondents 

No.  1  and  2  and  other  unknown  accused.  She  submitted  that 

despite  persistent  efforts  the  police  authorities  neither  included 

respondent  No.1  in  the  investigation  nor  produced  the  15-year 

old  daughter  of  the  petitioner  who  has  been  missing  since 

18.05.2021. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted 

that pursuant to application filed under Section 491 of the Code 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 2 

of  Criminal  Procedure  (“Cr.P.C.”)  a  bailiff  was  appointed  who 

submitted a report before the learned Additional Sessions Judge 

stating that the wife of respondent No.3 had informed the bailiff 

that  the  daughter  of  the  petitioner  had  been  married  to 

respondent  No.1.  And  it  was  on  this  basis  that  the  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge  passed  order  dated  20.10.2021, 

pursuant to which the petition was dismissed.  

3.  

On  03.12.2021  the  SHO,  Police  Station  Golra  Sharif, 

Islamabad  appeared  in  person  and  assured  the  court  that  the 

Minor would be produced in the Court by 06.12.2021. On the said 

date,  the  SHO  produced  the  Minor,  who  stated  in  court  that  she 

had married respondent No.1 and was unwilling to go along with 

the  petitioner  (i.e.  her  mother)  to  her  family  home.  This  Court 

then  ordered  that  the  Minor  be  lodged  in  Dar-ul-Aman  and 

directed the Administrator, Dar-ul-Aman to allow the petitioner to 

meet with the Minor under the  supervision of Administrator  Dar-

ul-Aman.  It  was  also  directed  that  an  analysis  of  the 

psychological and mental state of the Minor be undertaken by the 

psychologist  at  Dar-ul-Aman  and  a  report  be  submitted  to  the 

Court.  The  Court  had  further  directed  National  Database  and 

Registration  Authority  (“NADRA”)  to  place  a  report  before  this 

Court  verifying  the  details  in  the  Family  Registration  Certificate 

(“FRC”)  of  the  petitioner’s  family  reflecting  the  date  of  birth  of 

the Minor as 07.03.2006. Further the SHO, respondent No.5, was 

directed  to  interview  the  petitioner  along  with  her  husband  and 

the  brothers  of  the  Minor,  and  file  a  report  before  the  Court 

stating  whether  the  Minor’s  safety  would  be  in  jeopardy  in  the 

custody of the petitioner. On 16.12.2021 the psychologist of Dar-

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 3 

ul-Aman  appeared  before  the  Court  and  stated  that  she  had 

interviewed the Minor who was stable and not a threat to herself. 

On 23.12.2021 the father of the Minor along with brothers of the 

Minor appeared in Court along with the petitioner and assured the 

Court that as a family of the Minor they would be responsible for 

her  security  and  well-being.  On  the  said  date  the  Court  directed 

that  the  Minor  continue  to  stay  in  Dar-ul-Aman  and  that  the 

father and brothers of the Minor may also be allowed to meet the 

Minor at Dar-ul-Aman under the supervision of the Administrator.  

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  stated  that  the  FRC 

reflected  that  the  Minor  was  15  years  of  age  and  the  said  FRC 

had  been  verified  by  NADRA  as  well.  She  relied  on  Muhammad 

Safeer  VS  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (West)  Islamabad 

and  others  (2018  PLD  Islamabad  385)  for  the  proposition 

that  where  a  report  submitted  by  NADRA  confirmed  the  date  of 

birth  of  a  party  to  a  marriage  there  was  no  reason  to  order  a 

medical  examination  of  such  person.  She  further  relied  on  Mst. 

Alishba  Bibi  VS  The  State  and  7  others  (2020  PLD 

Islamabad  28),  where  this  Court  had  given  detailed  directions 

to the concerned authorities to curb the evil of child marriages. In 

the  said  judgment  it  had  been  held  that  question  of  age  of  the 

Minor  should  be  determined  by  the  court  of  competent 

jurisdiction  after  recording  of  evidence.    She  further  relied  on 

Mst.  Bakhshi  VS  Bashir  Ahmed  (PLD  1970  SC  323)  for  the 

proposition  that  any  person  who  married  a  girl  below  the  age  of 

16  years  was  criminally  liable  under  provisions  of  the  Pakistan 

Penal  Code,  1860  (“PPC”).  She  submitted  that  the  petitioner 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 4 

and  her  husband  were  the  parents  and  natural  guardians  of  the 

Minor,  who  was  living  with  them  in  her  family  home  before  she 

was abducted by respondent No.1. That the Minor had now filed a 

suit  for  jactitation  of  marriage  before  the  court  vested  with 

jurisdiction, and pending the decision of such suit the Minor ought 

to be released in the custody of the petitioner.    

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  and  3  submitted 

that the Minor had married respondent No.1 and respondent No.1 

be allowed to meet the Minor. And further that the Minor may be 

released  in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.1,  who  was  the 

husband  of  the  Minor.  She  relied  on  Muhammad  Khalid  VS 

Magistrate Ist Class and 2 others (PLD 2021 Lahore 21) for 

the proposition that a girl who had attained puberty, even if she 

was  14/15  years  of  age,  could  enter  into  a  contract  of  marriage 

with a  man of her  choice and that  it  was not necessary for such 

girl  to  obtain  the  consent  of  her  guardian/wali.  In  the  said 

judgment  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court  after  relying  on 

Muhammad Iqbal v. The State (PLD 1983 FSC 9) and Mauj 

Ali  VS  Safdar  Hussain  Shah  (1970  SCMR  437)  held  that  a 

minor girl who had attained puberty and married of her own free 

will  was  to  be  released  from  Dar-ul-Aman  and  proceed  with  her 

husband or with her parents as she pleased. She further relied on 

Rashad  Nazir  VS  The  State  and  3  others  (2000  SCMR 

1179)  for  the  proposition  that  a  sui  juris  girl  could  not  be 

directed  to  live  in  Dar-ul-Aman.  She  also  relied  on  Muhammad 

Bashir  VS  Muhammad  Usman  (2003  SCMR  1339)  where  a 

sui  juris  girl  appeared  before  the  High  Court  and  admitted  that 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 5 

she  had  contracted  marriage  with  the  accused  against  whom  an 

FIR  for  her  abduction  had  been  registered.  The  august  Supreme 

Court  upheld  the  judgment  of  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court 

quashing the said FIR.  

6.  Mr.  Shazeb  Nawaz  Khan  Advocate,  the  learned  State 

Counsel, submitted that while the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 

1961  (“MFLO”)  dealt  with  the  registration  of  marriage,  divorce 

etc., neither the said Ordinance nor the rules framed thereunder 

addressed the issue of marriage with a minor. He submitted that 

section  23  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  prohibited  the  court 

from questioning the validity of a marriage which was registered 

under  the  MFLO.  He  submitted  that  in  view  of  the  lack  of  clarity 

within  the  MFLO,  marriages  of  the  minors  under  the  age  of  18 

years  have  continued  as  a  matter  of  practice  in  view  of  the 

customary understanding of law that marriages of Muslim citizens 

are regulated by the Muslim Personal Law. He further stated that 

under  the  West  Pakistan  Muslim  Personal  Law  (Shariat) 

Application  Act,  1962,  Muslim  Personal  Law  on  the  question  of 

marriage  was  applicable  subject  to  provisions  of  any  enactment 

for  the  time  being  in  force.  Consequently,  Muslim  Personal  Law 

could  be  relied  on  as  a  source  of  law  with  regard  to  a  question 

relating  to a marriage that arose before the court. He submitted 

that Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 defined “child” in case of 

a  female  as  a  person  under  16  years  of  age  and  section  4 

provided that a male married a female under the age of 16 years 

of  age  was  punishable  with  simple  imprisonment  which  may 

extend to one month.  He further  stated that pursuant to  section 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 6 

2(vii)  of  Dissolution  of  Muslim  Marriages  Act,  1939,  a  minor  girl 

was  entitled  to  seek  dissolution  of  marriage  before  she  attained 

the  age  of  16  years  provided  that  the  marriage  was  not 

consummated.  He  submitted  that  most  of  the  case  law  on  the 

question  of  marriage  had  relied  on  commentary  on  Muslim 

Personal Law by Dinshaw F. Mulla wherein under para 251 of the 

commentary  it  has  been  stated  that  it  would  be  assumed  that  a 

female  had capacity to enter  into a marriage contract  if  she had 

attained  puberty.  He  contended  that  while  the  said  commentary 

was not a source of law or binding on the court, a perusal of case 

law  reflected  that  it  had  been  treated  as  a  source  of  law  and 

relied on by the courts to determine the question of legal capacity 

of  a  minor  to  engage  in  a  marriage.  He  then  drew  the  court’s 

attention  to  Muhammad  Aslam  VS  State  (2012  PCr.LJ  11), 

wherein  the  learned  Federal  Shariat  Court,  contrary  to  the 

suggestion  that  puberty  alone  determined  a  girl’s  capacity  to 

marry,  had  dwelled  on  the  meaning  of  consenting  adults  for 

purposes of marriage, and had held that such consenting adult is 

a person who has come of age responsible enough to understand 

the  consequence  of  marriage  and  the  responsibilities  that  it 

entails.  He  relied  on  Mst.  Shahida  and  another  VS  Province 

of Sindh through Home Secretary, Sindh and others (2016 

PCr.LJ  Note  61)  for  the  proposition  that  no  minor  was  capable 

of  giving  consent.  He  then  relied  on  Tariq  Mahmood  and 

another VS The State (2000 PCr.LJ 226) wherein the learned 

Federal Shariat Court while adjudicating the question of marriage 

of a 13-year-old girl had held that where the female was not 16 

years of age on the date of Nikah and her attaining puberty could 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 7 

not be proved from the record she was not sui juris and was not 

capable  of  granting  consent  for  marriage.  He  relied  on  Ghulam 

Qadir  VS  The  Judge  Family  Court,  Muree  and  another 

(1988  CLC  113)  for  the  proposition  that  a  minor  was  not 

competent  to  contract  marriage.  In  the  said  judgment,  the 

learned  Lahore  High  Court  had  held  that  the  marriage  of  a  child 

was  not  invalid  but  could  be  annulled.  It  further  held  that  a 

guardian could contract the marriage of child. He relied on certain 

cases  where  the  alleged  abductee  was  found  to  be  sui  juris  and 

admitted  to  have  contracted  marriage  with  the  accused  against 

whom  an  FIR  had  been  registered,  and  the  courts  found  that 

there  was  no  basis  for  registration  of  an  FIR  and  quashed  the 

same.  The  learned  State  Counsel  concluded  by  saying  that  in 

view  of  the  provisions  of  the  Child  Marriage  Restraint  Act,  1929, 

read together with the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939, 

the  legislative  intent  was  clear  that  a  girl  under  the  age  of  16 

years  could  not  enter  into  a  contract  for  marriage.  But 

notwithstanding  statutory  provisions  prohibiting  such  marriage 

contracts,  marriages  of  minors  had  continued  as  the  MFLO  had 

not clearly declared that marriages of minors would be invalid.  

7.  

In  view  of  the  FRC,  as  verified  by  NADRA,  the  date  of 

birth  of  the  Minor  is  07.03.2006.  She  was  14  years  and  02 

months old at the time (i.e. 18.05.2021) when she was allured by 

respondent No.1 to come along with him for purposes of entering 

into  a  relationship  and  executing  a  marriage  contract.  The 

question  of  validity  of  such  marriage  is  not  the  main  question 

before this Court, but arises incidentally in discharge of its duty of 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 8 

treating  the  Minor  in  accordance  with  law  and  determining  who 

ought  to  be  handed  over  the  custody  of  the  Minor  till  such  time 

that a court of competent jurisdiction rules on the existence and 

legality of any relationship between the Minor and respondent No. 

1. This Court can therefore not pass a declaration whether or not 

the  purported  marriage  contract  between  the  parties  is  valid  or 

not as doing so would require definitively determining the age of 

the  Minor,  which  could  require  recording  of  evidence,  and  this 

Court  in  its  constitutional  jurisdiction  cannot  undertake  such 

exercise. This Court must however decide whether the Minor who 

has  been  produced  before  the  Court  and  is  presently  lodged  in 

Dar-ul-Aman  is  to  be  released  in  the  custody  of  the  petitioner, 

who  is  her  mother,  or  is  to  be  released  in  the  custody  of 

respondent  No.1,  who  claims  to  have  solemnized  a  contract  of 

marriage with the minor. The issues that arise in relation to such 

question include the following: 

1.  Can a Minor execute a valid contract of marriage and 

can a marriage between an adult and a child, even if 

with the consent of the child, be deemed to be a valid 

marriage? 

2.  What  is  the  age  of  majority  in  Pakistan,  and  does  a 

Minor  have  the  legal  competence  to  enter  into  a 

contract  of  marriage  before  attaining  the  age  of 

majority? 

3.  Can  the  consideration  and  purpose  of  contract  of 

marriage be regarded as lawful  in view of section 23 

of the Contract Act, 1872, read together with sections 

375 and 377A of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860? 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 9 

4.  Can  a  contract  of  marriage,  involving  an  object  and 

purpose  that  is  proscribed,  be  treated  as  a  valid 

contract  while  simultaneously  creating  criminal 

liability  for  the  male  for  carrying  out  acts  conceived 

by such contract? 

8. 

The  foundational  purpose  of  rule  of  law  is  to  enable 

citizens  to  order  their  lives  in  accordance  with  provisions  of  law 

and  to  be  able  to  understand  which  actions  are  permissible  that 

the citizens are free to engage in for not having been prohibited, 

and which actions are proscribed by law and consequently not to 

be undertaken.  Article 4 of the Constitution guarantees a right to 

every individual to be dealt in accordance with law and states the 

following: 

4.  Right  of  individuals  to  be  dealt  with  in  accordance 

with  law,  etc.  (1)  To  enjoy  the  protection  of  law  and  to  be 

treated in accordance with law is the inalienable right of every 

citizen.  Wherever  he  may  be,  and  of  every  other  person  for 

the time being within Pakistan.  

(2) In particular—  

(a)  no  action  detrimental  to  the  life,  liberty,  body, 

reputation  or  property  of  any  person  shall  be  taken 

except in accordance with law;  

(b) no person shall be prevented from or be hindered in 

doing that which is not prohibited by law; and  

(c) no person shall be compelled to do that which the law 

does not required him to do. 

9. 

In  order  for  citizens  to  ensure  that  their  actions  do  not 

fall foul of the law attracting punitive liability, it is imperative that 

law  lays  down  the  acceptable  rule  of  conduct  with  clarity.  It 

cannot  be  countenanced  that  in  a  rule  of  law  system  an  action 

 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 10 

would be prohibited by law engaging in which constituted a crime 

attracting  significant  jail  time,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  very 

same  action  was  to  be  treated  as  the  foundation  of  a  valid 

contractual relationship. In order to make sense of the concept of 

rule of law, the laws of a country must speak with one voice that 

the  citizens  can  understand  in  order  to  comply  with  the 

requirements  of  law  and  know  in  advance  which  actions  are 

proscribed and would result in legal liability. This is why courts of 

law  while  discharging  the  function  of  interpreting  laws  take  a 

holistic view of the  statutes in force in  order  not to accord them 

contradictory  interpretations,  as  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  the 

legislature  while  promulgating  a  law  would  not  have  intended  to 

enact provisions that would contradict other provisions of law also 

in force. Principles  of statutory interpretation thus require courts 

to  accord  meaning  to  provisions  of  a  statute  in  a  manner  that 

they do not contradict the intent and purpose of other statutes to 

the  extent  possible.  And  if  in  view  of  the  clear  text  of  a  statute 

such  interpretation  is  not  possible,  there  are  other  principles  of 

statutory interpretation (i.e. as a general matter the law later  in 

time prevails as the latest expression of legislative intent) applied 

to lay down for the benefit of citizens the applicable requirements 

of law with clarity.  

10. 

Let  us  start  with  the  framework  of  rights  of  children  as 

guaranteed  by  the  Constitution.  Children  like  adults  have  been 

guaranteed  the  right  to  life  and  liberty  by  Article  9  of  the 

Constitution. Article 9 was interpreted expansively by the august 

Supreme  Court  in  Ms.  Shehla  Zia  and  others  VS  WAPDA 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 11 

(PLD 1994 SC 693) as a meaningful right to enjoy life and not 

just to exist. Through the 18th Constitutional Amendment, Article 

25A  was  added  to  the  Constitution,  which  holds  that  “the  State 

shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the 

age  of  five  to  sixteen  years  in  such  manner  as  may  be 

determined  by  law.”  Thus,  the  Constitution  itself  declares  that  it 

is mandatory for the State to ensure that children up to the age 

of  16  are  given  educational  instruction.  Article  35  of  the 

Constitution holds that “the State shall protect the marriage, the 

family, the mother and the child.”  

11. 

In  any  rule  of  law  framework,  a  distinction  is  drawn 

between  actions  of  adults  VS the  actions  of  children.  The 

reason  is  simple.  Adults  are  assumed  to  understand  the 

consequences  of 

their  actions  and  are  accordingly  held 

accountable for such consequences. Children, on the other hand, 

are not assumed to have complete agency and the law therefore 

acknowledges 

that 

they  might  neither  understand 

the 

consequences  of  their  actions  nor  can  be  held  completely 

responsible  for  such  actions.  Every  State  through  legislative 

enactment determines the age at which a person is to be treated 

as  an  individual  with  autonomy  and  human  agency  for  purposes 

of certain actions. This is the age at which his or her actions are 

deemed  valid  and  are  to  be  given  effect  as  he  or  she  has  the 

capacity  to  understand  their  consequences,  and  the 

law 

accordingly  holds  such  person  accountable  for  them.  Part  of  the 

question  before  us  is  the  age  at  which  a  person  in  Pakistan  is 

deemed to have the agency and capacity to enter into a contract 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 12 

for marriage and grant informed consent while understanding the 

myriad consequences and responsibilities marriage entails.   

12. 

The  case  law  on  the  question  of  competence  of  a  Minor 

to  consent  to  a  contract  of  marriage  is  divergent.  It  has  been 

assumed  that  the  question  of  legal  competence  of  a  Minor  to 

solemnize  a  marriage  contract  is  regulated  by  Muslim  Personal 

Law and not statutes enacted by the legislature. Research of the 

case law on the subject throws up references from paragraphs of 

Dinshaw  F.  Mulla’s  commentary  on  Muslim  Personal  Law  on  the 

basis  of  which  it  has  been  held  that  a  female  child  is  competent 

to  enter  into  a  contract  of  marriage  once  she  has  attained 

puberty.  Paragraphs  250  and  251  of  Mulla’s  commentary  on 

Muslim Personal Law state the following: 

250. Definition of Marriage.—Marriage (nikah) is defined to 
be  contract  which  has  for  its  object  the  procreation  and  the 
legalizing of children.  

251.  Capacity  for  marriage.—(1)  Every  Muhammedan  of 
sound  mind,  who  has  attained  puberty,  may  enter  into  a 
contract of marriage.  

(2)  Lunatics  and  minors  who  have  not  attained  puberty  may 
be  validly  contracted 
in  marriage  by  their  respective 
guardians. 

(3) A marriage of a Muhammedan who is of sound mind and 
has attained puberty, is void, if it is brought about without his 
consent.  

13. 

Before  we  proceed  with  the  question  of  application  of 

Muslim Personal Law to determine the legal competence of a child 

to  execute  a  marriage  contract,  a  comment  on  Mulla’s 

commentary on Muslim Personal Law as a source of law is called 

for.    Dinshaw  Fardunji  Mulla  was  not  a  muslim  scholar  who  can 

be  accredited  with  religious  expertise  to  interpret  precepts  of 

Islam.  Dinshaw  Fardunji  Mulla,  of  Zoroastrian  faith  by  descent, 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 13 

was a legal scholar who authored treatises on various subjects of 

law, including contract law and Muslim Personal Law. His treatise 

on  Muslim  Personal  Law  is  therefore  like  any  other  legal 

commentary  by  a  scholar  of  law  as  opposed  to  the  commentary 

by a Muslim jurist with expertise or authority to interpret primary 

sources  of  Islamic  Law.  Dinshaw  Mulla’s  commentary  can 

therefore  not  be  treated  as  a  source  of  law  itself  but  like  any 

other  treatise  commenting  on  a  subject  of  law  can  be  used  as  a 

reference and a commentary.  

14. 

The  suggestion  that  questions  such  as  marriage, 

maintenance  and  divorce  for  the  Muslim  citizens  of  Pakistan  are 

regulated  by  Muslim  Personal  Law  and  not  by  statute  is 

misconceived  and  emanates  from  a  flawed  reading  of  West 

Pakistan  Muslim  Personal  Law  (Shariat)  Application  Act,  1962 

(“Act  of  1962”).  Section  2  of  the  Act  of  1962  states  the 

following: 

 2.   Application  of 

the  Muslim  Personal  Law.—

Notwithstanding  any  custom  or  usage,  in  all  questions 

regarding  succession  (whether  testate  or  intestate),  special 

property  of  females,  betrothal,  marriage,  divorce,  dower, 

adoption,  guardianship,  minority,  legitimacy  or  bastardy, 

family  relations,  wills,  legacies,  gifts,  religious  usages  or 

institutions,  including  waqfs,  trusts  and  trust  properties,  the 

rule  of  decision,  subject  to  the  provisions  of  any 

enactment for the time being in force, shall be the Muslim 

Personal Law (Shariat) in case where the parties are Muslims. 

[Emphasis supplied] 

15. 

It  is  evident  from  the  text  highlighted  above  that 

application  of  Muslim  Personal  Law  in  relation  to  subjects 

mentioned  in  section  2,  including  marriage,  is  subject  to 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 14 

provisions  of  enactments  for  the  time  being  in  force  in  Pakistan. 

Sections 3 and 4 of the Enforcement of Shari’ah Act, 1991 (“Act 

of 1991”), which Act is subsequent to the Act of 1962, state the 

following: 

3.  Supremacy  of  Shari’ah.  (1)  The  Shari’ah  that  is  to  say 

the  Injunctions  of Islam  as  laid  down  in  the Holy  Qur’an  and 

Sunnah, shall be the supreme law of Pakistan. 

(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  Act,  the 

judgment of any Court or any other law for the time being in 

force,  the  present  political  system,  including  the  Majlis-e-

Shoora  (Parliament)  and  Provincial  Assemblies  and  the 

existing system of Government, shall not be challenged in any 

Court, including Supreme Court, the Federal Shariat Court or 

any authority or tribunal: 

Provided  that  nothing  contained  herein  shall  affect  the 

right  of  the  non-Muslims  guaranteed  by  or  under  the 

Constitution. 

4.  Laws  to  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  Shari’ah. 

For the purpose of this Act— 

(a)  while  interpreting  the  statute-law,  if  more  than  one 

interpretation is possible, the one consistent with the Islamic 

principles  and  jurisprudence  shall  be  adopted  by  the  Court; 

and 

(b)  where  two  or  more  interpretations  are  equally  possible, 

the interpretation which advances the Principles of Policy and 

Islamic provisions in the Constitution shall be adopted by the 

Court. 

16. 

The  question  of  application  of  Muslim  Personal  Law  and 

to what extent a High Court can employ understanding of Muslim 

Personal  Law  in  adjudicating  matters  before  it  came  before  this 

Court  in  Shahab  Saqib  VS  Sadaf  Rasheed  (W.P  No. 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 15 

2355/2015).  It  could  be  useful  to  reproduce  excerpts  of  this 

Court’s opinion rendered in Shahab Saqib:  

30.  As  a  historical  matter,  certain  relationships,  such  as 

marriage and interactions within the family, were left outside 

the domain of public law and were regulated by the personal 

law of the community in question. The customs and personal 

laws  of  communities  came  to  be  guided  by  their  respective 

religious beliefs and edicts. And the process of codification of 

personal  laws  of  communities  also  began  taking  root. 

Therefore, codified statutory provisions as well as uncodified 

personal  law  both  constituted  sources  of  law  guiding  courts 

in  reaching  decisions  in  areas  that  traditionally  belonged  to 

the province of private law.  

31. Overtime  there  has  been  a  rethink  on  the  virtues  of 

leaving certain relationships, such as marriage and whatever 

transpires within it, in the private realm. The state has found 

that  it  has  a  legitimate  interest  in  regulating  these 

relationships  as  well,  and  we  have  consequently  seen 

legislation on the issue of domestic abuse and statutory  law 

regulating  marriage,  divorce  and  maintenance  etc.  The 

Muslim Family Law Ordinance, 1961, is one manifestation of 

the  evolving 

jurisprudential  approach  with 

the  state 

regulating  relationships  that  erstwhile  fell  outside  the  public 

domain  and  were  treated  as  a  private  matter  regulated  in 

accordance with customs as informed by the religious beliefs 

of communities.  

33. …It  can  thus  not  be  permissible  for  a  judge  to  assume 

the  role  of  the  legislature  and  determine  what  the  Muslim 

Personal  Law  ought  to  be  (which  determination  is  then 

binding in terms of Articles 189 and 201 of the Constitution) 

on the basis of his preference for a certain school of Islamic 

thought  or  his  personal  understanding  of  Usool-al-fiqh  and 

Shariah.  

34. The  Constitution  has  thus  addressed  this  issue  as  also 

elucidated by the august Supreme Court in Malik Muhammad 

Mumtaz  Qadri  (PLD  2016  SC  17).  A  provision  of  law  that  is 

considered  to  fall  foul  of  the  commands  of  Shariah  can  be 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 16 

challenged only before the Federal Shariat Court in terms of 

Article  203D  of  the  Constitution  and  the  jurisdiction  of  the 

High Courts is ousted for such purpose under Article 203G… 

Further  the  Council  of  Islamic  Ideology  has  been  created 

under Article 228 of the Constitution, which is conferred with 

the  authority  to  make  recommendations  to  the  Parliament 

and  Provincial  Assemblies  as  to  ways  and  means  to  enable 

Muslims  of  Pakistan  to  enable  their  lives  in  accordance  with 

the  injunctions  of  Islam.  It  is  then  for  the  Parliament  to 

amend  existing  laws  or  promulgate  new  laws  for  such 

purpose.  It  is  however,  nor  for  the  High  Court  to  usurp  the 

jurisdiction  of  the  Federal  Shariat  Court  on  the  one  hand  or 

the Council of Islamic Ideology comprising religious scholars 

and the Parliament on the other, by importing one’s personal 

understanding  of  principles  emanating  from  the  Quran  and 

the  Sunnah  in  deciding  cases  in  the  presence  of  clear 

statutory provisions addressing the subject matter. 

37. The  Enforcement  of  Shariah  Act,  1991,  was  then 

promulgated  and  Section  4  clearly  provides  that  laws  to  be 

interpreted  in  the  light  of  Shariah  where  more  than  one 

interpretation  of  a  statutory  provision  is  possible  and  one 

such  interpretation  is  consistent  with  or  promotes  the 

jurisprudence  and principles  of Islamic  Law.  In  other words, 

jurisprudence  and principle  of Islamic  Law  can  be used as  a 

tool  for  interpretation  of  statutes  where  the  text  of  the 

statute  in  view  of  its  plain  meaning  can  be  accorded  more 

than  one  interpretation.  If  the  language  of  the  statue 

unequivocally  conveys  the  intent  of  the  law,  no  external 

source  of  law  can  be  employed  to  read  into  the  statute. 

Framed  another  way,  the  jurisprudence  and  principle  of 

Islamic  Law  do  not  trump  the  principle  of  casus  omissus.  A 

court cannot supply to a statue language that is not provided 

therein.  It  is  only  while  undertaking an  interpretive  exercise 

to resolve some ambiguity in statutory law that Section 4 of 

the  Enforcement  of  Shariah  Act,  1991  comes  into  play  and 

the  jurisprudence  and  principles  of  Islamic  law  can  be  used 

as sources of law to guide the interpretive exercise. 

It  was  therefore  concluded  that  it  is  in  view  of  the  provisions  of 

the  Constitution  as  well  as  the  law  laid  down  by  the  august 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 17 

Supreme  Court  in  Malik  Mumtaz  Qadri  VS  State  (2016  PLD 

SC  17)  it  is  not  for  a  presiding  judge  to  employ  his  own 

subjective understanding of  principles  of Muslim  Personal  Law to 

decide the case before the court in the presence of clear statutory 

provisions addressing the subject matter.  

17. 

In  Farooq  Omar  Bhoja  VS  Federation  (Shariah 

Petition 1/2020) the learned Federal Shariat Court dismissed a 

challenge to sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Child Marriage Act, 1929, 

for  being  in  contradiction  with  principles  of  Islamic  Law.  It 

observed  that  amongst  Islamic  Jurists  there  was  disagreement 

over  whether  or  not  the  nikah  of  a  minor  girl  is  permissible. 

However,  it  held  that  it  was  not  un-Islamic  for  the  state  to 

determine  the  permissible  age  for  entering  into  a  contract  for 

marriage.  The  question  of  what  amounts  to  consent  for  purpose 

of  entering  into  a  marriage  contract  was  addressed  by  the 

learned  Federal  Shariat  Court  in  Muhammad  Aslam  VS  The 

State (2012 P.Cr.L.J 11) wherein the following was held: 

9. Awareness  about  marriage  encompasses  more 

serious  matters  than  mere  carnal  knowledge  (relating 

to  physical  feelings  and  desires  of  body).  Therefore, 

Islam  places  conjugal  consent  over  high  pedestal  of 

morality rather than carnality. Consequently consenting 

adult  is  a  person  who  has  come  of  age  enough,  and 

therefore responsible enough, to decide and understand 

consequences of marriage. 

10. Marriage  involves  a  consent  which  is  quite  distinct 

in  definition  and  in  differentiation  from  all  types  of 

other  consent,  e.g.,  common  consent,  mutual  consent, 

or  implied  or  express  consent.  Consent  for  marriage  is 

eloquent  and  declaratory,  being  more  specific  and 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 18 

expressive. Consent for marriage has deeper and wider 

implications  for  criminal,  civil,  and  family  laws,  e.g., 

inheritance,  etc.  Therefore,  free  consent,  for  marriage, 

does  not  mean  just  acceding  to  or  saying  'yes'  to  the 

circumstantial  or  situational  dictate.  While  analyzing 

quality,  value  or  worth  and  features  of  such  a  free 

consent,  following  need  to  be  considered:  Ability  of 

exercising free choice; capacity (legal capacity: not only 

sane,  but  mature  mind,  i.e.,  not  only  puberty,  mere 

majority  but  age  of 

responsive  and  conscious 

consent); capability  to  use  that  capacity; depending 

upon  capacity,  impediments  to  or  assistance  available 

for application of mind e.g., availability of assistance of 

wali  and  wakil  (guardian-counsel  and  supporter-

protector); in  one's  own  interest  or  benefit; extent  of 

free  availability  of  possible  options 

to  choose 

from; environ of freedom. 

In  view  of  the  jurisprudence  produced  by  the  learned  Federal 

Shariat  Court,  the  State  regulating  the  permissible  age  for 

entering into a marriage contract or what constitutes a prohibited 

object  or  purpose  of  a  contract  is  not  un-Islamic.  Further,  as 

noted  in  Farooq  Omar  Bhoja,  there  is  no  agreement  amongst 

Islamic  scholars  and  jurists  with  regard  to  the  minimum 

permissible  age  for  marriage.  Consequently,  such  age  is  to  be 

determined  in  view  of  provisions  of  enactments  in  force  in 

Pakistan at the present time, with a view to promoting Principles 

of  Policy  prescribed  in  the  Constitution  while  contradicting 

principles of Islamic law and jurisprudence.  

18. 

As  will  be  discussed  later  in  this  opinion  there  are  clear 

statutory  provisions  proscribing  acts  that  no  one  can  engage  in 

when they involve a child under the age of 18. In the presence of 

such  clear  and  unequivocal  statutory  provisions  criminalizing 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 19 

certain  acts  and  behavior,  there  is  no  room  to  engage  in  any 

further  interpretive  exercise  to  determine  whether  or  not  a  child 

marriage  falls  within  the  domain  of  prohibited  conduct  in 

Pakistan. Before we consider enactments in force at the moment, 

it  must  be  noted  that  legislative  instruments  enacted  prior  to 

Pakistan’s independence, while India was a British colony, largely 

refrained from regulating conduct that was deemed to fall within 

the  province  of  private  law  of  citizens  (as  also  discussed  in 

Shahab  Saqib).  And  consequently,  the  colonial  regime  sought 

not  to  interfere  with  local  practices  beyond  a  point  even  when 

certain  practices  were  considered  undesirable,  such  as  child 

marriages. The limitations that bound the colonial government do 

not  constrain  the  state  in  a  democracy  where  the  populace 

administers  itself  through  a  representative  government.  The 

Constitution  provides  for  separation  of  powers  and  checks  and 

balances.  Part  of  the  system  of  checks  and  balances  includes 

institutional  structures,  in  the  form  of  the  Council  of  Islamic 

Ideology  with  the  power  to  make  recommendations  to  the 

legislature  to  ensure  that  laws  of  the  country  are  in  consonance 

with  teachings  of  Islam,  and  in  the  form  of  a  Federal  Shariat 

Court to consider whether the provision of a law is in conflict with 

Islamic  law  and  jurisprudence.  It  is  due  to  the  institutional 

framework  to  enact  laws  for  the  welfare  of  the  citizens  in 

accordance with the Constitution that the state of Pakistan is not 

constrained  in  the  manner  that  the  colonial  state  was,  and  the 

legislature  can  enact  laws  to  proscribe  abhorrent  practices  and 

social customs and prescribe penal consequences to root out such 

practices  and  customs.  It  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  that 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 20 

while  the  fundamental  right  of  a  child  to  have  his/her  best 

interest  protected  might  have  been  a  recognized  right  even  a 

century ago, the standard of behavior that is required in order to 

uphold  such  right  has  evolved  over  a  period  of  time.  And  this 

evolution  in the expected standard of  behavior, as prescribed, is 

reflected in our legislation.  

19. 

Let us now turn to the statutory instruments relevant for 

our  present  purposes.  We  will  first  list  the  relevant  provisions  of 

statutes enacted by the government in British India, which reflect 

a  policy  of  the  colonizing  power  to  avoid  interference  with  local 

customs and practices within the domain of private law.  

(i) The Majority Act, 1875. 

2.  Savings:-- Nothing herein contained shall effect.- 

(a) the capacity of any person to act in the following matters 
(namely), marriage, dower, divorce and adoption; 

(b)    the religion or religious rites and usages of any class of 
citizens of Pakistan; 

3. Age  of  majority  of  persons  domiciled  in  Pakistan.-

Subject  as  aforesaid,  every  Minor  of  whose  person  or 

property, or both a guardian, other than a guardian for a suit 

within  the  meaning  of  Order  32  of  the  First  Schedule  of  the 

Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (V  of  1908)  has  been  or  shall 

be  appointed  or  declared  by  any  Court  of  Justice  before  the 

minor  has  attained  the  age  of  eighteen  years,  and  every 

minor  of  whose  property  the  superintendence  has  been  or 

shall be assumed by any Court of Wards before the minor has 

attained that age shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 

the that age shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the 

Succession  Act,  1925  (XXXIX  of  1925)  or  in  any  other 

enactment,  his  majority  when  he  shall  have  completed  his 

age of twenty-one years and not before.  

(ii) The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 21 

2. Definitions.– In this Act: 

(a)  "child" means a person who, if a male, is under eighteen 
years of age, and if a female, is under sixteen years of age; 

(b)  "child marriage”  means  a  marriage  to  which  either  of 
the contracting parties is a child; 

(d) "minor”  means  person  of  either  sex  who  is  under 

eighteen years of age. 

4. Punishment  for  marrying  a  child.–  If  a  person,  not 
being  a  minor,  contracts child marriage,  he  shall  be  liable  to 
punishment of simple  imprisonment  which  may  extend to  six 
months and fine of fifty thousand rupees. 

performs, 

5.  Punishment  for  solemnizing  a  child marriage.–
 Whoever 
any 
child marriage shall  be  punishable  with  simple  imprisonment 
which may extend to [8][six months and fine of fifty thousand 
rupees], unless he proves that he had reason to believe that 
the marriage was not a child marriage. 

conducts 

directs 

or 

a  minor 

6.  Punishment  for  parent  or  guardian  concerned  in  a 
child marriage.– (1)  Where 
a 
child marriage, any  person  having  charge  of  the  minor, 
whether as parent or guardian or in any other capacity, lawful 
or  unlawful,  who  does  any  act  to  promote  the marriage or 
permits  it  to  be  solemnized,  or  negligently  fails  to  prevent  it 
from  being  solemnized,  shall  be  punishable  with  simple 
imprisonment which may extend to [9][six months and fine of 
fifty thousand rupees]: 

contracts 

Provided  that  no  woman  shall  be  punishable  with 

imprisonment. 

(2)  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  it  shall  be  presumed, 
unless  and  until  the  contrary  is  proved,  that  where  a  minor 
has contracted a child marriage, the person having charge of 
prevent 
negligently 
such  minor 
the marriage from being solemnized. 

failed 

has 

to 

(iii)  The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939. 

2.  Grounds  for  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage.  A 
woman married under Muslim  Law shall  be  entitled  to obtain 
a  decree  for  the  dissolution  of  her  marriage  on  any  one  or 
more of the following grounds, namely: 

(vii) that she, having been given in marriage by her father or 
other  guardian  before  she  attained  the  age  of  sixteen  years, 
repudiated the marriage before attaining the age of eighteen 
years: 

 Provided that the marriage has not been consummated; 

20. 

Section  2  of  the  Majority  Act,  1875,  excluded  from  its 

scope  the  subject  of  marriage.  The  Dissolution  of  Muslim 

Marriages Act, 1939, contemplated the possibility of a child under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 22 

the age of 16 being married off by her father or guardian. It was 

due to these provisions, together with lack of a clear provision in 

the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, prescribing the age for 

a  valid  marriage,  that  courts  while  relying  on  commentaries  on 

Muslim Personal Law held that marriage with a female child under 

the age of 16 while attracting criminal liability under sections 4, 5 

and 6 of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, did not invalidate 

the  contract  of  marriage  itself.  In  this  regard  various  judgment 

rendered  by  High  Courts  rely  on  the  decision  of  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  Mst.  Bakhshi VSBashir  Ahmad  (1970 

PLD SC 323) where a 15 years old girl whose father had passed 

away when she was very young and her mother had contracted a 

second marriage, had contracted a marriage of her own will. Her 

mother  then  lodged  an  FIR  against  the  daughter’s  husband  for 

kidnapping  her.  The  girl  was  medically  examined  and  the  doctor 

opined  that  she  was  between  16/17  years  of  age.  The  husband 

filed  an  application  before  the  High  Court  under  section  491  of 

Cr.P.C to secure the release of his wife. The High Court released 

the minor girl and left it up to her to determine who she wished 

to  live  with.  The  apex  Court  upheld  the  decision  and  observed 

that where a girl below the age of 16 got married in violation of 

provisions of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, the marriage 

itself  would  not  become  invalid,  although  the  husband  who 

contracted such marriage or individuals who helped solemnize the 

marriage  may  be  held  criminally  liable.    The  apex  Court  further 

held  that  in  view  of  section  2  of  West  Pakistan  Muslim  Personal 

Law  (Shariat)  Application  Act,  1962,  that  question  of  marriage 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 23 

was  to  be  regulated  by  Muslim  Personal  Law  in  case  where  the 

parties were Muslim.  

21. 

The  law  as  laid  down  in  Mst.  Bakhshi VSBashir 

Ahmad  (1970  PLD  SC  323)  is  now  distinguishable  for  a  few 

reasons.  One,  the  said 

law  was 

laid  down  before  the 

promulgation  of  the  Constitution  of  1973,  which  as  discussed 

above, now provides for an institutional framework, including the 

Council  of  Islamic  Ideology  and  the  Federal  Shariat  Court,  to 

determine  the  question  of  compliance  of  statutory  laws  with  the 

injunctions  of  Islam.  Two,  that  West  Pakistan  Muslim  Personal 

Law  (Shariat)  Application  Act,  1962,  which  was  subject  to 

enactments  for  the  time  being  in  force,  was  succeeded  by  the 

Enforcement  of  Shariat  Act,  1991,  whereby  principles  of  Islamic 

law  are  to  be  employed  as  tools  where  statutory  provisions  

create  room  for  more  than  one  interpretation.  Three,  and 

probably the foremost distinguishing factor is that United Nations 

Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Child  (“UNCRC”)  was  adopted  by 

the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  in  1989  and  entered  into 

force on 02.09.1990. UNCRC has done for the rights for children 

what  United  Nations’  Human  Rights  Declaration  did 

for 

fundamental human rights more generally.  Pakistan is a party to 

the  UNCRC  and  is  under  an  obligation  to  comply  with  its 

provisions. It has done so by enacting a string of legislation and 

the  introduction  of  Article  25A  of  the  Constitution  is  also  part  of 

the  legislative  measures  taken  by  Pakistan  to  bring  its  laws  in 

compliance with the UNCRC.  Reproduced below are some of the 

most      relevant  clauses  and  sub-clauses  of  UNCRC  that  seek  to 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 24 

entrench,  operationalize  and  protect  the  fundamental  rights  of 

children across nation-states:  

Article 1 

For  the  purposes  of  the  present  Convention,  a  child  means 
every  human  being  below  the  age  of  eighteen  years  unless 
under  the  law  applicable  to  the  child,  majority  is  attained 
earlier. 

Article 3 

1.  In  all  actions  concerning  children,  whether  undertaken  by 
public  or  private  social  welfare  institutions,  courts  of  law, 
administrative  authorities  or  legislative  bodies,  the  best 
interests of the child shall be a primary consideration. 

2.  States  Parties  undertake  to  ensure  the  child  such 
protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, 
taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, 
legal  guardians,  or  other  individuals  legally  responsible  for 
him  or  her,  and,  to  this  end,  shall  take  all  appropriate 
legislative and administrative measures. 

Article 4 

States  Parties  shall  undertake  all  appropriate  legislative, 
administrative, and other measures for the implementation of 
the  rights recognized  in  the  present  Convention.  With  regard 
to  economic,  social  and  cultural  rights,  States  Parties  shall 
undertake  such  measures  to  the  maximum  extent  of  their 
available resources and, where needed, within the framework 
of international co-operation. 

Article 9 

1.  States  Parties  shall  ensure  that  a  child  shall  not  be 
separated  from  his  or  her  parents  against  their  will,  except 
when  competent  authorities  subject  to 
judicial  review 
determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, 
that such separation is necessary for the best interests of the 
child.  Such  determination  may  be  necessary  in  a  particular 
case  such  as  one  involving  abuse  or  neglect  of  the  child  by 
the  parents,  or  one  where  the  parents  are  living  separately 
and  a  decision  must  be  made  as  to  the  child's  place  of 
residence. 

2. In any proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 of the present 
article,  all  interested  parties  shall  be given an  opportunity  to 
participate in the proceedings and make their views known. 

3.  States  Parties  shall  respect  the  right  of  the  child  who  is 
separated  from  one  or  both  parents  to  maintain  personal 
relations  and  direct  contact  with  both  parents  on  a  regular 
basis, except if it is contrary to the child's best interests. 

4. Where such separation results from any action initiated by 
a  State  Party,  such  as  the  detention,  imprisonment,  exile, 
deportation  or death (including  death  arising  from  any  cause 
while the person is in the custody of the State) of one or both 
parents  or  of  the  child,  that  State  Party  shall,  upon  request, 
provide  the  parents,  the  child  or,  if  appropriate,  another 
member  of  the 
information 
concerning  the  whereabouts  of  the  absent  member(s)  of  the 

family  with  the  essential 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 25 

family  unless  the  provision  of  the  information  would  be 
detrimental to the well-being of the child. States Parties shall 
further ensure that the submission of such a request shall of 
itself  entail  no  adverse  consequences  for  the  person(s) 
concerned. 

Article 19 

1.  States  Parties  shall  take  all  appropriate  legislative, 
administrative, social and educational measures to protect the 
child  from  all  forms  of  physical  or  mental  violence,  injury  or 
abuse,  neglect  or  negligent  treatment,  maltreatment  or 
exploitation,  including  sexual  abuse,  while  in  the  care  of 
parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the 
care of the child. 

for 

2.  Such  protective  measures  should,  as  appropriate,  include 
effective  procedures 
the  establishment  of  social 
programmes  to  provide  necessary  support  for  the  child  and 
for those who have the care of the child, as well as for other 
forms  of prevention and for  identification,  reporting,  referral, 
investigation,  treatment  and  follow-up  of  instances  of  child 
maltreatment  described  heretofore,  and,  as  appropriate,  for 
judicial involvement. 

Article 20 

1.  A  child  temporarily  or  permanently  deprived  of  his  or  her 
family environment, or in whose own best interests cannot be 
allowed  to  remain  in  that  environment,  shall  be  entitled  to 
special protection and assistance provided by the State. 

2.  States  Parties  shall  in  accordance  with  their  national  laws 
ensure alternative care for such a child. 

3.  Such  care  could  include,  inter  alia,  foster  placement, 
kafalah of Islamic  law,  adoption or if  necessary  placement in 
suitable institutions for the care of children. When considering 
solutions,  due  regard  shall  be  paid  to  the  desirability  of 
continuity  in  a  child's  upbringing  and  to  the  child's  ethnic, 
religious, cultural and linguistic background. 

Article 24 

1.  States  Parties  recognize  the  right  of  the  child  to  the 
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and to 
facilities  for  the  treatment  of  illness  and  rehabilitation  of 
health.  States  Parties  shall  strive  to  ensure  that  no  child  is 
deprived  of  his  or  her  right  of  access  to  such  health  care 
services. 

3.  States  Parties  shall  take  all  effective  and  appropriate 
measures  with  a  view  to  abolishing  traditional  practices 
prejudicial to the health of children. 

Article 28 

1. States Parties recognize the right of the child to education, 
and  with  a  view  to  achieving  this  right  progressively  and  on 
the basis of equal opportunity. 

Article 31 

1.  States  Parties  recognize  the  right  of  the  child  to  rest  and 
leisure,  to  engage 
in  play  and  recreational  activities 
appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in 
cultural life and the arts. 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 26 

2.  States  Parties  shall  respect  and  promote  the  right  of  the 
child  to  participate  fully  in  cultural  and  artistic  life  and  shall 
encourage 
the  provision  of  appropriate  and  equal 
opportunities  for  cultural,  artistic,  recreational  and  leisure 
activity. 

Article 32 

1.  States  Parties  recognize  the  right  of  the  child  to  be 
protected  from  economic  exploitation  and  from  performing 
any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the 
child's  education,  or  to  be  harmful  to  the  child's  health  or 
physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development. 

2.  States  Parties  shall  take  legislative,  administrative,  social 
and  educational  measures  to  ensure  the  implementation  of 
the  present  article.  To  this  end,  and  having  regard  to  the 
relevant  provisions  of  other  international  instruments,  States 
Parties shall in particular: 

(a)  Provide  for  a  minimum  age  or  minimum  ages  for 
admission to employment; 

(b)  Provide  for  appropriate  regulation  of  the  hours  and 
conditions of employment; 

(c)  Provide  for  appropriate  penalties  or  other  sanctions  to 
ensure the effective enforcement of the present article. 

Article 34 

States Parties undertake to protect the child from all forms of 
sexual  exploitation  and  sexual  abuse.  For  these  purposes, 
States Parties shall in particular take all appropriate national, 
bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent: 

(a)  The  inducement  or  coercion  of  a  child  to  engage  in  any 
unlawful sexual activity; 

(b)  The  exploitative  use  of  children  in  prostitution  or  other 
unlawful sexual practices; 

(c)  The  exploitative  use  of  children 
performances and materials. 

in  pornographic 

Article 36 

States Parties shall protect the child against all other forms of 
exploitation prejudicial to any aspects of the child's welfare. 

22. 

The  issue  of  giving  effect  to  international  law  came 

before  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  The  Hanover  Fire 

Insurance  Company  VS  Muralidhar  Banechand  (PLD  1958 

SC 138), wherein the following was held:  

“It  is  therefore  necessary  to  act  in  accordance  with  the 

reciprocal arrangements arrived at between Pakistan and the 

country concerned i.e. Pakistan and India in the present case; 

otherwise  our  Courts  would  be  passing  orders  inconsistent 

 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 27 

with rules of international law. In this connection the following 

passage of Maxwell on Interpretation of Statute Tenth Edition 

(p.148) is instructive: 

“Under 

the  same  general  presumption 

that 

the 

legislature  does  not  intend  to  exceed  its  jurisdiction, 

every  statute  is  to  be  so  interpreted  and  applied,  as  for 

as its language admits, as not to be inconsistent with the 

comity  of  nations,  or  with  the  established  rules  of 

international  law.  if,  therefore,  it  designs  to  effectuate 

any  such  object,  it  must  express  its  intention  with 

irresistible  clearness  to  induce  a  Court  to  believe  that  it 

entertained it, for if any other construction is possible, it 

would be adopted to avoid imputing such an intention to 

the  legislature.  All  general  terms  must  be  narrowed  in 

construction to avoid it. But if the statue is unambitious, 

its provisions must be followed, even if they are contrary 

to international law.”  

This question came before the learned Sindh High Court in Najib 

Zarab  Limited  VS  Government  of  Pakistan  (PLD  1993 

Karachi 93), wherein the following was held: 

“We  are  of  the  view  that  nations  must  march  with  the 

international  A  community  and  the  municipal  law  must 

respect  rules  of  international  law,  even  as  nations  respect 

international  opinion.  The  comity  of  nations  requires  that 

rules  of  international  law  may  be  accommodated  in  the 

municipal  law  even  without  express  legislative  sanction 

provided they do not run into conflict with Acts of Parliament. 

But when they do run into such conflict, the sovereignty and 

the  integrity  of  the  Republic  and  the  supremacy  of  the 

constituted Legislatures in making laws, may not be subjected 

to external rules except to the extent legitimately accepted by 

the constituted Legislatures themselves. …National Courts will 

endorse  international  law  but  not  if  it  conflicts  with  national 

Law.  National  Courts  being  organs  of  the  National  State  and 

not organs of international law, must perforce, apply national 

law  if  international  law  conflicts  with  it.  But  the  Courts  are 

under an obligation within the legitimate limits, so to interpret 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 28 

the  municipal  statute  as  to  avoid  confrontation  with  the 

comity  of  nations  or  the  well-established  principles  of, 

international  law.  But  if  conflict  is  inevitable,  the  latter  must 

yield.  

23. 

In  view  of  the  law  on  the  issue  of  treaty  obligation  as 

enumerated 

in 

Societe  Generale  De 

Surveillance 

S.A. VSPakistan 

through  Secretary,  Ministry  of 

Finance  Revenue  Division,  Islamabad  (2002  SCMR  1694), 

for provisions of treaty to be given effect in Pakistan it is for the 

Parliament to enact legislation for such purpose. In the event that 

municipal  law  of  Pakistan  is  in  conflict  with  provisions  of 

international law, the municipal law for the time being in force is 

to  be  given  effect  by  the  courts  in  Pakistan  notwithstanding  any 

conflicting  international  obligation.  However,  for  purposes  of 

interpretation,  where  the  express  provisions  of  municipal  law  of 

Pakistan do not contradict obligations undertaken by Pakistan by 

becoming party to a treaty or convention, it is to be assumed that 

the  legislature  never  intended  to  set  up  municipal  law  in  conflict 

with Pakistan’s obligations under intentional law. Thus, where the 

text  of  a  statutory  instrument  provides  room  for  interpretation, 

the interpretation is to be undertaken such that it is not in conflict 

with Pakistan’s obligation  under international law. In  the  context 

of  UNCRC,  however,  Parliament  has  enacted  legislation  for  the 

specific  purpose  of  bringing  the  laws  of  Pakistan  in  conformity 

with  the  Pakistan’s  obligations  under  UNCRC.  These  enactments 

include the following:  

(I)  Article 25A of the Constitution.  

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 29 

 The  State  shall  provide  free  and  compulsory  education     
to  all  children  of  the  age  of  five  to  sixteen  years  in  such 
manner as may be determined by law. 

It  has  already  been  discussed  above  that  Article  25A 

was  enacted 

through 

the  18th  Constitutional 

Amendment  whereby  the  State  was  placed  under  a 

mandatory  obligation  to  ensure  the  education  of 

children  up  to  16  years  of  age.  The  scope  of  Article 

25A  of  the  Constitution  came  before  the  august 

Supreme Court in Liaquat Hussain VS  Federation 

(PLD  2012  SC  224)  and  the  object  of  Article  25A 

and its significance, was explained as follows:  

Main purpose of education is to educate individuals so 

that they get prepared to form the next generation of 

leaders.  It  will  yield  strong  families  and  strong 

communities.  Education  plays  an  important  role  to 

promote  knowledge  and  understanding  of  rural 

communities.  In  almost  all  societies,  receiving 

education  and  attending  school  is  necessary  to 

achieve  success.  It  is  the  key  to  move  forward  and 

ultimately  succeed  in  life.  For  preparing  the  children 

and  young  people  to  effectively  participate  in  the 

development  of  the  society,  the  schools  play  a  vital 

role.  The  knowledge  and  wisdom  can  only  be  gained 

through the experience of learning.  

(II)  Protection  of  Women 

(Criminal  Laws 

Amendment) Act, 2006. 

WHEREAS  it  is  necessary  to  provide  relief  and 
protection to women against misuse and abuse of law 
and to prevent their exploitation; 

AND WHEREAS Article 14 of the Constitution ensures 
that dignity of man and, subject to law, the privacy of 
home, shall be inviolable; 

AND  WHEREAS  Article  25  of 
the  Constitution 
guarantees  that  there  shall  be  no  discrimination  on 
the  basis of  sex  alone  and  that  the  State  shall  make 
provisions for the protection of women; 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 30 

AND  WHEREAS  Article  37  of 
encourages  promotion  of 
eradication of social evils; 

the  Constitution 
justice  and 

social 

AND WHEREAS the objective of this Bill is to bring in 
particular  the  laws  relating  to  zina  and  qazf  in 
conformity  with 
the 
Constitution and the injunctions of Islam, 

the  stated  objectives  of 

AND  WHEREAS  it  is  expedient  for  the  aforesaid 
objectives  further  to  amend  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code 
(Act  XLV  of  1860),  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 
1898  (Act  V  of  1898,  the  Dissolution  of  Muslim 
Marriages  Act,  1939  (VIII  of  1939),  the  Offence  of 
Zina  (Enforcement  of  Hudood)  Ordinance,  1979  (VII 
of  1979),  and  the  Offence  of  Qazf  (Enforcement  of 
Hadd)  Ordinance,  1979  (VIII  of  1979)  and  for  the 
purposes hereinafter appearing, 

375.  Rape:-  A  man  is  said  to  commit  rape  who  has 
sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances 
falling under any of the five following descriptions,  

(i) against her will. 

(ii) Without her consent 

(iii)  With  her  consent,  when  the  consent  has  been 
obtained by putting her in fear of death or of hurt,  

(iv)  With  her  consent,  when  the  man  knows  that  he 
not  married  to  her  and  that  the  consent  is  given 
because she believes that the man is another person 
to whom she is or believes herself to be married; or  

(v)  With  or  without  her  consent  when  she  is  under 
sixteen years of age.  

Explanation: Penetration is sufficient to constitute the 
sexual intercourse necessary to the offence of rape.   

376.  Punishment  for  rape  (1)  whoever  commits 
rape shall be punished with death or imprisonment of 
either  description  for  a  term  which  shall  not  be  less 
than  ten  years  or  more,  than  twenty-five  years  and 
shall also be liable to fine.  

(2) When rape is committed by two or more persons 
in  furtherance  of  common  intention  of  all,  each  of 
such  persons  shall  be  punished  with  death  or 
imprisonment for life.  

The statements of objects of the Protection of Women 

(Criminal Laws Amendment) Act, 2006, read together 

with  provisions  of  sections  375  and  376  of  PPC  now 

provide  unequivocally  that  no  child  up  till  the  age  of 

16  is  to  engage  in  sexual  intercourse  under  any 

circumstances.  Even  if  a  child  were  to  consent  to 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 31 

engaging  in  sexual  intercourse,  the  action  would  still 

constitute  rape  for  purposes  of  section  375  of  PPC 

punishable  with  death  or 

life 

imprisonment 

notwithstanding such consent.   

(III)    The  National  Commission  on  the  Rights  of 

Child Act, 2017. 

2. Definitions-- In this Act, unless there is anything 
repugnant in subject or context,--  

(b)  ''child"  means  any  person  below  the  age  of 
eighteen years; 

(c) ''child rights" mean and include, but limited to, 
rights  of  child  in  the  United  Nations'  Convention  on 
Rights of the Child and in any other domestic law; 

15.  Functions  of 
the  Commission.-  The 
Commission  shall  perform  all  or  any  of  the  following 
functions, namely:- 

(c) examine and review any law or policy or practice, 
for  the  time  being  in  force,  for  protection  of  child 
rights  and  recommend  measures  for  their  effective 
implementation;  

inquire 

(e) 
into  violation  of  child  rights  and 
recommend  to  the  relevant  agency  or  department 
initiation of proceedings in such cases;  

(f)  examine  all  factors  that  inhibit  enjoyment  of 
rights  of  child,  such  as  violence,  abuse  and 
exploitation,  trafficking,  torture,  pornography  and 
prostitution  and  recommend  appropriate  remedial 
measures; 

Through the definition of “child rights” in this Act, the 

Parliament  has  provided 

the  clearest  possible 

statement that the rights of children as guaranteed in 

Pakistan  include  the  rights  as  defined  in  UNCRC.  It 

has  further  put  in  place  a  statutory  body  to  ensure 

that  the  rights  of  children  as  defined  in  UNCRC  and 

domestic  law  are  given  effect  and  children  are 

protected against abuse and exploitation.    

(VI)  Juvenile Justice System Act, 2018.   

2. Definitions. In this Act, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context,- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 32 

(a)  "best  interest  of  the  child"  means  the  basis  for 
any  decision  taken  regarding  the  child  to  ensure 
fulfillment  of  his  basic  rights  and  needs,  identity, 
and 
social  well-being, 
psychological development; 

emotional 

physical, 

(b)  "child"  means  for  the  purposes  of  this  Act  a 
person  who  has  not  attained  the  age  of  eighteen 
years; 

The  Juvenile  Justice  System  Ordinance,  2000  was 

repealed and replaced by the Juvenile Justice System 

Act,  2018.  The  provisions  of  this  law  take  into 

account  the  principles  of  agency  and  autonomy  and 

while  holding  children  accountable 

for  criminal 

conduct  proportionally, 

it  creates  a  distinction 

between  criminal  liability  attributable  to  actions  of 

minors  VS

liability 

flowing 

from  actions 

attributable  to  adults.  It  further  provides  for  a 

different  set  of  policy  objects  for  initiating  penal 

action  against  minors,  driven  by  considerations  of 

reform as opposed to deterrence.  

 (V)  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Child  Protection 

Act, 2018.  

Preamble.  WHEREAS  it  is  expedient  to  provide  for 
protection  and  care  of  children  in  Islamabad  Capital 
Territory from all forms of physical or mental violence, 
injury,  neglect  maltreatment,  exploitation,  abuse  and 
matters ancillary thereto;  

Definitions.-  (1)  In  this  Act,  unless  the  context 
otherwise requires,- 

(d)  "child"  means  a  person  who  has  not attained the 
age of eighteen years;  

(t)  "sexual  abuse  and  exploitation"  includes  the 
inducement  or  coercion  of  a  child  to  engage  in  any 
unlawful  sexual  activity  including  use  of  children  in 
audio  or  visual  images  for  child  pornography,  child 
prostitution,  trafficking  within  and  between  countries 
for  sexual  exploitation  and  sale  of  children  for  sexual 
purposes; 

5.  Child  in  need  of  care.-  A  child  in  need  of 
protection and care shall include a child who-  

 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 33 

(a) has been subjected to or is under serious threat of 
being  subjected  to  child  abuse  or  child  exploitation 
while in the care of parents, legal guardian or any other 
person who has custody of the child in any manner; or 

 (b)  is  unattended,  victim  of  an  offence,  child, 
domestic  and  such  other  workers,  found  begging, 
imprisoned  with  the  mother  or  lives  in  an  immoral 
environment. 

16. Care and placement of a child.- Notwithstanding 
the  provision  of  section  15,  where  the  child  care  plan 
specifies  that  the  child  will  be  at  risk  of  significant 
harm, abuse or exploitation if he remains in care of his 
parent, legal guardian or other current carer, if any, an 
application shall be made immediately to the Court for 
the  care  and  placement  of  the  child  in  an  appropriate 
form of alternative care. 

Through  this  Act,  Parliament  has  declared  that 

upholding  and  protecting  the  rights  and  welfare  of 

children  is  ultimately  the  responsibility  of  the  State, 

and  the  relationship  between  a  parent  and  a  child  is 

not  a  private  family  affair  that  does  not  concern  the 

State. It creates an obligation for the State to ensure 

that  the  needs  of  children  up  to  the  age  of  18  are 

provided for and in the event that any child is at the 

risk  of  significant  harm,  abuse  or  exploitation,  while 

in the care of parents, legal guardians or other care-

givers,  the  State  is  to  make  sure  that  such  child  is 

placed in an appropriate form of alternative care. This 

law  clarifies  that  to  uphold  the  rights  of  a  child  to 

protection  and  care  is  the  obligation  of  a  parent  or 

guardian.  But  where  such  parent  or  guardian  is 

delinquent in discharge of such obligation, the state is 

under an obligation to take the child out of the care of 

such  parent  or  guardian  and  make  arrangements  for 

alternative  care  in  the  best  interest  of  the  child  to 

 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 34 

provide  for  his/her  safety,  wellbeing,  and  physical, 

emotional and educational needs, etc.      

(VI)  Criminal  Law  (Second  Amendment)  Act, 

2016.  

Sections 377A and 377B of PPC enacted through this 

Act state the following: 

377A.  Sexual  abuse.  Whoever  employs,  uses,  forces, 
persuades,  induces,  entices,  or  coerces  any  person  to 
engage  in,  or  assist  any  other  person  to  engage  in 
fondling,  stroking,  caressing,  exhibitionism,  voyeurism 
or  any  obscene  or  sexually  explicit  conduct  or  simulation 
of  such  conduct  either  independently  or  in  conjunction 
with  other  acts,  with  or  without  consent  where  age  of 
person  is  less  than  eighteen  years,  is  said  to  commit  the 
offence of sexual abuse.  

377B.  Punishment.  Whoever  commits  the  offence  of 
sexual  abuse  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of 
either  description  for  a  term  which  shall  not  be  less  than 
fourteen  years  and  may  extend  up  to  twenty  years  and 
with fine which shall not be less than one million rupees. 

These  provisions  were  enacted  within  PPC  to  discharge 

Pakistan’s  obligations  under  Articles  19  and  34  of 

UNCRC.  The  object  of  the  Act  as  reflected  from  the 

statements of objects and reasons was to criminalize the 

act  of  exposing  children  to  obscene  or  sexually  explicit 

conduct.  Section  377A  as  originally  promulgated  carried 

a  punishment  of  seven  years’  imprisonment.  The  said 

provision  was  amended  by  Act  No.  XXVII  of  2018  with 

effect  from  22.05.2018  and  punishment  for  the  offence 

of  sexual  abuse  was  enhanced  to  minimum  of  14  years 

and up to a maximum of 20 years and fine of up to one 

million rupees.  

(VII)  Zainab  Alert,  Recovery  and  Response  Act, 

2020. 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 35 

The preamble to this Act states that it is borne out of the 

necessity  to  make  provisions  for  protection  of  missing 

and abducted children under the age of 18 years, which 

the  State  must  ensure  in  light  of  various  conventions 

that  Pakistan  is  party  to,  with  specific  reference  to  the 

“United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child”. 

Once again, the term “child” (in section 2(g) of this Act) 

is defined as anyone who has not attainted the age of 18 

years  at  the  time  of  commission  of  the  offence.  Section 

3 of the Act establishes the Zainab Alert, Response and 

Recovery  Agency 

for 

the  purpose  of  effectively 

dispatching Zainab Alerts (whenever a child is missing or 

abducted),  with  the  performance  of  the  Agency  to  be 

analyzed  by  the  ICT  Child  Protection  Advisory  Board 

(constituted  under  section  6  of  the  ICT  Child  Protection 

Act, 2018). 

24. 

In view of sections 375, 377A and 377B of PPC there  is 

no  room  for  intendment  within  our  legal  framework  to  deem 

permissible any act of a sexual nature involving a child even if it 

is with an explicit consent of such a child. In view of the National 

Commission on the Rights of Child Act, 2017, read together with 

the Majority  Act, 1875, and Article 1 of UNCRC, a child  means a 

human  being  below  the  age  of  18  years.  The  various  statutes 

cited  above  all  adopt  the  same  age  for  purposes  of  defining  a 

child. Pursuant to the National Commission on the Rights of Child 

Act, 2017, the rights of a child in Pakistan have now been defined 

to  include  all  rights  guaranteed  to  a  child  under  the  UNCRC.  In 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 36 

order  to  bring  civil  and  criminal  laws  of  Pakistan  in  compliance 

with  UNCRC  the  statutory  instruments  listed  above  have  been 

enacted by the legislature. Section 375 of PPC was consequently 

amended to include intercourse with a child below the age of 16 

within the definition of rape, which is punishable with death or life 

imprisonment.    Section  377A  of  PPC  defines  merely  the  attempt 

to persuade or induce or entice a child below the age of 18 in any 

sexually  explicit  conduct,  with  or  without  his/her  consent,  as 

offence  of  sexual  abuse  punishable  with  a  jail  term  of  up  to  25 

years.    

25. 

What  is  evident  from  sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC, 

read  together  with  UNCRC  that  has  inspired  these  amendments, 

is that PPC prohibits the involvement of children under the age of 

18 in sexual conduct in any form whatsoever. Even persuading or 

enticing a child under the age of 18 to engage in sexually explicit 

conduct  of  any  sort  is  a  criminal  offence  punishable  by  up  to  25 

years in prison. In view of such scathing criminal liability imposed 

on  anyone  engaging  in  or  attempting  to  engage  in  sexually 

explicit activity with children, it cannot be conceived that the civil 

law applicable in Pakistan would nevertheless continue to treat a 

contract  for  the  specific  purposes  of  engaging  in  sexual  conduct 

with  a  child  to  be  a  legal  or  valid  contract.  Our  jurisprudence 

continues  to  rely  on  Mulla’s  definition  of  a  marriage  contract  or 

nikah as a “contract which has for its object the procreation and 

the  legalizing  of  children.”  The  contract  of  marriage  by  its  very 

definition  is  a  contract  whereby  the  parties  agree  to  engage  in 

sexual  relations,  recognized  by  the  State  and  society  as 

legitimate, for the purpose of procreation. The consideration and 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 37 

object  of  a  marriage  contract  thus  essentially  entails  two 

individuals  agreeing  to  engage  in  legitimate  sexual  relations, 

transforming  the  individuals  into  a  family  warranting  state 

protection.  PPC,  on  the  other  hand,  defines  the  very  conduct  for 

purposes  of  which  two  individuals  seek  to  enter  into  a  marriage 

contract as rape when it involves a child under the age of 16, and 

sexual  abuse  when  an  invitation  to  engage  in  such  conduct  is 

made  to  a  child  under  the  age  of  18.  How  can  a  contract  be 

deemed  to  be  valid  when  the  mere  invitation  to  enter  into  such 

contract constitutes the offence of sexual abuse punishable by 25 

years  in  prison,  and  the  consummation  of  such  contract 

constitutes rape punishable by death or life imprisonment? Under 

no conception of rule of law can an interpretation be accorded to 

statutes  operating  with  the  realm  of  civil  and  criminal  laws  in  a 

jurisdiction  such  that  a  contract  together  with  its  objects  and 

purpose  is  deemed  valid  for  purposes  of  civil  law,  when  giving 

effect to such object and purpose is defined as a crime punishable 

by death or life imprisonment under the penal code. The conduct 

for purposes of civil law is deemed legal and valid.  

26. 

The  validity  of  a  marriage  contract  with  a  child  as  a 

party  needs  to  be  analyzed  not  merely  from  the  perspective  of 

the principle of agency and competence of the child to enter into 

such  contract,  but  also  from  the  perspective  of  legality  of  the 

very  consideration  and  object  of  the  marriage  contract.  Let  us 

reproduce here the relevant provisions of Contract Act, 1872.  

11.  Who  are  competent  to  contract.—  Every  person  is 

competent to contract who is of the age of majority according 

to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind, 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 38 

and  is  not  disqualified  from  contracting  by  any  law  to  which 

he is subject. 

23. What consideration and objects are lawful and what not.—

The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless- 

it is forbidden by law; or is of such a nature that, if permitted, 

it would defeat the provisions of any law; or is fraudulent; or 

involves  or  implies  injury  to  the  person  or  property  of 

another;  or  the  Court  regards  it  as  immoral,  or  opposed  to 

public  policy.  In  each  of  these  cases,  the  consideration  or 

object  of  an  agreement  is  said  to  be  unlawful.  Every 

agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is 

void. 

The  question  of  illegal  purpose  of  the  contract  has  been  the 

subject  of  extensive  commentary,  some  of  which  is  reproduced 

below.  

Chitty on Contracts Volume I General Principles.  

Illegality  as  to  formation.  Contracts  may  be  illegal  when 

entered into because they cannot be performed in accordance 

with  their  terms  without  the  commission  of  an  illegal  act. 

Thus  the  contract  may  involve  a  breach  of  the  criminal  law, 

statutory  or  otherwise,  alternatively  it  may  be  a  statutory 

requirement  that  the  parties  to  the  transaction  posses  a 

license  and  where  they  do  not  the  contract  will  be  illegal  as 

formed.  

Pollock  &  Mulla  The  Indian  Contract  &  Specific 
Relief Acts. 

‘Forbidden by law’  

An act of undertaking may be forbidden by law if it violates a 

prohibitory  enactment  of  the  legislature  or  a  principle  of 

unwritten  law.  In  India,  where  criminal  law  is  codified  acts 

forbidden by law seem practically to consist of acts punishable 

under  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  under  the  authority  derived 

from  the  legislature.…In  particular,  it  may  have  to  be 

considered  whether  the  intention  of  the  legislator  was  to 

prevent  certain  things  from  being  done,  or  only  to  lay  down 

terms and conditions on which they might be done….Although 

properly  drawn  acts  or  Regulations  ought  to  leave  no  doubt 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 39 

on  that  point  such  doubts  are  possible  and  have  not  been 

uncommon.  That  which  has  been  forbidden  in  the  public 

interest  cannot  be  made  lawful  by  paying  the  penalty  for  in 

but  an  act  which  is  in  self  harmless,  does  not  become 

unlawful  merely  because  some  collateral 

requirement 

imposed  for  reasons  of  administrative  convenience  has  been 

omitted.  Where  the  contract  is  such  that  it  affects  not  only 

parties  to  it,  but  if  permitted  or  recognized  would  have  such 

wider repercussions affecting adversely the public at large, it 

would be unlawful under s.23.   

Express Prohibition 

If  expressly  prohibited  by  law,  the  contract  is  void  ab  initio 

and  cannot  be  enforced  at  all.  There  has  to  be  a  clear  and 

unequivocal  declaration  by  the  Legislature  in  the  public 

interest  that  the  particular  kind  of  contract  shall  be  entered 

into…S.23  lays  down  that  the  object  of  an  agreement 

becomes unlawful if it was of such a nature that, if permitted, 

it would defeat the provision of any law.  

Anson’s Law of Contract  

(b) Implied Prohibition: Contract Illegal.  

The  Courts  must  determine  whether  the  statutory  words, 

construed  in  context  including  the  purpose  of  the  statue, 

prohibit and penalize  only  the  prescribed conduct  or whether 

they  additionally  prohibit  the  contract.  If,  for  example,  the 

purpose  of  the  statue  is  to  protect  the  public  from  injury  or 

fraud  the  inference  is  likely  to  be  that  contracts  made  in 

contravention  of  its  provisions  are  prohibited.  Again,  if  a 

contract  has  as  its  whole  object  the  doing  of  the  very  act 

which  the  statute  prohibits,  it  can  be  argued  that  you  can 

hardly  make  sense  of  a  statue  which  forbids  an  act  and  yet 

permits to be made a contract to do it.   

27. 

In  view  of  section  23  of  the  Contract  Act,  1872,  courts 

refuse  to  enforce  contracts  forbidden  by  law  i.e.  where  the 

consideration or object of the agreement is itself forbidden by law 

or  the  contract  is  of  a  nature  that  could  defeat  the  provisions  of 

law  if  given  effect.  Neither  the  State  nor  a  court  of  law  can 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 40 

become  an  instrument  in  facilitating  or  enforcing  a  contract 

forbidden  by  law  or  enabling  an  object  which  is  forbidden  and 

attracts  criminal  liability.  In  this  context,  no  sensible  distinction 

can  be  drawn  between  rules  regulating  behavior  that  fall  within 

the  domain  of  civil  law  and  those  that  fall  within  the  domain  of 

criminal law. When PPC explicitly and unequivocally provides that 

a child under the age of 18 is not even to be enticed or invited to 

engage  in  sexually  explicit  conduct  of  any  form,  notwithstanding 

the child’s consent to such sexual conduct, and anyone engaging 

with  or  inducing  a  child  to  engage  in  sexual  conduct  is  liable  to 

punishment,  a  court  cannot  read  into  sections  375  and  377A  of 

PPC  the  suggestion  that  such  conduct  would  not  attract  criminal 

liability  if  the  child  in  question  was  party  to  a  marriage  contract 

within the scope of which such sexual conduct was to take place. 

Such interpretation would make a mockery of the concept of rule 

of  law  by  failing  to  provide  in  clear  terms  the  conduct  that  is 

permissible in the eyes of law and the conduct that is prohibited 

and attracts penal liability. It would also be contrary to the Article 

9 rights of a child to meaningful life read together with the rights 

guaranteed  under  UNCRC.  Such 

interpretation  would  also 

undermine  public  policy  as  reflected  in  a  string  of  legislative 

enactments  promulgated  for  purposes  of  bringing  the  laws  of 

Pakistan  in  compliance  with  the  rights  of  children  as  defined 

under  UNCRC  and  creating  statutory  mechanisms  to  ensure  that 

such rights are upheld.  

28. 

In  view  of  sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC  read  together 

with provisions of UNCRC any contract of marriage entered into in 

which one of the contracting parties is below the age of 18 would 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 41 

be  a  contract  the  object  and  consideration  of  which  is  unlawful 

and which is consequently forbidden by law. Any such contract is 

therefore void in view of provisions of section 23 of the Contract 

Act.  Giving  effect  to  such  prohibited  contract  would  not  be 

permissible  as  it  would  be  tantamount  to  defeating  provisions  of 

sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC  as  well  as  Pakistan’s  obligations 

towards  children  as  defined  under  the  UNCRC.  Such  illegal 

contract can neither be registered under provisions of the Muslim 

Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  nor  be  given  recognition  or  effect 

by  a  court  of  law,  as  powers  vested  in  the  executive  to  register 

marriage  contracts  and  in  the  courts  to  give  effect  to  valid 

contracts  and  promises  cannot  be  exercised  in  order  to  defeat 

provisions of the law.  

29. 

Our  jurisprudence  on  the  distinction  between  directory 

and mandatory provisions of law is clear. It was held in Province 

of Punjab VS Javed Iqbal (2021 SCMR 328) that:  

“The ultimate test is the intent of the legislature and not the 

language  in  which  the  intent  is  clothed.  The  object  and 

purpose  of  enacting  the  provision  provide  a  strong  and  clear 

indicator  for  ascertaining  such  intent  of  the  legislature.1 The 

intention  of  the  legislature  must  govern  and  this  is  to  be 

ascertained  not  only  from  the  phraseology  of  the  provision 

but  also  by  considering  its  nature,  its  object,  and  the 

consequences which would follow from construing it one way 

or  the  other. This  exercise  entails  careful  examination  of  the 

scheme  of  the  Act  in  order  to  discover  the  real  purpose  and 

object of the Act. A provision in a statute is mandatory if the 

omission  to  follow  it  renders  the  proceedings  to  which  it 

relates  illegal  and  void,  while  a  provision  is  directory  if  its 

observance is not necessary to the validity of the proceeding. 

One  of  the  important  test  that  must  always  be  employed  in 

order  to  determine  whether  a  provision  is  mandatory  or 

directory  in  character  is  to  consider  whether  the  non-

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 42 

compliance  of  a  particular  provision  causes  inconvenience  or 

injustice  and,  if  it  does,  the  court  would  say  that  that 

provision must be complied with and that it is obligatory in its 

character.”  

It  was  held  in  Province  of  Punjab  VS  Murree  Brewery 

Company Limited (2021 SCMR 305) that: 

6. The test to determine whether a provision is directory or 

mandatory  is  by  ascertaining  the  legislative  intent  behind 

the same. The general rule expounded by this Court is that 

the  usage  of  the  word 

'shall'  generally  carries  the 

connotation  that  a  provision  in  mandatory  in  nature1. 

However,  other  factors  such  as  the  object  and  purpose  of 

the statute and inclusion of penal consequences in cases of 

non-compliance  also  serve  as  an  instructive  guide  in 

deducing the nature of the provision. 

In  Murree  Brewery  the  apex  Court  cited  with  the  approval  the 

decision of Indian Supreme Court in New India Insurance Co. Ltd. 

Hilli  Multipurpose  Cold  Storage  Pvt.  Ltd.  (2020)  5  SCC  757) 

where it was held that:   

If  the  provision  is  couched  in  prohibitive  or  negative 

language,  it  can  rarely  be  directory,  the  use  of  peremptory 

language  in  a  negative  form  is  per  se  indicative  of  the 

interest that the provision is to be mandatory. 

It  further  cited  the  decision  of  the  Indian  Supreme  Court  in  May 

George  VS  Special  Tehsildar  and  others  ((2010)  13  SCC  98) 

where  one  of  the  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in  construing 

the intent of the legislature was that: 

The  Court  has  to  give  due  weight  age  to  whether  the 

interpretation intended to be given by the Court would further 

the  purpose  of  law  or  if  this  purpose  could  be  defeated  by 

terming it mandatory or otherwise. 

 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 43 

30. 

In  relation  to  the  question  before  this  Court  there  is  no 

manner  of  doubt  that  provisions  of  sections  375  and  377A  are 

mandatory  as  they  criminalize  sexual  intercourse  with  a  child 

under the age of 16 or inviting or  enticing a child under the age 

of 18 years to engage in sexually explicit conduct. The provisions 

are  also  mandatory  and  in  public  interest  as  they  are  framed  to 

protect the rights of child to life and liberty as guaranteed by the 

Article  9  of  the  Constitution  read  together  with  provisions  of 

UNCRC.  The  intent  of  the  various  legislative  instruments  cited 

above is to ensure that no child is subjected to an environment or 

activity that is deemed by the state to not be age appropriate. A 

child  is  defined  as  an  individual  under  the  age  of  18  years.  The 

obligation of the state to provide free education to children up to 

the age of 16 has been guaranteed by the Constitution. Likewise, 

under Article 9 read together  with provisions of UNCRC, children 

have  the  right  to  be  cared  for,  to  play,  to  leisure,  and  to  not  be 

burdened with responsibilities not appropriate for children.  

31. 

The  relationship  of  marriage  does  not  just  entail 

engagement  in  permissible  sexual  conduct.  The  purpose  of 

marriage is to enter into a contract whereby two people agree to 

become a family and look after one another, and further agree to 

bring  children  into  this  world  and  be  responsible  for  the  safety 

and  physical  and  emotional  wellbeing  of  such  offspring.  The 

Guardian  and  Wards  Act,  1890  read  together  with  Islamabad 

Capital Territory Child Protection Act, 2018, provides that a child 

under the age of 18 remains in the supervision and guardianship 

of  an  adult  whether  such  adult  is  a  parent,  guardian  or  other 

caregiver  provided  by  the  State  or  appointed  by  a  court  of 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 44 

competent  jurisdiction.  Section  21  of  the  Guardian  and  Wards 

Act, 1890, makes some allowance for a minor being the guardian 

of his own wife or child. But this law was enacted over 132 years 

ago  in  colonial  India,  and  section  21  is  now  in  conflict  with 

provisions  of  UNCRC,  to  give  effect  to  which  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  Child  Protection  Act,  2018,  has  been  promulgated,  and 

also  sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC,  as  discussed  above.  In  view 

of the statutory provisions enacted by Parliament to give effect to 

UNCRC,  our  law  no  longer  creates  a  carve-out  for  purposes  of 

marriage to allow a child under the age of 18 years or even under 

the age of 16 years to enter into a contract of marriage and bring 

her  own  children  into  this  world  for  whose  safety,  welfare  and 

well-being  she  would  be  responsible  while  being  a  child  herself 

and under somebody else’s care.        

32. 

The  issue  of  competence  of  a  child  to  enter  into  a 

contract  came  before  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Yar 

Muhammad  Khan  VS  Sajjad  Abbas  (2021  SCMR  1401),  in 

which the court held the following:  

8. To  protect  minors  and  their  interests  a  minor  cannot 

enter  into  an  agreement  nor  grant  a  power  of  attorney  to 

another  to  do  so.  Section  11  of  the  Contract  Act,  1872 

explicitly  stipulates  that  only  those  who  arc  'of  the  age  of 

majority  according  to  the  law  to  which  he  is  subject'  are 

'competent  to  contract';  the  law  is  the  Majority  Act,  1875 

section  3  whereof  stipulates  eighteen  years  as  the  age  of 

majority. This Court  in the case of Abdul  Ghani v. Yasmeen 

Khan  (above,  which  was  decided  by  three  learned  Judges) 

held that: The provisions as enumerated in section 11 of the 

Contract Act,  1872 would make minor incompetent to enter 

into  any  contract,  therefore,  contract  by  minor  was  void  ab 

initio and not merely voidable. Such contract would have no 

existence in the eye of law and was incapable of satisfaction 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 45 

or  confirmation'  (paragraph  13,  page  847B).  Therefore,  the 

General Power of Attorney dated 8 February 1975 is void to 

the  extent  of  a  minor.  This  leads  on  to  the  question  of 

limitation  and  'whether  the  suit  was  belatedly  filed.  in 

Hamida  Begum  v.  Murad  Begum  (above,  a  decision  by  four 

learned  Judges)  it  was  held  that:  `...  where  the  deed  or 

instrument is ab initio null and void, in which case it can be 

treated  as  a  nullity  without  having  to  be  cancelled  or  set 

aside. If on the other hand, the instrument is only voidable, 

then it would be necessary to have it set aside or cancelled 

in  order  to  remove  the  impediment  in  the  way  of  the 

plaintiff (at page 50E). 

33. 

Section  3  of  Majority  Act,  1875,  was  challenged  before 

the  learned  Federal  Shariat  Court  in  Muhammad  Fayyaz  and 

another  VS  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan 

through 

Secretary,  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs,  Islamabad  and  4 

others  (PLD  2007  FSC  1),  in  which  the  said  section  was  not 

found  to  be  repugnant  to  the  injunctions  of  Islam  and  in  finding 

so the learned Federal Shariat Court also observed the following:  

“ It is also worth mentioning that mere manifestation of the 

physical  symptoms  of  attaining  puberty,  as  submitted  by 

the  learned  petitioner,  are  not  by  themselves  sufficient  to 

hold that the concerned person has also attained the age of 

majority/maturity.  Beside  that,  there  are  definitely  other 

mental, emotional and psychological aspects also that form 

necessary  basis  for  that  purpose.  The  Holy  Qur'an  has,  in 

certain matters, considered and referred to the same, as we 

may  conveniently  find  in  Verse  No.6  of  Surah  Annisa  and 

Verse  No.59  of  Surah  Annoor.  Moreover,  it  is  noticeable 

that  the  ages  in  attaining  physical  puberty  vary  from  place 

to  place  and  from  person  to  person  and  no  definite  criteria 

can be specified to exactly determine who attained puberty 

and  on  which  date.  This  is  the  reasons  why  even  the 

renowned Muslim Scholars are not unanimous on this point 

and  have  held  divergent  opinions  in  respect  of  age  of 

puberty.” 

 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 46 

34. 

The  argument  that  a  female  child  who  has  attained 

puberty  is  legally  competent  to  execute  a  contract  of  marriage 

makes  no  logical  sense,  apart  from  there  being  no  settled 

principle within Islamic jurisprudence stating that puberty alone is 

the  test  for  determining  a  female’s  competence  to  contract 

marriage.  The  question  of  reaching  puberty  has  to  do  with 

physical aspects of the growth of a female child. Merely because 

a child has grown physically and biologically to an extent that she 

can  endure  sexual  activity  or  intercourse  does  not  automatically 

mean  that  she  has  the  legal  capacity  to  marry  or  the  agency  to 

contemplate the consequences that marriage entails i.e. that she 

has the mental and psychological maturity to reach such decision 

in  her  own  best  interest.  Much  research  has  been  produced  on 

factors  that  contribute  to  a  female  child  reaching  puberty. 

Children  as  young  as  ten  or  eleven  years  of  age  can  possibly 

reach  puberty  as  the  timing  of  puberty  has  been  found  to  be 

related  to  physical  characteristics  including  height,  weight  and 

body  mass,  as  well  as  the  diet  of  the  individual  and  her 

geography  etc.  If  puberty  is  to  be  the  applicable  test,  would  we 

deem  a  10-year-old  to  be  competent  to  contract  marriage  and 

engage  in  sexual  intercourse  because  she  has  attained  puberty? 

Research  suggests  that  early  maturing  “adolescents”  are  at  a 

higher  risk  for  psychological  and  behavioral  problems  because 

they  are  not  emotionally  or  formatively  ready  for  the  major 

biological,  social  and  emotional  changes  comprising  puberty. 

Consider for example the following research: 

“Individual Differences in Boys’ and Girls’ Timing and 

Tempo  of  Puberty:  Modeling  Development  With 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 47 

Nonlinear  Growth  Models.”  By  Kristine  Marceau, 

Nilam  Ram,  Renate  M.  Houts,  Kevin  J.  Grimm,  and 

Elizabeth  J.  Susman.  (Developmental  Psychology, 

47(5), 1389–1409.) 

To  date,  the  vast  majority  of  literature  relating  puberty  to 

psychological  and  physical  development  examines  the 

relative timing of puberty compared with same-age and sex 

adolescents. Timing of puberty has been related to physical 

characteristics, 

including  height 

(e.g., Belsky  et  al., 

2007; Huang,  Biro,  &  Dorn,  2009; Li  et  al.,  2009; Llop-

Viñolas  et  al.,  2004),  weight  (e.g., Tanner-Smith,  2010), 

and body mass index (BMI; e.g., Davison, Susman, & Birch, 

2003; He  &  Karlberg,  2001; Huang  et  al.,  2009).  In  line 

with  biological 

influences,  earlier  timing 

is  generally 

associated with greater physical size and/or earlier physical 

growth. 

There  is  strong  and  consistent  evidence  that  deviations 

from  normative  timing  (earlier  or  later  timing)  are  related 

to  psychological  outcomes,  including  internalizing  and 

externalizing problems (e.g., Ge, Brody, Conger, & Simons, 

2006; Ge  et  al.,  2002; Graber,  Lewinsohn,  Seeley,  & 

Brooks-Gunn,  1997; Mendle,  Turkheimer,  &  Emery,  2007). 

Two hypotheses that explain how timing relates to negative 

psychological 

sequelae  have  gained 

traction.  The 

maturational  deviance  hypothesis  posits  that  adolescents 

who  develop  either  earlier  or  later  relative  to  peers 

experience  psychological  distress  and  manifest  behavior 

problems  (Petersen  &  Taylor,  1980).  The  developmental 

readiness hypothesis posits that early maturing adolescents 

are  at  highest  risk 

for  psychological  and  behavioral 

problems  because  they  are  not  emotionally  or  cognitively 

ready  for  the  major  physiological,  social,  and  emotional 

changes comprising puberty (e.g., Ge et al., 2002). 

35. 

To  use  puberty  as  a  test  for  legal  competence  for  a 

female  child  to  enter  into  marriage  contract  would  be  an  unsure 

test in any event. Sections 375 and 377A of the PPC attach very 

serious  criminal  liability  to  engagement  in  sexual  conduct  with  a 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 48 

child under the age of 18. It has already been held above that a 

marriage exclusion cannot be read into sections 375 and 377A of 

PPC as that would fall foul of the principle of casus omissus. But 

even if it were possible to render such interpretation and hold the 

female child being when in a marriage contract is an exception to 

the  liability  that  would  otherwise  flow  from  sections  375  and 

377A of PPC, how would any individual be aware of the fact as to 

whether  the  female  child  has  attained  puberty  or  not  prior  to 

engaging  in  conduct  which  would  attract  liability  under  sections 

375 and 377A of PPC? The consent of a female child is no excuse 

or  justification  where  conduct  qualifies  as  rape  or  sexual  abuse. 

And  it  is  only  a  female  child  who  could  know  with  certainty 

whether  or  not  she  has  attained  the  age  of  puberty  or  not.  How 

could  such  severe  criminal  penalty,  as  provided  under  sections 

375 and 377A of PPC, be justifiable in a fair rule of law system if 

the  accused  had  no  basis  for  confirming  in  advance  whether  or 

not his conduct constituted an offence punishable by death or life 

imprisonment? As has been explained above, in any just and fair 

rule of law system, the law must provide clearly what conduct is 

proscribed  and  falls  beyond  the  redline  and  what  conduct  is 

permissible.  Sections  375  and  377A  do  so  by  providing  a  very 

clear  redline  that  is  not  to  be  crossed  even  inadvertently.  The 

suggestion  that  a  female  child  having  attained  puberty  becomes 

qualified  to  contract  marriage  and  transform  a  crime,  as  defined 

in  sections  375  or  377A  of  PPC,  into  a  legitimate  act,  if  acceded 

to,  would  make  a  mockery  of  the  need  for  certainty  within  the 

penal justice system. 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 49 

36. 

A review of our corpus of laws also suggests that we use 

the  age  of  18  as  the  trigger  point  for  vesting  various  rights  in 

citizens. A few examples are as follows: 

National  Database 
Ordinance, 2000.  

and  Registration  Authority 

10. National Identity Cards. —(1) The Authority shall issue 

or renew, or cause to be issued or renewed, in such manner 

and on terms and conditions, subject to every citizen who has 

attained the age of eighteen years and got himself registered 

under section 9, a card to be called National Identity Card in 

such form, with such period of validity upon payment of such 

fee in such form and manner as may be prescribed:  

Provided  that  all  cards  issued  under  section  5  of  the 

National Registration Act, 1973, (LVI of 1973) to such citizens 

as  stood  registered  under  section  4  of  the  said  Act 

immediately  before  the  commencement  of  this  Ordinance 

shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  issued  under  this  Ordinance 

and  shall,  subject  to  sections  17,  18  and  30  remain  valid  till 

such  period  as  the  underlying  registration  of  the  citizens  to 

whom such cards are issued remains valid in terms of the first 

proviso to subsection (1) of section 9:  

Provided  further  that  before  issuing  or  renewing  a  card 

under  this  section,  the  Authority  may  require  a  person  to 

surrender a National Identity Card earlier issued to him under 

this Ordinance or the National Registration Act, 1973, (LVI of 

1973)  or  otherwise  satisfy  the  Authority  as  to  the  factum  of 

his  having  totally  abandon  the  use  of  any  such  earlier  card 

and,  till  such  time  as  he  surrenders  such  earlier  card  or 

otherwise  satisfies  the  Authority  as  aforesaid,  the  Authority 

may not issue or renew a card.  

(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  this  Ordinance,  all 

such  National  Identity  Cards  as  are  to  be  issued  to  a  citizen 

under this Ordinance by means of a manual or computerized 

laser  printing  process  (as  applicable  in  the  Districts  of 

Islamabad and Rawalpindi) shall not be issued for a period of 

validity  beyond  two  years  after  the  commencement  of  this 

Ordinance,  or  such  longer  or  shorter  period  as  may  be 

notified by the Federal Government with a view to promoting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 50 

uniformity, authenticity and technological advancement in the 

registration for and issuance of National Identity Cards.    

19. Cards necessary for certain purposes.—(1) No citizen 

who  has  attained  the  age  of  eighteen  years  but  does  not 

possess  or produce  a  National  Identity  Card shall  be granted 

a  passport,  permit  or  other  travel  document  for  going  out  of 

Pakistan. 

The Elections Act, 2017 

2(xli) “voter” means—  

(a) in relation to an Assembly or a local government, a person 

who is enrolled as a voter on the electoral roll of any electoral 

area in a constituency; and 

 (b) in relation to the Senate, a person who—  

I.  for  election  to  a  seat  from  a  Province,  is  a  Member  of  the 

Provincial Assembly;  

II. for election to seats from the Islamabad Capital Territory, 

is a Member of the National Assembly; and  

III.  for  election  to  a  seat  from  the  Federally  Administered 

Tribal  Areas,  is  a  Member  of  the  National  Assembly  elected 

from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. 

26. Preparation of preliminary electoral rolls--- 

 (2) A person shall be entitled to be enrolled as a voter in an 

electoral area if he—  

(a) is a citizen of Pakistan; 

 (b) is not less than eighteen years of age;  

(c) possesses a National Identity Card issued by the National 

Database  and  Registration  Authority  at  any  time  till  the  last 

day  fixed  for  inviting  claims,  objections  and  applications  for 

preparation, revision or correction of electoral rolls;  

(d)  is  not  declared  by  a  competent  court  to  be  of  unsound 

mind; and 

The Provincial Motor Vehicles Ordinance, 1965. 

 4.   Age 

limit 

in 

connection  with  driving  of 

motor vehicles.– (1)  No  person  shall  drive  in  any  public 

place– 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 51 

(i)  a  motor  cycle  or  an  invalid  carriage,  unless  he  has 

attained the age of eighteen years; 

(ii)  a  motor  car,  otherwise  than  as  a  paid  employee,  unless 

he has attained the age of eighteen years; 

(iii)  a  motor  car  as  a  paid  employee  or  a  transport  vehicle, 

unless he has attained the age of twenty-one years; 

(iv)  a heavy transport vehicle, unless he has attained the age 

of twenty-two years. 

37. 

For  rule  of  law  to  make  sense,  the  corpus  of  laws 

applicable within a jurisdiction must speak with one voice. In view 

of the provisions of the statues cited above, it is patent that our 

laws  define  a  child  as  a  person  who  has  not  reached  the  age  of 

18. We do not allow such child who has not reached the age of 18 

to be issued a CNIC or be granted travel documents which would 

enable  him/her  to  travel  without  the  consent  of  his  parents  or 

guardians. We do not allow a citizen to exercise his right to vote 

guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  till  the  time  that  he/she 

reaches  the  age  of  18.  We  do  not  allow  children  to  drive  motor 

vehicles  till  such  time  that  they  reach  the  age  of  18.  We  do  not 

trust children, till they have reached the age of 18, to be able to 

take  care  of  their  own  day-to-day  needs  without  being  placed 

under the supervision of a parent, guardian or other caregiver. It 

would indeed be incredible if in face all these statutory provisions 

we were to conclude  that while we do  not find a child below  the 

age  of 18 to possess the agency, legal capacity and qualification 

to look after  himself/herself, we find it perfectly  normal for such 

child  to  be  capable  and  competent  to  decide  whether  or  not  to 

execute  a  marriage  contract  and  be  responsible  for  his/her 

spouse  and  children  and  assume  all  responsibilities  and  burdens 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 52 

that  come  with  the  relationship  of  marriage.  And  that  we  find 

such  child  to  be  qualified  to  engage  in  sexual  intercourse  and 

bring  offspring  into  the  world  that  such  child  would  then  be 

responsible for. 

38. 

A  key  measure  of  civilization  in  a  polity  is  how  it  treats 

the  most  vulnerable  segments  of  the  population.  Children,  and 

within  children  the  female  sex,  constitute  the  most  vulnerable 

segment of our populace. Guided  by  its obligation  to protect the 

marriage,  the  family,  the  mother  and  the  child,  under  Article  35 

of  the  Constitution  read  together  with Articles  9,  14  and 25,  the 

Parliament  has  promulgated  a  string  of  laws  to  protect  the  life, 

liberty, dignity and equality of children and to give effect to their 

rights as articulated in the UNCRC that Pakistan is a signatory to. 

Under the Constitution, the judiciary is the machinery provided to 

uphold  fundamental  rights  of  citizens  and  breathe  meaning  into 

constitutional  guarantees.  Courts  are  thus  obliged  to  protect 

children  against  being  employed  in  any  conduct  that  has  been 

proscribed  by  Parliament  by  defining  it  as  a  crime,  as  has  been 

done by Sections 375 and 377A of PPC.    

39. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  Court  has  come  to  the 

following conclusions:  

A.  A child is defined as a person who has not attained the age of 

18 years. A child is required to be placed in somebody’s care 

whether  it  is  a  parent  or  guardian  or  other  caregiver 

appointed  on  behalf  of  the  state.  Complete  agency  to  grant 

informed  consent  for  purposes  of  entering  into  contract, 

including, inter alia, a marriage contract cannot be attributed 

to such child.  

B.  A  female  child  below  the  age  of  18  cannot  be  deemed 

competent  to  freely  grant  her  consent  to  enter  into  a 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 53 

marriage contract merely because she manifests the physical 

symptoms of having attained puberty. In view of provisions of 

the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961,  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  Child  Protection  Act,  2018  and  PPC,  when  read 

together,  while  being  guided  by  principles  of  Islamic 

jurisprudence  and  Principles  of  Policy  enshrined  in  the 

Constitution,  (including  state’s  obligation  to  protect  the 

woman,  the  child  and  the  family),  the  test  for  legal  agency 

and competence of a female child is her biological age and not 

her state of physical and biological growth.   

C.  The  provisions  of  sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC  are 

mandatory  provisions  and  any  contract  entered  with  the 

object  of  breaching  such  provisions  or  that  has  the  effect  of 

breaching  such  provisions  cannot  be  treated  as  a  valid 

contract. A marriage contract in which one of the parties is a 

child under the age of 18 is therefore a contract executed for 

an  unlawful  purpose  and  is  void  ab  initio.  Such  marriage 

contract  can  neither  be  registered  under  the  Muslim  Family 

Laws Ordinance, 1961, nor can be given effect by a court, as 

that  would  tantamount  to  defeating  provisions  of  law  that 

have  been  promulgated  to  uphold  rights  of  children 

guaranteed by Article 9 of the Constitution read together with 

the  provisions  of  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of 

the Child.  

D.  A child under the age of 18 years is a dependent of an adult 

whether such adult is a parent or guardian or other caregiver 

appointed  by  the  State.  The  State  is  under  an  obligation  to 

uphold and guarantee the rights of such child, who cannot be 

deemed to have the competence or capacity to parent a child 

of his/her own and act as guardian endowed with the primary 

responsibility  to  provide  for  his/her  child  while  being  a  child 

himself/herself.  

E.  Sections 375 and 377A of PPC read together with Article 9 of 

the  Constitution,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Child  Protection 

Act, 2018, and provisions of United Nations Convention on the 

Rights  of  the  Child  unequivocally  provide  that  no  one  can 

engage in sexual conduct in any form with a child and neither 

can  any  person  invite  or  entice  a  child  to  engage  in  sexual 

conduct  in  any  form,  and  any  invitation  or  enticement 

provided  to  a  child  to  engage  in  sexual  conduct,  even  under 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 54 

the  cloak  of  marriage,  would  fall  within  the  definition  of 

sexual abuse in terms of section 377A.  

F.  Neither a child under the age of 18 can consent to engage in 

sexual conduct in any form, nor can a parent or guardian of a 

child, contract a child out to engage in sexual conduct. A child 

is  not  a  chattel  that  can  be  contracted  out  by  a  trustee  or 

guardian  to  engage  in  conduct  that  the  child  himself/herself 

cannot  grant  consent  for.  No  consent  can  be  granted  on 

behalf  of  a  child  by  a  parent  or  guardian  involving  discharge 

of  personal  service  by  the  child  or  engagement  in  conduct 

that  is  unlawful  and  prohibited,  such  as  that  required  to  be 

performed  under  a  marriage  contract.  While  a  parent  or 

guardian  can  deal  with  a  child’s  property  in  his/her  best 

interest,  the  parent  or  guardian  is  not  at  liberty  to  contract 

out  the  child  to  engage  in  a  contract  of  personal  service  or 

conduct otherwise prohibited by law. 

G.  Sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC  do  not  provide  for  any 

exceptions or exclusions to conduct that otherwise qualifies as 

rape or sexual abuse as defined therein, and the said sections 

would  be  attracted  even  where  the  offence  is  made  out 

against  a  person  who  seeks  to  defend  himself  on  the  basis 

that  such  conduct  was  pursuant  to  a  marriage  contract 

executed  by  a  child  under  the  age  of  18  years  or  his/her 

parent or guardian on his/her behest.  

40. 

Once  this  Court  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  a 

marriage contract involving a child under the age of 18 years is a 

contract prohibited by law, which, even if executed by a child, is 

void ab initio, the question of treating the purported nikah-nama 

between respondent No.1 and the Minor as a basis to release her 

in the custody of respondent No.1 does not arise. This Court has 

not however determined the age of the Minor definitively, nor has 

it  made  any  observations  as  regard  the  liability  of  respondent 

No.1  under  provisions  of  PPC.  Doing  so  in  writ  jurisdiction  could 

fetter  the  rights  of  the  parties  involved  to  due  process  and  fair 

trial  as  guaranteed  by  Article  10A  of  the  Constitution.  The 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 55 

determination of such questions is left to the court of competent 

jurisdiction before which such questions are raised.   

41. 

For  reasons  stated  above,  the  instant  petition  is 

allowed  and  respondent  No.5  is  directed  to  ensure  that  the 

Minor  is  released  from  Dar-ul-Aman  into  the  custody  of  the 

petitioner,  who  is  her  mother,  and  the  petitioner  along  with  her 

husband (i.e. the father of the minor) are responsible to provide 

for  the  safety  and  wellbeing  of  the  Minor  in  accordance  with  the 

provisions  of  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Child  Protection  Act, 

2018.  Respondent  No.1  shall  pay  the  petitioner  cost  of  litigation 

in the amount of Rs.20,000/- under section 35 of Civil Procedure 

Code, 1908 within a period of thirty days and the learned counsel 

for the respondent will file a certificate with the Deputy Registrar 

(Judicial)  of  this  Court  confirming  that  the  order  as  to  costs  has 

been complied with.  

42. 

The office is directed to send a copy of this judgment to 

the  Secretary,  Cabinet  Division,  and  Secretary,  Ministry  of 

Parliamentary Affairs, to bring to the attention of the Cabinet and 

the  Parliament,  respectively,  (i)  the  absence  of  a  clear  statutory 

provision in the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, stating the 

permissible  age  for  marriage  in  Pakistan,  (ii)  section  21  of  the 

Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890,  which  is  in  conflict  with 

provisions  of  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Child  Protection  Act, 

2018,  read  together  with  provisions  of  the  United  Nations 

Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Child,  and  capable  of  creating  the 

false impression that children in Pakistan under the age of 18 are 

still  deemed  capable  of  being  guardians  in  select  circumstances, 

 
 
W.P No. 4227 of 2021  

P a g e  | 56 

and  (iii)  provisions  of  statutory  instruments  dating  back  to 

colonial  times,  including  the  Majority  Act,  1975,  Child  Marriage 

Restraint Act, 1929, and the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 

1939,  provisions  of  which,  if  read  on  a  stand-alone  basis,  could 

be  vulnerable  to  interpretations  in  conflict  with  provisions  of 

Sections  375  and  377A  of  PPC  read  together  with  Islamabad 

Capital Territory Child Protection Act, 2018, and provisions of the 

United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Child.  The  office  is 

also  directed  to  send  a  copy  of  this  judgment  to  Chief 

Commissioner,  ICT,  for  information  and  compliance  for  purposes 

of  registration  of  marriages  under  the  Muslim  Family  Laws 

Ordinance,  1961,  within  Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  This  Court 

would like to express its appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Shazeb 

Nawaz Khan, the learned State Counsel, for his assistance.  

       (BABAR SATTAR) 
               JUDGE 

    Announced in the open Court on 09.02.2022. 

Saeed.  

Approved for reporting. 

                         JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
