ORDER  SHEBT.

IN THE ISLAIW{BAD  HIGH COUTRT.  ISLAIUT{BAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P No.125912019.

Mst.  Raiya Hammad

VS

Hammad  Hussain etc.

S. No. of
order/
nroceedinss

Date of order/
Proceedings

Order with signature of Judge  and  that of parties or counsel
where necessary.

17.09.2019

Petitioner in person.
Respondent  No.1 in person.

Petitioner in person contends  that  her counsel was available

in the early  hours of the day and later  on left the Court for his

medical  checkup.

2.  The petitioner  has been confronted with the order dated

06.03.2019,  passed by learned  Family/Guardian Judge,

Islamabad  as to why the said order  has been assailed in the

instant  writ petition  as the same is an interim order, whereby she

contends  that she is mother  of two minors namely  Muhammad

Affan Butt  aged 2 yearc 10 months  and Muhammad  Abdullah

Butt aged l% year and respondent No.l/father filed  custody

petition U/S 25 of Guardian  & Wards Act, 1890  and during  the

proceedings  before learned Guardian Judge  restriction  has been

imposed  upon her not to remove  the minors beyond  the territorial

jurisdiction  of Islamabad without due permission.

3.  The petitioner has also  been  confronted as to whether  she is

living outside the territorial  jurisdiction of Islamabad or she is

working  outside  Islamabad,  whereby  she contends that she is

permanently  residing in Islamabad in Sector  F-611,  Islamabad

alongwith  the minor  with her parents and as such  neither she  has

intention to remove  the minors  from territorial jurisdiction of

Islamabad  nor going abroad  but due to restriction of Guardian

2
W.P No.1259/2019

Court she is unable  to visit her patemal and maternal  family

members  in Kallar  Syedan  as well as District  Rawalpindi,  which

persuaded  her to challenge the said  order through instant  writ

petition.

4.  Conversely,  respondent  No.1 in person contends  that he has

no objection on visit  of the petitioner  alongwith  the minors  to her

native  village  Kallar Syedan and District Rawalpindi, however,

she will not remove the minors and  deprive  him from  his right of

visitation.

5.  Keeping  in view above position, the grievances  of the

petitioner  and respondent  No.l have been  redressed. Therefore,

instant  writ petition  stands disoosed  of in above terms  and the

order dated 06.03.2019, passed  by Family/Guardian  Judge,

Islamabad  is mofr@.The petitioner/mother  is at liberty to visit

her parents and family members living in Kallar Syedan and

District Rawalpindi  with her free will as and  when  she likes. If

the petitioner intends to shift from territorial  jurisdiction  of

Islamabad  permanently for the purpose  of job or settlement,  she

shall obtain permission from the learned  FamilyiGuardian  Judge

and this condition  shall cease  to exist on passing of the final

judgment  in the custody petition  filed by respondent  No.l.

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KIYANI)

JUDGE

