Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

     W.P. No. 2907 of  2017. 

MUHAMMAD USMAN DAR.  

          VS 

KHAWAJA MOHAMMAD ASIF, ETC.  

        PETITIONER BY:         

Mr. Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC, Mr  
Mustafa Aftab A. Sherpao, ASC and Syed  
Zulqarnain Safdar, Advocate.  

        RESPONDENTS BY:         

Mr. Rashdeen Nawaz Kusuri, ASC, Mr Nadeem  
Yousaf Rana, Mr Assad Ullah Waghra and Ch,  
Najam ul Hassan, Advocates.  

DATE OF HEARING:                 10.04.2018. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  J.-    The  petitioner,  namely  Muhammad 

Usman  Dar,  has  invoked  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article 

199(1)(b)(ii)  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 

(hereinafter 

referred 

to  as 

the  “Constitution”) 

requiring  Khawaja 

Muhammad  Asif  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Respondent”)  to  show  

under  what  authority  of  law  he  claims  to  hold  the  office  as  Member  of  the   

National  Assembly  of  Pakistan,  the 

lower  House  of  Majlis-e-Shoora 

(Parliament).   

2.   

The facts, in brief, are that the General Elections were held 

on 11.05.2013. The Respondent contested elections on the ticket of Pakistan 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

2 

Muslim  League  (Nawaz)  and  secured  92803  votes  as  against  71525  votes 

polled  in  favour  of  Muhammad  Usman  Dar  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the 

"Petitioner'.) The latter had contested elections from the platform of Pakistan 

Tehreek-e-Insaaf.  The  nomination  paper  submitted  by  the  Respondent  was 

challenged by other contesting candidates which culminated in the dismissal 

of Election Appeal no. 144-A of 2013 by the learned Election Tribunal of the 

Lahore High Court, Lahore vide order dated 17.04.2013. Pursuant to the said 

order  the  Respondent  had  contested  the  elections  and  was  declared  as  

returned candidate. He was, thereafter, notified as a Member of the National 

Assembly,  elected  from  constituency  NA-110.  After  taking  oath  of  office  as 

Member  of  the  National  Assembly,  the  Respondent  was  inducted  in  the 

Federal Cabinet on 08.06.2013 as the Minister for Water and Power. Later the 

Respondent  was  given  the  portfolio  of  Minister  of  Defence  on  27.11.2013. 

The Respondent took oath as Foreign Minister of Pakistan on 04.08.2017. The 

Respondent has had the privilege of being elected to the lower house of the 

Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  in  the  General  Elections  held  in  1993,  1997, 

2002  and  2008.  Some  relevant  facts  necessary  for  the  adjudication  of  the 

instant petition are mentioned as follows;- 

(A) 

NOMINATION PAPER: 

The nomination paper to contest elections from the constituency NA 110 

was  filed  by  the  Respondent  on  30.03.2013  under  section  12  of  the 

Representation of the People Act 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act of 

1976”).  Declarations  made  in  columns  7  and  8  therein,  as  required  under 

section 12(2)(e), were as follows;- 

“7.  My educational qualification is     B.A., LLB____ 
   BUSINESS___” 
8.  My present occupation is   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

3 

3.   

It  is  noted  that  the  Respondent  was  required  to  attach 

attested copies of the relevant documents in support of the declarations, inter 

alia,  made  in  columns  7  to  10.  The  nomination  paper  signed  by  the 

Respondent specifically contained the following affirmation; 

(b)  

I,  Mr/Ms/Mrs  KHWAJA  MOHAMMAD  ASIF 

s/o  KHAWAJA 

MOHAMMAD  SAFDAR  state  that  failure  to  give  detail  regarding  any  item  of 

this  Form  shall  render  my  nomination  to  contest  election  invalid  or  if  any 

information given here in above are found incorrect at any time my election 

shall stand void ab initio" 

(B) 

OCCUPATION IN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES:- 

The Respondent has executed, from time to time, three separate employment 

contracts  with  International  Mechanical  and  Electrical  CO.  (W.L.L.) 

(hereinafter referred to as  the “Company”). The latter is  a  juridical person 

incorporated and governed under the laws of the United Arab Emirates.   

(i)   

FIRST CONTRACT:-  

The first employment contract was executed by the Respondent on 

08.06.2011  which  remained  valid  till  30.06.2013  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 

the  “First  Contract”).  The  relevant  clauses  of  the  contract,  dated 

06.08.2011 are as follows;- 

“A. FIRST PARTY 
Company/Est  : INT. MECH. & ELEC CO. LLC______ 
: EMIRATES_____________________ 
Nationality 
: ABU DHABI TOURIST CLUB______ 
Address  
Represented by : ELIAS IBRAHIM SALLOUM_______ 

B. SECOND PARTY 
: ASIF MUHAMMAD KHAWAJA SAFDAR MUHAMMAD KHAWAJA 
Mr./Mrs  
Nationality 
: PAKISTAN___________________ 
Passport No.  : AC 1886006)____________________ 

Now therefore the parties declare having full capacity to contract and mutually 
agreed as follows: 

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

4 

1) That the Second party accepts to work for first party as LEGAL ADVISOR 
PRIVATE LAW in the U.A.E. For a basic salary   9000   Per MONTH nine 
thousand dirhams   
2) The duration of this Agreement shall be (   Unlimited  ) As from 03-07-
2011  to _____________. 
A- The two parties hereto have agreed that the Second party shall be subject to 
a probation period of 6 months (provided that the probation shall not exceed six 
months from the beginning of employment). 
B- The limited employment agreement expires on the date of expire thereof, but 
in case the two parties continue to execute the agreement then it shall be 
considered as renewed for an extra period of one year from the date of expire 
thereof on the same terms and conditions. 
3) The First Party shall bear the cost of air ticket at the time of commencing 
work and also the cost of one ticket home at the time of terminating the 
Employment Agreement. 
4) The First Party may terminate the services of Second Party immediately and 
without notice in case the Second party violates Clause (120) of the Federal Law 
No(8) of 1980 in respect of the organizing of Labour Relation and as conditions 
provided therein. And also as provided in Clause (88) there of. 
5.) Provisions of Federal Act No.(8) shall be applicable in respect of end of 
service gratuity and shall also be applicable for other conditions which are not 
provided for herein.  
6) This Agreement is made in 3 copies. First Copy retained with the Ministry 
(Labour Dept.) at the time of attesting the agreement each party hereto shall 
have one copy to act according whenever necessary.. 
7) The first Party is obligated to grant the Second Party an annual leave with pay 
for 30 days (provided that the annual leave shall not be less than thirty days). 
8) Other allowance granted to the Second Party: 
A-Accommodation All:  FAMILY HOME PROVIDED 
B-Transportation All.     PROVIDED 
C-Other: 

1-________________________ 
2-________________________ 
3-________________________ 
4-________________________ 
Basic Salary:   
Total salary with Allowance:    9000_______  

9000________        

9)  Other Conditions: 
.A______________________________ 
.B______________________________ 

10) Daily working hours are ( 8 ) hours only, and shall not exceed forty eight 
hours weekly. In case of shops, hotels, restaurants and watchmen, the working 
hours shall be nine hours per day.” 

 (ii) 

SECOND CONTRACT:- 

The  First  Contract  was  followed  by  the  execution  of  another 

employment  contract  in  July 2013  which  remained  valid  from  01.07.2013  to 

30.05.2017 (hereinafter referred to as the “Second Contract”).  The terms 

and  conditions  of  the  Second  Contract  were  the  same  as  that  of  the  First 

Contract except that basic salary was increased to AED 2000/- while the total 

i.e salary and allowances amounted to AED 30,000/-.   

    (iii)  

THIRD CONTRACT:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

5 

The  Third  Contract  was  executed  by  the  Respondent  and  the 

Company  in  May  2017  and  it  was  valid  and  subsisting  till  the  filing  of  the 

instant  petition.  It  is  noted  that  the  Third  Contract  was  executed  by  the 

Respondent  when  he  was  holding  the  portfolio  of  Defense  Minister  in  the 

Federal  Cabinet.  The  said  employment  contract  was  valid  w.e.f.  31.05.2017 

and the terms and conditions thereof are as follows:- 

“Hereinafter referred to as (The First Party) in this Employment Contract and 
the Annex thereof. 

To hire: 
Mr. Ms.: 
Name : ASIF MUHAMMAD KHAWAJA SAFDAR 
MUHAMMAD KHAWAJA 
Nationality: PAKISTAN 
Passport No. AC1886006 

Hereinafter referred to as (The Second Party Worker) in this Employment 
Contract and the Annex thereof 

Both the First Party and the Second Party are hereafter referred to as (The 
Parties Both Parties) in this Employment Contract and the Annex thereof. 

Preamble 
Whereas the Second Party works for the First Party in the Job profession of 
[MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT]  under an Unlimited Term Employment 
Contract No.(MB174652818AF) commencing as of 02/07/2011. And whereas 
Both Parties desire to continue this Contract. Both Parties have agreed upon 
the following. 

First Article 
The Second Party shall work for the First Party on the job profession of 
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT within the UAE (Emirate Name: Abu Dhabi.). 

Second Article 
The Second Party’s weekly rest shall be 1 day(s). The First Party shall 
determine  such  day(s)  and  inform  the  Second  Party  thereof  at  the 
commencement date of the employment relationship. 

Third Article 
Should either party desire to terminate this Contract, such party shall notify 
the other party of such desire within 01 Month(s) as prior notice before the 
determined date of termination. Such period shall be similar for both parties. 

Fourth Article 
Both Parties agree that the Second Party shall work for the First Party in 
return  for  [Monthly  Wage  of  50000  AED  (fifty  thousand)]                                                                             
Such wage shall include: 

The Basic Salary at an amount of AED 35000 (Thirty-five 
thousand) 
Allowances 
These allowances should include without limitation: 
Housing Allowance: FIRST PARTY 
Transport Allowance: FIRST PARTY 
Other allowance: 15000 

The First Party shall pay the wage and the Second Party shall receive the 
wage according to the regulations determined by MOL 

Fifth Article 
The labour relationship governed by this Contract, shall be a contractual, 
consensual relationship. Neither Party shall be obliged to continue such 
contractual labour relationship with the other Party without its consent, 
provided that the Party terminating the Contract at its sole discretion shall 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

6 

bear all legal consequences resulting therefrom as stipulated in the Annex 
enclosed herewith and according to any MOL Applicable Laws. The Labour 
relationship between both Parties shall end if any of the events set forth in 
Article (2) of the Annex enclosed herewith occurs. 

Sixth Article 
The First Party acknowledges that it has informed the Second Party of all the 
articles stipulated in the Annex enclosed herewith (6 articles in total). 

Seventh Article 
The Second Party acknowledges that it has thoroughly reviewed all the 
articles stipulated in the Annex enclosed herewith (6 articles in total). 

Eighth Article 
Both Parties acknowledge that the articles stipulated in the Annex enclosed 
herewith constitute an integral and complementary part hereof and shall be 
binding on both Parties. 

Ninth Article 

Both Parties have agreed to add the following conditions: 
1-family accommodation provided 
In such case, the additional conditions shall not breach Applicable Laws, or 
the articles stipulated in this Contract or the Annex hereof. In case of adding 
such conditions, this Contract and the Annex hereof must be referred to the 
relevant labour relation authority within MOL for review and prior to approval 
thereof.  

Tenth Article 
This Contract has been made in three counterparts duly signed by Both 
Parties. Each Party shall receive a copy and the third one shall be kept by 
MOL.” 

4.   

Pursuant  to  the  above  three  employment  contracts,  the 

Respondent  was  granted  an  "Iqama"  i.e.  residence  visa.  Moreover,  the 

Respondent  was  also  registered  as  a  skilled  labourer  and  a  card  was  duly 

issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  United  Arab  Emirates  wherein,  inter  alia, 

Work Permit No. 70798428 was mentioned.  The list issued by the Company 

shows  it  has  a  total  strength  of  1250  employees.  The  name  of  the 

Respondent  appears  at  serial  no.  303  and  his 

job  description 

is 

"Management Consultant”.  The  occupation  of  employees  mentioned  in 

the list above and below the name of the Respondent i.e. at serial nos. 302 

and  304  respectively  is  described  as  Concrete  Mason  and  Shovel  Operator 

Driver. The Managing Director of the Company, namely Mr. Elias Salloum, has 

issued  a  certificate,  dated  12.04.2018,  titled  "To  Whom  It  May  Concern" 

which  was  submitted  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  along  with 

his  written  arguments.  The  contents  of  the  certificate  are  reproduced  as 

follows;- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

7 

“TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN 

We hereby conﬁrm that Kh. Muhammad Asif has been the 
“Legal Advisor Private Law” for the company. The agreement 
executed with him was a standard document approved by the 
UAE Government. The agreement was executed to fulﬁll UAE 
Law, however, the terms stated in the agreement were not the 
understanding between the parties. The relationship has cordial, 
with mutual consent and there was no requirement for him to 
be present in UAE for any period of time and we have been 
seeking his advice as and when required telephonically and 
during his planned visit to UAE. 

Similarly, the agreement was renewed as per UAE law, he 
became the Management Consultant of the Company. The 
agreement was executed to fulﬁll UAE Law, however, the terms 
stated in the agreement were not the understanding between 
the parties. The relationship has been cordial, with mutual 
consent and there was no requirement for him to be present in 
UAE for any period of time and we have been seeking his advice 
as and when required telephonically and during his planned visit 
to UAE.  

Mr. Asif was paid a fee for his services as per the understanding 
of the company and himself. Mr. Asif was never a full time 
employee of the company and was not required to stay in UAE 
as mentioned in the agreement. There is total ﬂexibility in the 
UAE after execution of the standard document to agree to any 
terms with the employees and Consultants of the company and 
the UAE Government does not interfere in this respect.  

A representative of the company is willing to come and appear 
before 
any Court in Pakistan to conﬁrm the above facts.  

Yours faithfully, 
For INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL & ELECTRICAL CO. 
WLL. 

ELIAS SALLOUM 
MANAGING DIRECTOR” 

(C) 

ASSETS AND LIABILITIES:- 

The  Respondent  had  not  declared  Bank  Account  no.  6201853775, 

maintained  with  the  National  Bank  of  Abu  Dhabi  in  the  statement  of  assets 

and  liabilities  attached  with  the  nomination  paper.  According  to  the 

documents placed on record it shows a balance amount on the date of filing 

the nomination paper. The said account was declared by the Respondent for 

the  first  time  in  2015  before  the  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan  in  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

8 

annual statement of assets and liabilities filed under section 42-A of the Act 

of 1976.  

5.   

It  is  noted  that  the  above  facts  have  been  unambiguously 

admitted.  There  is  no  dispute  whatsoever  regarding  the  execution  of  the 

three employment contracts and non disclosure of the aforementioned Bank 

Account in the nomination paper. The Petitioner had challenged the election 

of the Respondent by filing an election petition under section 52 of the Act of 

1976  which  ultimately  led  to  the  rendering  of  the  judgment  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Usman Dar VSKhawaja Muhammad 

Asif” [2017 SCMR 292]. The above facts were not part of the Election Petition 

because the Petitioner asserts that they came to his knowledge much later.      

6.   

Mr Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC has contended that;  the 

Respondent  is  not  entitled  to  hold  the  office  of  Member  of  the  National 

Assembly  nor  as  member  of  the  Federal  Cabinet;  the  Respondent  had 

deliberately concealed material facts in his statement of assets and liabilities ; 

he had not  declared his income which was  derived as 'salary' from full time 

employment with the Company since 2011; source of business capital applied 

for to set up a restaurant in Abu Dhabi was also not fully declared; material 

discrepancies in the account of salary and foreign remittances disclosed in the  

nomination  form  are  obvious;  the  three  employment  contracts  were  not 

declared;  the  Respondent  had  unambiguously  taken  the  plea  before  the 

learned  Election  Tribunal  of  the  Lahore  High  Court,  Lahore  that  the 

remittances exclusively related to the sale of the restaurant; the unequivocal 

statement  recorded  in  the  order  dated  17.04.2013,  passed  by  the  learned 

Tribunal in Election Appeal no. 144-A of 2013, had attained finality since no 

attempt was made to correct it; the Respondent had declared his occupation 

as 'Business': for the first time in  the present proceedings he has  taken the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

9 

plea  that  foreign  remittances  declared  in  the  nomination  form  included 

income  from  salary  as  well  as  from  the  business  of  a  restaurant;  non-

disclosure  of  the  Bank  Account  maintained  with  the  Bank  of  Abu  Dhabi  is 

sufficient  for  a  declaration  in  the  context  of  Article  62(1)(f)  of  the 

Constitution,  read  with  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Act  of  1976;  the  test 

laid down by the august Supreme Court in the recent precedent law relating 

to non-disclosure for the purposes of Article 62(1)(e) is that of strict liability; 

the Respondent was a full time employee in a foreign based Company while 

he was holding the portfolios of Defence and Finance Minister; the conflict of 

interest  is  obvious  and,  therefore,  this  alone  is  sufficient  to  declare  the 

Respondent as disqualified; the Respondent, through his acts and omissions, 

has violated his oath which he had taken before entering upon the office as 

Member of the National Assembly and then as Federal Minister. The learned 

counsel has placed reliance on the case law which has been attached with his 

written arguments.     

7.   

Mr  Rasheen  Nawaz  Kusuri,  ASC  has  appeared  and  has 

argued  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent;  the  admission  relating  to  execution  of 

the  three  employment  contracts  with  the  Company  is  not  simplicitor;  the 

intent  of  the  parties  was  different  from  the  expressions  used  in  the  three 

employment  contracts;  the  Company  has  confirmed  that  the  language  and 

expressions used in the three employment contracts was for the purposes of 

fulfilling the requirements of law and did not reflect the intent of the parties; 

this  raises  questions  of  fact  which  cannot  be  resolved  while  exercising 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution;  the  Company,  vide 

certificate  dated  12.04.2018,  has  explicitly  acknowledged 

that 

the 

employment contracts were executed merely to fulfill the requirements of the 

Labour  Laws  in  United  Arab  Emirates;  the  letter  dated  12.04.2018  of  the 

Company ought to be read with the employment contracts; the employment 

contracts are infact an 'Iqama Agreement' between the Respondent and the 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

10 

Company;  the  employment  contracts  reflect  the  standard  document  and, 

therefore, does not manifest the actual relationship; the terms and conditions 

relating  to  the  services  rendered  by  the  Respondent  are  settled  orally;  the 

parties  are  free  to  enter  into  any  terms  and  conditions;  re-writing  of  a 

contract  falls  within  the  exclusive  domain  of  the  parties;  the  onus  is  on  the 

petitioner to establish  that the Respondent  was performing his duties in the 

United Arab Emirates and only then would he have been able to make out a 

case;  the  presence  of  the  Respondent  and  performing  functions  as  member 

of  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  and  the  Federal  Cabinet  stand  admitted 

by the petitioner; the relationship between the Respondent and the Company 

was  flexible;  no  reliable  evidence  has  been  produced  by  the  petitioner  to 

show that the Respondent was engaged in working on full time basis in the 

United  Arab  Emirates;  the  declaration  regarding  occupation  does  not  attract 

section 12(2)(f) of the Act of 1976; omission to mention a dormant account 

maintained with the National Bank of Abu Dhabi is inconsequential; the non-

disclosure  of  the  Bank  Account  would  not  attract  the  test  of  strict  liability; 

reliance  has  been  placed  on  the  case  titled  “Rai  Hassan  Nawaz  VS Haji 

Muhammad  Ayub  and  others”  [PLD  2017  S.C.  70];  the  petitioner  has  not 

been  able  to  bring  on  record  any  error  or  defect  which  may  be  false  in 

material  particular;  the  petitioner  had  declared  the  account  maintained  with 

the Bank of Abu Dhabi and an amount of AED 4700 deposited therein before 

the  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan  in  the  annual  statement  of  assets  and 

liabilities  submitted  on  30.06.2015;  the  said  declaration  was  made  much 

before filing of the instant petition; the occupation mentioned at serial no.8 of 

the nomination form cannot be treated as false in order to attract the penal 

consequences since the petitioner had enclosed a copy of his passport, which 

contained the 'Iqama' issued by the United Arab Emirates; entries disputed in 

the statement of account required recoding of evidence; the Respondent has 

made correct and true disclosures; any dispute regarding qualification of the 

Respondent as Member of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) after issuance of 

 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

11 

notification as a returned candidate is required to be dealt with under Article 

63(2) of the Constitution; at the best this Court may refer the matter to the 

Speaker of the National Assembly of Pakistan under sub-article (2) of Article 

63 of the Constitution; a bonafide omission, particularly relating to declaration 

regarding  occupation,  is  not  fatal  nor  attracts  the  consequences  of  being 

disqualified; the question of whether the strict liability test would be attracted 

in the case of non-disclosure was recently argued before the august Supreme 

Court in Sheikh Rasheed’s case wherein the judgment has been reserved; it 

would  be  appropriate  to  keep  the  matter  at  hand  pending  till  august  when 

the  Supreme  Court  announces  judgment  in  the  said  case;  quo-warranto 

petition is not maintainable and in case this Court concludes that inquisitorial 

proceedings  are  required  then  the  matter  may  be  referred  to  a  competent 

forum; the relief sought in the instant petition is discretionary in nature and, 

therefore,  utmost  restraint  must  be  exercised;  the  Respondent  has  been 

elected by a large number of constituents and, therefore, it would be unjust 

and  unfair  if  they  are  disenfranchised;  malafide  of  the  petitioner  is  obvious 

from  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition  eight  months  before  the  holding  of 

General Elections; the august Supreme Court in the case titled “Imran Ahmad 

Khan Niazi VSMian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others” [PLD 2017 S.C. 

265]  has  not  disqualified  the  former  Prime  Minister  merely  for  holding  an 

‘Iqama’  but  rather  his  disqualification  was  due  to  non-disclosure  of  assets; 

holding  an ‘Iqama’  cannot  be  made  the  basis  for  attracting  Article  62(1)(f) 

of the Constitution. The learned counsel has placed reliance on the case law 

which has been mentioned in the written arguments and, therefore, we need 

not reproduce the same.    

8.   

The  learned  counsels  for  the  parties  have  been  heard  and 

the record perused with their able assistance.  

9.   

The  petitioner  has  invoked  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of 

this Court under Article 199(1)(b)(ii) of the Constitution. The learned counsel 

 
                  
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

12 

for the petitioner has raised several grounds. However, we feel that it would 

be  appropriate  to  avoid  discussing  those  grounds  which  involve  disputed 

questions of facts. We shall, therefore, focus only on such grounds which are 

based on facts that have been unambiguously admitted by and on behalf of 

the  Respondent.  What  has  been  explicitly  admitted  before  us  are;  (i) 

declarations  in  the  nomination  paper;  (ii)  the  three  employment  contracts; 

(iii)  the  said  employment  contracts  having  been  executed  only  to  fulfill  the 

requirements  of  the  laws  of  the  United  Arab  Emirates  and  that  the  parties 

had  never  intended  to  give  effect  to  the  express  terms  and  conditions 

thereof;  (iv)  the  order  dated  17-04-2013,  passed  by  the  learned  Election 

Tribunal of the Lahore High Court, wherein specific plea was taken by and on 

behalf  of  the  Respondent  regarding  the  source  of  foreign  remittances, 

attained  finality    and  (v)  non-disclosure  of  an  account  maintained  with  the 

National Bank of Abu Dhabi. These facts have been expressly admitted in the 

para wise comments, written arguments and during the course of arguments 

addressed  at  the  Bar  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent.  It  is  the 

case  of  the  Petitioner  that  the  Respondent  had  deliberately  not  disclosed  in 

his  nomination  paper  his  occupation  in  column  8  as  a  permanent  full  time 

employee of the foreign based Company, concealed the salary received from 

the Company and the bank account maintained with the Bank of Abu Dhabi 

and was thus disqualified to contest the election, since Article 62(1)(f) of the 

Constitution  read  with  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Act  of  1976  were 

attracted.  It  would,  therefore,  be  beneficial  to  examine  the  relevant 

provisions  of  the  Constitution  and  the  Act  of  1976.  It  is  also  inevitable  to 

examine  the  precedent  law  regarding  the  test  laid  down  and  applied  for 

giving effect to Article 62(1)(f) read with the corresponding provisions of the 

Act  of  1976.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  also  raised  the 

question of conflict of interest.  

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

13 

10.  

Chapter-2 of the Constitution deals with the Majlis-e-Shoora 

(Parliament).  Article  50  provides  that  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  of  Pakistan 

(Parliament)  shall  consist  of  two  Houses  to  be  known  respectively  as  the 

National Assembly and the Senate. Article 51 provides that there shall be 342 

seats  for  Members  in  the  National  Assembly,  including  seats  reserved  for 

women and non-Muslims. The number of Members elected on General Seats 

is 272. A person is not qualified to contest elections and become Member of 

the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) unless he or she fulfils the conditions which 

have  been  described  under  Article  62  while  the  disqualifications  are 

enumerated under Article 63. Article 62(1)(f)  provides that a person shall not 

be  qualified  to  be  elected  or  chosen  as  Member  of  the  Majlis-e-Shoora 

(Parliament)  unless  he  is  sagacious,  righteous,  non-profligate,  honest  and 

ameen, there being no declaration to the contrary  by a court of law. Article 

63(2)  provides  that  if  any  question  arises  as  to  whether  a  member  of  the 

Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  has  become  disqualified  from  being  a  Member 

then  the  Speaker  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  Chairman  shall,  unless  he  or 

she decides that no such question has arisen, refer the matter to the Election 

Commission of Pakistan within thirty days and if the latter fails to do so within 

the specified period, then it is deemed to have been so referred.     

11.  

The  purpose  and  object  of  enacting  the  Act  of  1976,  as 

described  in  its  preamble,  is  to  provide  for  the  conduct  of  elections  to  the 

National  Assembly  and  Provincial  Assemblies  and  to  guard  against  corrupt 

and  illegal  practices  and  other  offences.  Section  2  defines  various 

expressions. Section 11 mandates that, pursuant to an announcement made 

by the President of Pakistan regarding the date or dates on which polls shall 

be taken, it becomes a statutory duty of the Election Commission to call upon 

a constituency to elect a representative or representatives, as the case may 

be. Section 12(2), inter alia, requires that every nomination shall be made by 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

14 

a  separate  nomination  paper  in  the  prescribed  form  which  shall  be  signed 

both  by  the  proposer  and  the  seconder  and  that  it  shall,  on  solemn 

affirmation  made  and  signed  by  the  candidate,  accompany,  inter  alia,  the 

statement  specifying  his  or  her  educational  qualifications  and  occupation 

along  with  attested  copies  thereof.  Section  99(1)(f)  provides  that  a  person 

shall  not  be  qualified  to  be  elected  or  chosen  as  Member  of  an  Assembly 

unless  he  is  sagacious,  righteous  and  non-profligate  and  honest  and  ameen 

and pays his debts specified under sub section (2) of section 12.   

12.  

It  is  obvious  from  the  above  provisions  of  the  Constitution 

and the Act of 1976 that Article 62(1)(f) and section 99(1)(f) are grounds for 

qualification and eligibility to contest elections and to hold the Public office of 

Member of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). The expressions used in the said 

provisions have a wide scope. The interpretation of the said expressions and 

their  application  has  been  examined  by  the  apex  Court  in  several 

pronouncements by now. In the words of His Lordship Mr Justice Asif Saeed 

Khosa,  Hon’ble Judge of the Supreme Court, vide his separate note in “Ishaq 

Khan Khakwani and others v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others” 

[PLD 2015 S.C. 275];- 

“It  is  unfortunate  that  the  nightmares  of 

interpretation  and  application  apprehended  and 

anticipated by me as a young lawyer more than a quarter 

of a century ago are presently gnawing the Returning 

Officers, Election Tribunals and the superior courts of the 

country in the face but those responsible for rationalizing 

the troublesome provisions of the Constitution through 

appropriate amendments of the Constitution have slept 

over the matter for so long and they still demonstrate no 

sign of waking up. As long as the highlighted obscurities 

and  impracticalities  are  not  addressed  and  remedied 

nobody  should  complain  that  the  Returning  Officers, 

Election. Tribunals and the superior courts of the country 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

15 

are generally unsuccessful in catching the candidates with 

bad character or antecedents in the net of Articles 62 and 

63 of the Constitution, particularly when the electorate is 

quite  happy  to  elect  such  candidates  with  sweeping 

majorities while in full knowledge of their character and 

antecedents.” 

13.  

The  august  Supreme  Court, 

in 

the 

judgment  dated 

25.03.2015,  rendered  in  Civil  Appeal  no.  91  of  2015  titled  “Abdul Waheed 

Chaudhry VSRana Abdul Jabbar, etc”  has  interpreted  the  expressions 

used in Article 62(1)(f) as follows;- 

“Before turning to the decision of the learned Election 

Tribunal  that  the  appellant  was  not  qualified  to  contest  the 

elections under Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution of the Islamic 

Republic of Pakistan, 1973, it is expedient to shed light on Article 

62(1)(f) ibid which reads as follows:- 

“Article 62 – ((1) A person shall not be 

qualified to be elected or chosen as a 

member of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) 

unless- 

(f) he is sagacious, righteous and 

non-profligate  and,  honest  and 

amen, there being no declaration 

to the contrary by a court of law” 

While  interpreting  Article  62(1)(f)  ibid,  the  terms  ‘ameen’, 

‘righteous’ and ‘honest’ have been defined by the courts in multiple 

judgments. In the case reported as Maqbool Ahmed Qureshi v. 

Pakistan PLD (1999 SC 484), it has been held that “the word 

‘Ameen’ would mean honest, trustworthy, and sagacious. The 

principle thus deducible is that the person to be employed for 

rendering service should possess these two basic qualities, firstly, 

he should be physically and mentally capable and secondly, he 

should be honest and trustworthy”. Similarly in the case reported 

as Mobashir Hussain v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 265), 

the definition of ‘Amin’ in The Concise Encyclopaedia of Islam, Pg 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

16 

41 was quoted as: ‘al-Amin. A name of the Holy Prophet (May 

Peace and Blessings be Upon Him), give to him by the Quraysh 

before the revelation of Islam, meaning the ‘Trustworthy One’. The 

word is used as a title for an organization official in a position of 

trust, with the … treasurer of a charitable organization, a guild and 

so forth”. 

On the other hand, with respect to the word ‘righteous’, in 

the case reported as Muhammad Yousaf v. M. Irshad Sipra and 

others  [1988  CLC  2475],  it  has  been  held  that  “The  word 

‘righteous’ having not been defined would be given its dictionary 

meaning. Word  ‘righteous’ means morally right, just, upright, 

virtuous, law-abiding and per The Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 

VII, Pg. 677, righteous means ‘Of persons: Just, upright, virtuous, 

guiltless, sinless, conforming to the standard of the divine or the 

moral  law,  acting  rightly  or  justly’  and  ‘Of  actions,  etc: 

Characterized by justice or uprightness; morally right or justifiable. 

The word ‘honest’ has been defined in the case reported as 

Ch. Altaf Hussain v. Raja M. Afzal [PLD 1986 Jour. 93] in the 

following terms: 

“Coming to the meaning of the terms 

‘honest’ I would first refer to the Latin 

term honeste, vivere, the meaning which 

is given in Black’s Law Dictionary Third 

Edition at page 902. The term means 

honourable,  creditably  or  virtuously.  It 

also means not to injure others and to 

render  to  every  man  his  due.  It 

Webseter’s  Third  New  International 

Dictionary Volume I Edition 1971 at page 

1086, the meaning of the term ‘honest’ 

are given as free from fraud or deception: 

legitimate,  truthful,  of  good  repute; 

virtuous in the eye of the society: of a 

creditable  nature:  of  good  reputation: 

characterized  by  integrity:  adhering  to 

principle, upright etc.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

17 

14.  

In  the  above  case,  the  august  Supreme  Court  had  upheld 

the  disqualification  of  a  returned  candidate  because  he  had  obtained  two 

national  identity  cards  prior  to  the  introduction  of  computerized  CNICs.  The 

august  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  titled  “Rai Hassan Nawaz VSHaji 

Muhammad Ayub and others”  [PLD  2017  S.C.  70],  after  examining  the 

provisions of the Act  of 1976 and the precedent law has observed and held 

that there is a clear public interest object behind the statutory prescription for 

obtaining the prescribed statements and declaration. It is to ensure integrity 

and probity of contesting candidates. After  quoting  with  approval  a passage 

from the earlier judgment titled ‘Muhammad Yousaf Kaselia v. Peer Ghulam’ 

[PLD 2016 S.C. 689], it has been held and observed as follows;- 

“It is for that reason that in a number of recent 

judgments, this Court has treated inaccurate disclosure of 

proprietary and financial resources to be fatal to the election 

of a returned candidate. In Muhammad Ahmed Chatta v. 

Iftikhar Ahmed Cheema (2016 SCMR 763), the failure by a 

returned candidate to disclose a presumed inactive bank 

account and in Shamuna Badshah Qaisarani v. Muhammad 

Dawood (2016 SCMR 1420) the omission by a lady returned 

candidate to disclose her agricultural land claimed to be 

transferred to her brothers without evidence of the mutation 

were held to annul their elections.” 

15.  

It  is  obvious  from  the  above  that,  in  a  nut  shell,  the 

Constitution  has  prescribed  conditions  for  being  eligible  to  hold  the  exalted 

Public office of Member of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). The object is to 

ensure  the  integrity,  honesty  and  probity  of  a  person  who  has  the  enviable 

privilege  and  honour  to  represent  the  constituents  who  have  reposed  trust 

and  confidence  in  him  or  her.  These  provisions  were  unequivocally  affirmed 

by  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  when,  despite  protracted  deliberations, 

Article  62(1)(f)  was  not  interfered  with  while  passing  the  Eighteenth 

Amendment. The Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), therefore, has itself set a high 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

18 

bar of qualifications for being eligible to hold the public office as its Member. 

In  a  recent  judgment  rendered  by  a  larger  Bench  of  the  august  Supreme 

Court in the case titled ‘Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz 

Sharif, Prime Minister of Pakistan/Member National Assembly, Prime Minister’s 

House, Islamabad and 9 others’ [PLD 2017 SC 265] it has been held that the 

expression  'honest'  as  used  in  Article  62(1)(f)  refers  to  legal  honesty,  an 

objective  concept  and  not  mere  moral  or  ethical  honesty,  the  latter  being 

subjective.  It  has  been  further  held  that  a  person  cannot  be  disqualified 

under Article 62(1)(f) in the absence of an established and proven breach of 

a legal obligation or violation of law.   

16.           

The  question  which  is  required  to  be  examined  and 

answered is the nature of the test laid down for ascertaining the type of error 

or non disclosure by a candidate in a nomination paper which  would attract 

the  consequences  flowing  from  failing  to  meet  the  conditions  prescribed 

under Article 62(1)(f) and section 99(1)(f) of the Act of 1976.  The question 

which  needs  to  be  answered  precisely  is  whether  in  the  case  of  the  said 

provisions the test to be applied is that of 'strict liability'. A strict liability test 

contemplates  liability  which  is  not  based  on  actual  negligence  or  intent. 

Would  any  non  disclosure  of  information  prescribed  under  section  12(2)  of 

the  Act  of  1976  ipso  facto  render  a  person  to  be  other  than  honest, 

sagacious,  righteous,  non  profligate  and  ameen  in  the  context  of  the 

aforementioned provisions. The august Supreme Court, in the case titled “Rai 

Haq Nawaz etc VSHaji Muhammad Ayub, etc” (supra), has observed and 

held as follows;-  

“We,  therefore,  observe  that  any  plausible 

explanation that exonerates, inter alia, mis-declaration of 

assets and liabilities by a contesting candidate should be 

confined to unintended and minor errors that do not confer 

 
   
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

19 

any  tangible  benefit  or  advantage  upon  an  elected or 

contesting candidate.” 

17.  

However,  the  jurisprudence  expounded  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  recent  judgments  appears  to  have  elaborated  the 

standard of the test required to be applied while examining a non disclosure 

in the context of Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution. The relevant judgments 

in this regard are ‘Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, 

Prime  Minister  of  Pakistan/Member  National  Assembly,  Prime  Minister’s 

House, Islamabad and 9 others’  [PLD  2017  S.C.  265], “Imran Ahmed Khan 

VS Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, Prime Minister of Pakistan”  [PLD  2017 

S.C.  692],    “Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc VSImran Khan Niazi” 

[PLD  2018  SC  1], “Muhammad Hanif Abbasi VSImran Khan Niazi, etc” 

[PLD  2018  SC  189],  “Mohammad Hanif Abbasi VS Jahangir Khan Tareen” 

[PLD  2018  SC  114]  and  lastly  the  recent  judgment  of  the  august  Supreme 

Court,  dated  13.04.2018  in  Civil  Appeal  no.  233  of  2015  titled  “Samiullah 

Baloch VSAbdul Karim Nosherwani, etc”.   

18.  

The  question  regarding  the  test  to  be  applied  came  up  for 

consideration before a larger Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and it was 

observed  and  held  in  the  case  titled  “Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif VS 

Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi” [PLD 2018 SC 1] as follows;- 

“The argument that even if it is assumed that 

unwithdrawn salary constitutes an asset, omission to 

disclose it involving a violation of Sections 12 and 13 of 

the Representation of Peoples Act calls for the rejection 

of nomination papers or at its worst, removal of the 

petitioner  from  the  public  office  and  not  his 

disqualification in terms of Section 99(1)(f) of the ROPA 

and Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution is devoid of force 

when the petitioner deliberately concealed his assets and 

willfully and dishonestly made a false declaration on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

20 

solemn affirmation in his nomination papers. It is not 

something to be looked at with a casual eye and outlook. 

It is not only a legal duty but a qualifying test for the 

candidates who in the later days preside over the destiny 

of the people. This duty has to be performed without a 

taint of misrepresentation. This test has to be qualified 

without resorting to unfair means. Any concession at this 

stage or any leniency to the candidates or the person 

elected would be a prelude to a catastrophe in politics, 

which has already had enough of it. Since it is already 

touching the extreme, extreme measures have to be 

taken. The culture of passing the candidates by granting 

grace marks has not delivered the goods. It has rather 

corrupted the people and corrupted the system.” 

It has been further elaborated; 

"The argument that the omission to disclose assets 

could possibly be unintentional in the circumstances of the 

case would have been tenable had the petitioner been a 

novice or a new entrant in business and politics. But where 

he has been neck deep in business and politics ever since 

early 80’s it is unbelievable that he did not understand the 

simple  principle  of  accounting  that  his  accrued  and 

accumulated salary of six and a half years was his asset and 

liability of the company he was an employee of."  

19. 

The  above  enunciation  has  been  reaffirmed  by  the  apex 

Court in the judgment titled “Mohammad Hanif Abbasi VS Imran Khan Niazi” 

[PLD 2018 SC 189] as follows;  

“In  the  passage  referred  above,  the  Court  is 

addressing  an  undisclosed  asset,  existence  whereof  is 

expressly admitted through the coffers of an entity whose 

financial dealings were already doubted and formed part of 

the  network  of  persons  and  entities  allegedly  holding 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

21 

disproportionate assets attributed to the erstwhile Prime 

Minister,  his  dependents  and  benamidars.  It  cannot, 

therefore, be contented that dishonesty is attributed in the 

said judgment without reference to any alleged design, 

intention,  scheme,  background  or 

impropriety. 

Consequently,  to  our  minds  the  larger  Bench  has  not 

expunged the requirement of establishing the “dishonesty” 

of conduct of an aspirant or incumbent member of a 

Constitutional Legislature in order for the disqualification 

under Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution and Section 99(f) 

of the ROPA to be attracted. Each and every word in the 

Constitution bears a meaning and place, which must be 

given effect because redundancy cannot be assigned to the 

Constitution. Accordingly, in earlier judgments by this Court 

in  the  matter  of  “dishonest  conduct,”  violation  of 

constitutional norms required by Article 62(1)(f) in its phrase 

“honest and ameen” have been deduced with caution and 

care.” 

It has been further held as follows;- 

“The insistence by learned counsel for the petitioner 

that any error or omission in the declaration of assets by a 

candidate  for  election  or  a  legislator  incurs  his 

disqualification under Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution 

posits a wide proposition of law. If at all, this may have 

limited relevance where the context involves corruption or 

money laundering in state office, misappropriation of public 

property or public funds, accumulation of assets beyond 

known means or abuse of public office or authority for 

private gain. These allegations are not germane to the 

present  case.  There  is  no  involvement  here  of  public 

property or funds, abuse of public office and authority, 

corruption or breach of fiduciary duty. Consequently, the 

argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner on this 

score fails.” 

20.  

In  the  case  titled  “Sheikh Muhammad Akram VS Abdul 

Ghafoor”  [2016  SCMR  733]  the  august  Supreme  Court  has  observed  that 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

22 

misrepresentation or non disclosure must have been made to gain a benefit 

to which the candidate was not otherwise entitled to. The test, therefore, in 

the  light  of  the  principles  and  law  highlighted  above,  could  be  divided  into 

two categories. Firstly, those who are contesting an election for the first time 

and  are  inexperienced  in  this  realm  and,  secondly,  those  who  have  had 

experience  in  the  past  and  cannot  be  treated  as  a  'novice',  an  expression 

used by the august Supreme Court to draw a distinction. In the case of the 

latter category the standard or bar is phenomenal. Nonetheless, the existence 

or attribution of 'dishonesty' is not precluded. There has to be some design, 

intention,  scheme,  impropriety  or  benefit  to  be  gained  in  non-disclosing  or 

misrepresenting  the  prescribed  information.  It  is,  therefore,  not  a  test  of 

purely strict liability because presence of intent is not precluded. A true and 

forthright  disclosure  of  material  information  prescribed  under  the  law  would 

not  attract  the  mischief  contemplated  under  Article  62(1)(f)  of  the 

Constitution. Likewise a non disclosure sans an element of design, scheme or 

intent would also not make a candidature open to be questioned if it could be 

shown  that  it  was  a  bonafide  error  and  that  there  was  no  intention  to  gain 

any  benefit  by  withholding  such  information  from  the  constituents.  The 

scrutiny  for  the  purposes  of  Article  62(1)(f)  of  the  Constitution  is  not  based 

on moralistic or subjective criterion. The said condition does not contemplate 

perfection  but  in  simple  words  requires  a  person  to  be  honest,  reliable  and 

trustworthy.  The  test  laid  down  in  the  above  discussed  judgments 

acknowledges  that  to  err  is  human.  The  requirement  of  making  the 

prescribed information public under section 12 of the Act of 1976 is aimed at 

maintaining purity and transparency in the process of elections. In any form 

of democratic system the most important stakeholders are the constituents. It 

is the voter who has to make a choice and it is crucial for this purpose that 

every candidate makes a true and honest declaration,  particularly when any 

information mentioned in the nomination paper has been challenged.      

 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

23 

21.  

We  will  now  advert  to  the  facts  and  circumstances  in  the 

instant  case  so  as  to  examine  whether  the  Respondent,  in  the  light  of  the 

above principles and law, was qualified on the touchstone of Article 62(1)(f). 

The  Respondent  has  had  the  privilege  of  being  declared  as  a  returned 

candidate  from  the  constituency  of  NA-110  in  the  General  Elections  which 

were  held  in  1993,  1997,  2002,  2008  and  lastly  in  2013.  In  his  column 

relating  to  qualifications,  the  Respondent  has  declared  that  he  holds  the 

degree  of  bachelor  of  law.  He  was  definitely  a  seasoned  and  accomplished 

politician  and,  by  no  stretch  of  the  imagination,  a  'novice'  in  the  field  of 

politics.  He  was  also  a  law  graduate  and,  therefore,  fully  understood  the 

implications  of  making  a  false  or  evasive  declaration.  When  he  had  signed 

and  submitted  the  nomination  paper  on  30-03-2013,  the  First  Contract  was 

valid and subsisting, pursuant whereof salary or 'wage' per month was being 

paid by the Company, incorporated and governed under the laws of another 

sovereign  State.  The  First  Contract  was  approved  by  the  Government  of 

United  Arab  Emirates  as  has  been  confirmed  by  the  Company  in  the 

certificate signed by the Managing Director. The relevant clauses of the First 

Contract  have  been  reproduced  above.  The  execution  of  the  employment 

contract  attracts,  inter  alia,  the  provisions  of  Article  120  of  UAE  Federal 

Labour  Law  no.  8  of  1980  which  amongst  other  conditions  makes  it  an 

obligation  of  the  employee  not  to  reveal  any  secret  of  the  establishment  in 

which  the  latter  is  working.  The  employment  can  be  terminated  if  an 

employee  remains  absent  from  duties  without  a  valid  reason  for  more  than 

twenty consecutive days, or more than seven consecutive days, in one year. 

A plain reading of the express terms and language incorporated and used in 

the First Contract unambiguously shows that it was for employment on a full 

time  basis.  The  relationship  between  the  Respondent  and  the  Company,  in 

the light of the expressions and terms used in the First Contract, was that of 

an  employee  and  employer.  This  is  further  affirmed  from  the  list  of 

employees  of  the  Company  which,  even  today,  includes  the  name  of  the 

 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

24 

Respondent  at  serial  no.  303.  On  the  basis  of  the  First  Contract  the 

Respondent was registered and issued an identification card in  the category 

of 'labour'  by the Ministry of Labour of  the United Arab Emirates. Moreover, 

this  status  of  the  Respondent  made  him  eligible  for  a  resident  visa  and, 

accordingly,  an  'Iqama'  was  issued  in  his  favour.  Employment  was 

essentially  one  of  the  main  occupations  of  the  Respondent  when  he  had 

executed the nomination paper.  The Respondent was admittedly paid salary 

per month on the basis of the First Contract. Besides influencing the minds of 

the  constituents,  serious  questions  regarding  conflict  of  interest  would  have 

been  raised  if  disclosure  regarding  the  nature  of  the  employment  and  the 

terms and conditions had been made in the nomination paper. In column 8 of 

the nomination paper only 'Business' was declared as an occupation. A vague 

and obscure figure of Rs.6.820 million was shown in the statement of assets 

and liabilities as foreign remittances. This vagueness was strongly challenged 

by the other contesting candidates before the Returning Officer. It led to an 

appeal  before  the  learned  Election  Tribunal  of  the  Lahore  High  Court.  In 

paragraph (c) under the title 'Grounds' of memo of petition in Election Appeal 

no. 144-A of 2013 it was explicitly objected that "respondent no. 2 has also 

suppressed  material  facts  before  the  respondent  no.1/Returning  Officer  as 

there  is  a  huge  amount  of  money  in  the  shape  of  foreign  remittance  in 

previous three years but no source of income, nor the name of the sender or 

country of the sender has been mentioned'. The response, or rather the plea 

taken by the Respondent and recorded in the order, dated 17-04-2013, was 

as follows; 

"It  is  further  contended  that  all  the  remittances 

received  by  the  respondent  no.  2  are  through  bank 

transactions and they are on the basis of business being run 

by the respondent no. 2 in a restaurant and are fully 

explained"  

 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

25 

22.  

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  could  not  show  a 

single document to even remotely suggest that the income as salary received 

from  the  employer  pursuant  to  the  First  Contract  had  been  declared  in  the 

nomination  paper.  It  is  also  admitted  that  no  attempt  was  made  to  correct 

the plea taken in response to the objection regarding obscurity of the foreign 

remittances  which  has  been  recorded  in  the  order  dated  17-04-2013  by  the 

learned  Tribunal  of  the  Lahore  High  Court.  "Occupation"  is  a  generic  term 

which, inter alia, includes 'business', 'employment' and 'profession'. The First 

Contract was an employment contract wherein the status of the Respondent 

was  that  of  an  employee.  This  status  continues  till  date  despite  holding  the 

portfolio  of  Foreign  Minister  of  Pakistan.  It  is  obvious  from  the  facts  and 

circumstances  in  the  instant  case  that  the  Respondent  had  deliberately  and 

willfully  not  disclosed  his  status  as  an  employee  of  the  Company,  nor 

receiving  of  the  salary  per  month  pursuant  thereto,  despite  having  been 

expressly put to challenge by the other contesting candidates. The validity of 

'Iqama',  working  as  an  employee  of  the  Company  and  receiving  a 

substantial salary without being physically present, which is AED 50,000/- per 

month  under  the  Third  Contract  executed  in  July  2017,  were  some  benefits 

gained  from  non  disclosure.  Disclosure  would  have  led  to  giving  up  the 

'Iqama'  and  the  hefty  salary  paid  by  the  Company  for  some  advice  sought 

telephonically by a foreign based employer from the prospective Defense and 

then  Foreign  Minister  of  Pakistan.  We  have  deeply  pondered  but  could  not 

persuade  ourselves  that  this  deliberate  and  willful  non  disclosure  was  a 

bonafide  or  honest  omission.  The  lack  of  honesty  was  established  by  not 

disclosing  the  employment  as  an  occupation  and  the  salary  received  per 

month  despite  the  vague  and  obscure  amount  declared  as  foreign 

remittances having been specifically challenged. This would also apply to the 

non  disclosure  of  the  account  maintained  with  the  Bank  of  Abu  Dhabi. 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

26 

Nothing has been placed on record to show that a request had been made for 

closing the account before submitting the nomination paper.  

23.  

The  Respondent  has  taken  the  stance  before  us  that  the 

employment  contracts  described  above  had  been  executed  merely  to  fulfill 

the  requirements  of  the  laws  of  the  United  Arab  Emirates.  In  this  regard  a 

certificate,  dated  12.04.2018,  executed  by  the  Managing  Director  of  the 

Company, has also been placed on record. The contents of the said certificate 

have  been  reproduced  above.  The  Respondent,  by  taking  this  stance,  has 

further complicated matters for himself. In other words, the Respondent has 

taken a stance which tantamounts to acknowledging that he had executed a 

false  contract  with  the  intent  of  deceiving  the  laws  of  another  sovereign 

State. The expression 'false' has been defined in the Black’s Law Dictionary as 

follows;  

“false,  adj.  1.  Untrue  <a  false  statement>.  2. 

Deceitful;  lying  <a  false  witness>.  3.  Not  genuine; 

inauthentic <false coinage>. What is false can be so by 

intent, by accident, or by mistake. 

false, vb. 1. Scot law. To make or prove false. 2. 

Archaic. FALSIFY (I).   

24.  

In  the  light  of  the  above  dictionary  meaning  of  the 

expression  'false',  the  Respondent  as  well  as  the  Company  unambiguously 

acknowledge that the employment contracts were executed only to meet the 

requirements of law. Both the Company and the Respondent expressly admit 

that  the  three  employment  contracts  were  executed  deliberately  and 

knowingly that the contents were untrue. This stance unfortunately has been 

taken by a person who has had the privilege of being elected many times as 

Member  of  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  and  pursuant  to  contesting  the 

General Elections of 2013 he was later to hold the portfolios of Defense and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

27 

Foreign Affairs as Member of the Federal Cabinet. This manifests the reason 

for  non  disclosure  of  the  occupation  as  an  employee  of  the  Company  and 

receiving monthly salary, despite the amount claimed as foreign remittances 

having been challenged. Would a person of ordinary prudence treat this as an 

honest  non  disclosure  of  material  information  prescribed  under  the  Act  of 

1976? We are afraid that the answer is an emphatic no. The Respondent had 

definitely  concealed  and  withheld  this  material  information  from  his 

constituents at the crucial time of submitting the nomination paper and later 

when  the  declarations  made  therein  were  challenged.  This  material  non 

disclosure of information prescribed under section 12 of the Act of 1976 was 

indeed  fatal.  The  Respondent  for  the  first  time  admitted  the  employment 

contracts  in  response  to  the  instant  petition  and  the  Third  Contract  was 

attached therewith.  

25.  

We are afraid that  the argument of  the learned counsel for 

the  Respondent  that  the  employment  contracts  should  not  be  interpreted 

according  to  the  language  and  terms  and  conditions  expressly  mentioned 

therein  because  it  does  not  manifest  the  actual  intent  of  the  parties  is 

fallacious.  As  noted  above,  this  argument  is  an  acknowledgment  that  the 

employment  contracts  are  'false'  documents.  A  contract  executed  between 

parties can only  be interpreted on  the basis of the language and terms and 

conditions expressly mentioned therein. The parties cannot later turn around 

and take a plea that the terms and conditions were false because they were 

never intended to be acted upon. It is now settled principle of interpretation 

that a contract has to be strictly and literally construed without deviating from 

or  implying  in  a  contract  something  inconsistent  with  its  express  terms. 

Stipulation not expressed in a contract cannot be implied. While construing a 

contract the words are to be taken in their literal, plain and ordinary meaning. 

Intent has to be gathered from the document as a whole and all parts of the 

deed  must  be  examined  and  read  together.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  case 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

28 

titled  “House  Building  Finance  Corporation  VS  Shahinshah  Hamayun 

Corporation House Building Society” [1992 SCMR 19]. In the instant case, the 

Company,  vide  certificate  dated  12-04-2018,  has  unambiguously  stated  that 

the  three  employment  contracts  were  approved  by  the  Government  of  the 

United Arab Emirates. We have not been able to fathom why the Respondent, 

even after being notified as Member of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and 

then as Minister of Water and Power and later Defense, had executed fresh 

employment  contracts  with  the  foreign  based  Company.  This  conduct 

definitely raises questions regarding conflict of interest. Nonetheless, the non 

disclosure  of  employment  as  occupation  and  receiving  a  monthly  salary, 

particularly when the amount of Rs. 6.820 million declared as remittance was 

specifically  challenged,  was  deliberate  and  willful  and,  by  no  stretch  of  the 

imagination,  a  bonafide  and  honest  omission.  It  was  other  than  an  honest 

omission  and  thus  attracted  the  consequences  flowing  from  the  non 

fulfillment  of  the  conditions  described  under  Article  62(1)(f)  of  the 

Constitution, read with section 99(1)(f) of the Act of 1976. There is also no 

force  in  the  argument  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent 

that  since  copies  of  the  passport  attached  with  the  nomination  paper  also 

contained  a copy of the 'Iqama', therefore there was no misrepresentation 

or concealment of the prescribed information. ‘Iqama’ is merely a residence 

visa  issued  by  the  immigration  officials.  In  the  instant  case,  the  non 

disclosure was that of the employment as an occupation pursuant to the First 

Contract and the salary per month received there under. These ought to have 

been truly declared in the nomination paper or, at best, when the statement 

regarding  foreign  remittances  and  details  thereof  were  challenged.  The 

certificate,  dated  12-04-2018,  issued  by  the  Company  and  the  stance  taken 

by  the  Respondent  to  the  effect  that  the  employment  contracts  and  the 

contents thereof were false explains withholding of this vital information while 

submitting the nomination paper.       

 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

29 

26.  

The learned counsel for the Respondent has laid great stress 

on the copy of document attached with the petition, numbered as page 65, in 

support of his contention that the salary amounting to AED 9000/- per month 

was  declared  in  the  tax  returns.  The  said  copy  appears  to  be  wealth 

reconciliation  statement  for  the  financial  year  30.06.2011  to  30.06.2012.  It 

shows  an  increase.  Sources  of  income,  inter  alia,  refers  to  foreign  salary  of 

AED  9000/-  but  the  same  is  declared  as  not  received  since  “O”  (zero)  is 

recorded in the relevant column. In the said financial year foreign remittances 

were  separately  declared  as  having  accrued  from  (50%  share/Dividend) 

amounting  to  Rs.21.793  million.  Perusal  of  the  tax  return  filed  in  respect  of 

the  corresponding  tax  year  shows  that  the  figures  do  not  match  with  the 

aforementioned document. We are afraid that rather than supporting the plea 

taken before us, this document reaffirms that the amount of Rs.6.824 million 

declared  in  the  nomination  paper  as  foreign  remittances  did  not  include  the 

amount  of  salary  because  the  non-receipt  was  expressly  mentioned  in  the 

relevant column of the wealth reconciliation statement. It is noted that for the 

purposes of Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution a candidate cannot take a plea 

on  the  basis  of  sub-section  4  of  section  111  of  the  Income  Tax  Ordinance, 

2001  because  the  immunity  thereunder  is  for  tax  purposes  and  cannot  be 

used to defeat the legal obligations under section 12 of the Act of 1976.  

27.  

There  is  yet  another  crucial  dimension  of  the  salary  earned 

as income pursuant to the employment contracts. Section 102 of the Income 

Tax  Ordinance,  2001  provides  that  any  foreign  source  salary  received  by  a 

resident individual shall be exempt from tax if the individual has paid foreign 

income tax in respect of such a salary. It is further provided that a resident 

individual  shall  be  treated  as  having  paid  foreign  income  tax  in  respect  of 

foreign  source  salary  if  tax  has  been  withheld  from  the  salary  by  the 

individual’s employer and paid to the revenue authority of the foreign country 

in  which  the  employment  was  exercised.  Section  82  defines  a  “Resident  

 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

30 

Individual” and provides that an individual shall be a resident individual for a 

tax year if, inter alia, the individual is present in Pakistan for a period of, or 

periods  amounting  in  aggregate  to  one  hundred  and  eighty  three  days  or 

more  in  a  tax  year.  Respondent,  admittedly,  is  a  Resident  Individual  within 

the  meaning  of  Section  82  of  the  Income  Tax  Ordinance,  2001  and  was 

required to comply with the requirements of section 102 ibid. We are afraid 

that  nothing  has  been  placed  on  record  to  show  compliance  with  the 

mandatory  requirements  prescribed  under  Section  102  ibid.  The  tax  returns 

filed  in  the  relevant  tax  years  and  placed  before  us  confirms  that  the  said 

provisions  were  not  complied  with.  We  are  not  concerned  with  violations  of 

the  tax  laws  but  the  non  compliance  of  section  102  of  the  Income  Tax 

Ordinance,  2001  highlights  the  non-disclosure  in  the  nomination  paper  of 

employment as an occupation and the salary received in pursuance thereof.    

28.  

The learned counsel for the Respondent has raised objection 

regarding maintainability of the instant petition. The august Supreme Court in 

the  case  titled ‘Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, 

Prime  Minister  of  Pakistan/Member  National  Assembly,  Prime  Minister’s 

House, Islamabad and 9 others’ [PLD 2017 S.C. 265] has observed and held 

as follows;- 

“While election of a member whose disqualification 

was overlooked, illegally condoned or went unquestioned on 

the nomination day before the Returning Officer or before 

the Election Tribunal, could still be challenged under Article 

199(1)(b)(ii) or Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Pakistan, 

1973 as was held in the cases of Lt. Col. Farzand Ali and 

others. VS Province of West Pakistan through the Secretary, 

Department of Agriculture, Government of West Pakistan, 

Lahore (PLD 1970 SC 98) and Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi. 

VS Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Law and others 

(PLD 2012 S.C. 1054)” 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

31 

It has been further held that; 

It has been observed; 

"However, it is now settled law and has been so 

settled through a series of judgments of this Court including 

Farzand Ali v. Province of West Pakistan (PLD 1970 S.C. 98) 

and Muhammad Azhar Siddiqui v. Federation of Pakistan and 

others (PLD 2012 S.C. 774) that a Constitution Petition in 

the nature of a writ of quo warranto is maintainable against 

a Member of the Majlis-e-Shoora, if he is disqualified or did 

not possess or has lost his qualification, in this behalf. Such 

Constitutional  Petitions  can  always  be  filed  before  the 

learned High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution and 

before this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, as 

has been filed in the instant case.  

"As noted above, the power to disqualify a member in 

cases where for some reason he escaped disqualification at 

the time of filing his/her nomination papers, but such 

fact/event was discovered subsequently (as is the case set 

up by the petitioners) can, in appropriate cases and subject 

to availability of admitted facts or irrefutable evidence be 

exercised by the High Court under Article 199 and by this 

Court  under  Article  184(3)  of  the  Constitution  on  the 

principles laid down in Farzand Ali’s case ibid, which has 

been  followed  by  this  Court  in  a  number  of  recent 

judgments, including Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi’s case ibid. 

This power can also be exercised where facts can be 

determined if the exercise does not require voluminous 

evidence and intricate and disputed questions of fact are not 

involved. The instant case, however, does not presently 

meet the said criteria." 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

32 

29.  

It  is,  therefore,  obvious  from  the  above  enunciation  of  law 

that  a  disqualification  can  be  challenged  before  a  High  Court  under  Article 

199(1)(b)(ii) 

if 

it  has  been  overlooked,  illegally  condoned  or  went 

unquestioned  on  the  nomination  day  or  before  the  election  Tribunal.  This 

jurisdiction can be exercised if the facts can be determined without recording 

of evidence and when intricate disputed questions are not involved. It is for 

this reason that we have solely considered those facts and events which were 

admitted  before  us.  The  documents  discussed  above  were  not  available  on 

the date of filing the Election Petition.     

30.  

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also argued that it 

is  incumbent  upon  this  Court  to  refer  the  matter  to  the  Speaker  of  the 

National  Assembly  as  mandated  under  Article  63(2)  of  the  Constitution.    In 

this  regard  it  would  be  appropriate  to  reproduce  the  observations  of  the 

Hon’ble Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, recorded in the case titled “Imran Ahmad Khan 

Niazi VSMian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others” [PLD 2017 S.C. 265] 

and the same is as follows;- 

“The High Court shall therefore proceed with the 

matter(s) before it and decide the same in accordance 

with law. Article 63(2) of the Constitution provides one of 

the remedies to cater for a situation where a validly 

elected member becomes disqualified during the tenure 

of his membership on the basis of any of the grounds 

mentioned in Articles 62 and/or 63(1) of the Constitution. 

That is to say the ground of disqualification occurs after 

he has validly been elected and was not in existence 

(whether known to anybody or not) at the time when he 

filed his nomination papers and was elected. In such a 

situation,  any  other  member  can  approach  the 

Speaker/Chairman seeking disqualification of the member 

who has incurred the alleged disqualification whereupon 

the Speaker/Chairman and the Election Commission can 

exercise powers provided in Article 63(2) and (3) of the 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

33 

Constitution, respectively. This means that where the 

ground for seeking disqualification is that a member did 

not qualify at the time of filing his nomination papers, 

but  this  fact  (ground  seeking  disqualification)  was 

discovered  subsequently  (which  is  the  case  of  the 

petitioners), the matter cannot be referred to the Election 

Commission  of  Pakistan.  In  order  for  the  Election 

Commission to disqualify a member on a reference sent 

by the Speaker, it must be shown that the disqualifying 

fact or event occurred after a member had validly been 

elected, which (ground) was nonexistent at the time of 

filing of nomination papers. The words “if any question 

arises,  whether  a  member  of  Majlis-e-Shoora 

(Parliament)  has  become  disqualified  from  being  a 

member ….” supports this interpretation. This view is 

fortified by the law laid down by this Court in Muhammad 

Azhar Siddiqui v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 

774).” 

31.  

In  the  case  at  hand  the  ground  of  disqualification  has  a 

nexus  with  the  nomination  paper  and  had  arisen  prior  to  the  issuance  of 

notification of the Respondent as a returned candidate. The argument of the 

learned counsel is, therefore, without force.    

32.  

For what has been discussed above, we hold that the instant 

petition is maintainable. We declare that the Respondent was not qualified to 

contest  the  General  Election  of  2013  from  NA  110  as  he  did  not  fulfill  the 

conditions  described  under  Article  62(1)(f)  of  the  Constitution,  read  with 

section 99(1)(f) of the Act of 1976. The petition is, therefore, allowed. The 

Registrar  of  this  Court  is  directed  to  send  certified  copy  of  this  judgment  to 

the  Election  Commission  for  de-notifying  the  Respondent  as  Member  of  the 

National  Assembly  of  Pakistan.  A  copy  is  also  directed  to  be  sent  to  the 

Speaker of National Assembly of Pakistan for information.     

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

34 

33.  

Before  parting  we  would  like  to  observe  that  it  is  not  a 

pleasant  duty  for  any  Court  to  be  called  upon  to  examine  and  exercise 

powers of judicial review which may lead to an elected representative being 

disqualified  as  Member  of  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament).  In  the  words  of 

Hamood-ur-Rehman,  Chief  Justice,  in  the  case  of  titled  “State VS Zia-ur-

Rehman”  [PLD  1973  SC  49],  while  exercising  power  of  judicial  review,  the 

judiciary claims no supremacy over the organs and that it is a duty assigned 

to the Courts to see that the Constitution prevails. In the judgment rendered 

by a Bench consisting of seven Hon’ble Judges in the case titled “Ishaq Khan 

Khakwani and others v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others”  [PLD 

2015 SC 275] it has been held that “Thus the consistent view of the Courts 

has  been  that  if  the  determination  of  any  question  raised  before  the  Court 

requires interpretation or application of any provision of the Constitution the 

Court is obliged to adjudicate upon the same notwithstanding that the action 

impugned  or  the  questions  raised  has  political  overtones".  However,  when 

political forces, instead of settling disputes at the political forums, particularly 

the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  resort  to  the  Courts,  it  has  consequences 

not  only  for  the  institutions  but  the  litigant  public  as  well.  This  conduct  of 

political  forces  lowers  public  confidence  in  the  Legislature  on  the  one  hand 

and  on  the  other  hand  exposes  the  institution  of  the  judiciary  to  the 

controversies of adversarial politics. The political forces are expected to settle 

their  grievances  before  the  political  forums  rather  than  taking  the  precious 

time of the bona fide litigants awaiting justice to be dispensed. Parliament is 

a symbol of unity of the Federation and the peoples will. Parliament deserves 

utmost  respect  and  its  prestige  and  public  confidence  depends  on  the 

conduct of its Members who represent the actual stakeholders i.e. the people 

of Pakistan. It would have been appropriate if the political party to which the 

Petitioner  belongs  had  raised  the  issue  at  hand  in  the  Parliament  before 

invoking the jurisdiction of this Court. It is ironic that Pakistan is amongst the 

few countries where a formal code of ethics and conduct for Members of the 

 
 
W.P. No. 2907 of 2017.  

35 

Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  and  the  Cabinet  has  not  been  prescribed  so  as 

to  avoid  situations  such  as  have  been  observed  in  the  facts  and 

circumstances  of  the  instant  petition.  We  have  handed  down  this  judgment 

with  a  heavy  heart  not  only  because  a  seasoned  and  accomplished  political 

figure stands disqualified but more so because the dreams and aspirations of 

342,125 registered voters have suffered a setback.  

(ATHAR MINALLAH)             

   JUDGE 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

JUDGE 

Announced in the Open Court on 26.04.2018. 

JUDGE 

JUDGE 

JUDGE 

    Asad K/* 

Approved for reporting.  

Uploaded By: Umer Rasheed Dar & Zulqarnain Shah 

 
          
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
             
 
 
             
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
