JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J.---Throught this common judgment, I intend to decide 
the captined writ petitions as well as criminal original petition as common questions of law and 
facts are involved in all the captioned writ petitions. 

2. 
Brief facts referred in W.P. No.4761/2013 (Sh. Ahsan-ud-Din, etc. v. FOP, etc.) are that 
Petitioners  Nos.1  and  2,  who  are  former  Presidents  of  Lahore  High  Court  Bar  Association, 
Rawalpindi Bench, Rawalpindi, whereas petitioner No.3, who is former President of District Bar 
Association Attock (hereinafter the "first three petitioners"), in capacity of lawyers appear before 
different superior Courts of country and rendered legal assistance to the Courts in matter of their 
legal  rights  and  in  this  capacity  they  always  came  forward  to  take  all  actions  and  steps  for 
protection and defence of these rights for enforcement of fundamental rights and with this intention 
they claims that they have locus standi to file the instant writ petition under Article 199 of the 
Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973.  In  capacity  of  faculty  members  of  bar 
association the petitioners are concerned and worried about the security of former Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as no efficacious remedy is available to them, as a 
result whereof they have filed this writ petition with the following prayer: 

"It  is,  therefore, humbly prayed that this writ petition may very kindly be accepted and 
respondents  be  directed  to  provide  full  security  to  Mr.  lftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry, 
former Chief Justice of Pakistan by providing "bullet proof" and "jammer vehicle" along 
with elite force and squad of rangers. It is further prayed that any other suitable, just and 
proper relief, which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and necessary in the circumstances 
may also be granted." 

3. 
The  petitioners  in  this  writ  petition  contend  that  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr. 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry has dealt with various cases of high profile nature such as the high 
treason case of Gen. Parvez Musharaf who was declared usurper under Article 6 of the Constitution 
of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  whereas  the  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr. 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry has also dealt with different cases in suo motu jurisdiction, to name 
a few, the controversial privatization of Pakistan Steel Mills, Hajj Scandal, Rental Power Case, 
NRO case, Asghar Khan's Case, LPG Case, NICL Case, LNG Case, EOBI Case, Bank of Punjab 
Case,  PIA  Case,  distribution  of  funds  among  nearer  and  dearer  of  former  Prime  Minister  of 
Pakistan  in  the  name  of  development  scheme  from  government  exchequer,  contempt  notice  to 
Yousaf Raza Gillani, Civil Aviation Fateh Jang Airport Case, Touqeer Sadiq OGRA Scam, out of 
turn promotion of 21-22 grade officers by Prime Minister Case, Reckodic Case, Suo Motu Notice 
against rangers for killing young boy in Karachi, Price Adjustment Case of Petrol and CNG, Illegal 
Imposition of GST Case, Punjab Police Foundation Case, DHA Society Case, and Missing Persons 
Case. Petitioners further contend that the above referred cases resulted into difficult situation and 
in this regard former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry requires security 
of extreme nature as he himself could not act and plead before the Courts in terms Article 207(3) 
of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, therefore, petitioners have invoked 
the jurisdiction of this Court by way of filing instant writ petition. It has further been argued that 
in such like situation when former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry is 
left without any remedy, the principle of ubi jus ibi remedium (there is no wrong without a remedy) 
attracts. The petitioners to strengthened their arguments have placed their reliance upon PLD 1988 
Supreme  Court  416  (M/s  Benazir  Bhutto  v.  FOP),  PLD  1993  Supreme  Court  473  (Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan), PLD 1996 Supreme Court 324 (Al Jehad Trust 
v. FOP), PLD 2011 Supreme Court 963 (Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010), PLD 2011 
Supreme Court 407 (Munir Hussain Bhatti v. FOP), PLD 2012 Supreme Court 774 (Muhammad 
Azhar  Siddiqui  v.  FOP),  PLD  2010  Supreme  Court  1109  (Bank  of  Punjab  v.  Haris  Steel 
Industries), PLD 2012 Supreme Court 1089 (Syed Mehmood  Akhtar Naqvi  v. FOP),  and PLD 
2012  Supreme  Court  92  (Baz  Muhammad  Kakar  v.  FOP.  The  first  three  petitioners  have  also 
drawn attention of this Court towards the Rules for the Use of Staff Cars, 1980, whereby the term 
"vulnerable dignitary" has been used which means that any person who is exposed to risk, attached 
or harm, either physical or emotionally, has to be given due protection by the State and keeping in 

 
 
  
 
view  the  background  referred  by  petitioners,  they  claimed  that  relief  prayed  in  the  instant  writ 
petition be granted. 

On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Riaz  Hanif  Rahi  (hereinafter  the  "fourth  petitione")  for  being  a 
4. 
Member of the Bar Association and in his individual capacity, filed Writ Petition No.2228/16 (Riaz 
Hanif Rahi, etc. v. FOP, etc.) on the ground that he cannot remain silent when his contribution as 
taxpayer is being wasted continuously on the issue not permitted by law and on giving advantage 
to  a  person  (former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry)  who  is  not 
entitled  for  Honda  Accord  Car  No.  CIA-2,  2400cc,  along  with  additional  vehicle  bearing 
registration No. GD-0341 (bullet proof car, 6000cc) with unlimited petrol and maintenance with 
additional security and escort vehicles. The petitioner has prayed for the following relief: 

i. 

ii. 

Reasons may kindly be given by determining the questions raised pursuant to order 
dated 11.05.2016 passed in I.C.A. 65/2014 by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this 
Court. 

Direct respondents Nos.1 to 3 to consider the application dated 13-05-2016 on such 
terms and conditions as this Honorable Court deems proper and fit. 

The  petitioner-in-person  mainly  argued  that  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry is not allowed to retain additional benefits on any ground and respondents 
Nos.10 to 12 i.e. Sh. Ahsan-ud-Din, ASC, Toufeeq Asif, ASC, and Syed Azmat Ali Bukhari, ASC 
have no locus standi to file the writ petition to render advantages to respondent No.13/former Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, who himself has not approached this Court 
for  the  same  cause;  that  this  Court  has  no  jurisdiction  to  pass  order  which  may  generate 
discrimination and law does not allow to pass order for personal advantage; that respondent No.13/ 
former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. lftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry is a head of a political party, 
who could not be allowed to launch campaign at the cost of public exchequer. 

Furthermore, Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi by filing Writ Petition No.1055/2017 (Riaz Hanif Rahi, 
5. 
etc. v. FOP,  etc.), has  challenged the order dated 05.09.2016 passed by  the Secretary to  Prime 
Minister of Pakistan holding therein that a 2400cc car is to be provided to every outgoing Chief 
Justice of Pakistan w.e.f. former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry. Mr. 
Riaz Hanif Rahi has also assailed order dated 09.01.2014 passed in respect of provision of a bullet 
proof car i.e. Mercedes Benz No.GD-3041 Model 2005 to former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as replacement of protective Mercedes Benz No.IDE-5445 (Model 
1991) as a special dispensation for a period of three months. In essence, the petitioner-in-person 
has made the following prayer in the instant writ petition. 

"It is, therefore, respectively prayed that instant writ petition may kindly be accepted and 
impugned minutes passed on 09.02.2016 and the order of PM dated 09.01.2014 for grant 
of vehicle for three months may kindly be declared to have passed without lawful authority 
and of no legal effect in the interest of justice and equity." 

The petitioner-in-person further relied upon the case of Mustafa Impex Karachi v. Govermnent of 
Pakistan (PLD 2016 Supreme Court 808) with the view that it was held therein that Prime Minister 
cannot exercise the powers of Cabinet and Prime Minister as a single individual is not the Cabinet 
and any decision taken by Prime Minister on his own initiative lacked the authority of law and 
constitution, in this respect, petitioner-in-person has also relied upon the case Gadoon Textile Mills 
v. WAPDA (1997 SCMR 703). Petitioner-in-person/Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi also contended that the 
awarding of gift from public exchequer amounts to bribe from the funds of public for their personal 
benefits; that under the monetization policy the Hon'ble Judges can retain last vehicle in use on the 
depreciated value whereas former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as 
well as Hon'ble Judges retired thereafter, except for former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Jawad 
S. Khawaja, have taken the vehicle, therefore, they are not entitled to receive another vehicle which 
is not permissible under the law. 

6. 

In addition, Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi, has also filed Writ Petition No.1979/2017 (Riaz Hanif 

 
 
Rahi v. FOP, etc.), and prayed for the following relief: 

"It is, therefore, respectfully prayed that instant writ petition may graciously be accepted 
and vehicle No.CIA-2 Honda Accord, Model 2006, 2400CC, received at depreciated value 
of Rs.549,817/- may kindly be held to have been delivered without lawful authority and 
have no legal effect." 

The petitioner-in-person has arrayed the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. lftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry  as  respondent  No.5  and  claimed  that  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry has received the vehicle on depreciated value but he was restrained by the 
Hon'ble Supreme Judicial Council on 09.03.2007 not to perform functions as Judge of Supreme 
Court and as Chief Justice of Pakistan till the pendency of the reference and the said order is in 
field as the reference is pending adjudication, therefore, he is not allowed to receive any benefit in 
this  regard.  Mr.  Riaz  Hanif  Rahi  further  argued  that  respondent  No.5/former  Chief  Justice  of 
Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry challenged the restraining order dated 09.03.2007 of 
the Hon'ble Supreme Judicial Council along with reference by filing C.P. No.21 of 2007 in the 
apex Court and the final decision was passed and reported as PLD 2010 Supreme Court 61 (Chief 
Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan through Secretary) but 
the said judgment is ignorable. 

7. 
Whereas, through the captioned Criminal Original No.176-W-2017, Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi, 
ASC  contends  that  respondent/Mr.  lftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry,  former  Chief  Justice  of 
Pakistan,  and  Sh.  Ahsan-ud-Din,  ASC  may  please  be  directed  to  comply  with  the  order  dated 
02.12.2016 passed in Writ Petition No.4761/2013 whereby Sh. Ahsan-ud-Din, ASC was directed 
to produce the protected vehicle in the Islamabad High Court which was in use of former Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr. lftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry. The applicant in this case contended that 
the said order has not been complied with whereas the order still holds the field as the same was 
not set aside and respondents are committing contempt. 

On the contrary, the Federation of Pakistan has been presented in all the captioned cases 
8. 
and  para-wise  comments  have  been  filed  on  behalf  of  quarters  concerned.  Whereas,  Cabinet 
Division  through  the  para-wise  comments  has  taken  the  stance  that  Cabinet  Division  provides 
protected vehicle to vulnerable dignitaries, subject to availability and approval of Prime Minister 
in  pursuance  of  Rule  24(2)(a)  of  the  Rules  for  the  Use  of  Staff  Cars,  1980  and  accordingly, 
Mercedes Benz No.GD-0341 (model 2005) was provided on 07.01.2014 to Mr. Justice (R) Iftikhar 
Muhammad  Chaudhry,  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  for  a  period  of  three  months  with 
approval of Prime Minister with direction of POL and Repair/Maintenance whereas expenditure 
has to be paid by the user. It was further acknowledged in the comments that necessary security 
has been provided by Ministry of Interior as per SOPs. 

The  Cabinet  Division  has  also  submitted  their  comments  in  connected  Writ  Petition 
9. 
No.1979/2017 whereby it was admitted that bullet proof vehicle was provided by Cabinet Division 
for three months with approval of Prime Minister and the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. 
Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry,  who  was  retired  on  11.12.2013  with  full  benefits,  was  legally 
entitled to purchase the allotted vehicle at depreciated price and there is no disparity under the 
policy  for  purchase  of  vehicle  in  possession  at  the  time  of  retirement.  The  Cabinet  Division, 
Government  of  Pakistan  also  acknowledged  in  their  para-wise  comments  submitted  in  Writ 
Petition No.1055/2017 that Prime Minister was pleased to order that 2400cc car shall be provided 
to every outgoing Chief Justice of Pakistan w.e.f. the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry. The facility will continue to hold effect till the lifetime of the Chief Justice 
of Pakistan and expenditure of maintenance and POL shall be catered by the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan. 

10. 
In Writ Petition No.2228/2016, Ministry of Law and Justice Division has submitted their 
para-wise comments and contended that Ministry of Law is not presumed to determine questions 
raised in the instant writ petition and same could only be determined by the Hon'ble Court. 

11. 

The Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan has also submitted their report and placed 

 
 
relevant  record  which  reveals  that  a  foolproof  security  has  been  provided  to  the  former  Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry which comprised of fourteen (14) officials 
including Gunman, House Guards, Sub-Inspectors, Head Constables, Drivers and two pickups. 
Ministry of Interior also relied upon amendment of PO.NO 2 of 1997, whereby Clause (e) was 
inserted in the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) (Amendment) Order, 2016, 
whereby round-the-clock posting of security guards at the residence by the concerned police during 
the lifetime of judge has to be maintained. Ministry of Interior also provided details for security 
arrangement of retired judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan vide letter dated 12.10.2017 has 
been  appended  as  Annexure-III.  Ministry  of  Interior  has  also  disclosed  the  details  of  security 
reports  of  the  law  enforcement  agencies  whereby  no  threat  is  in  existence  to  the  former  Chief 
Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry  as  of  today.  Similarly,  law  and  justice 
division has also filed report and put emphasis on the amendment provided in the Supreme Court 
Judge (Leave, Pension and Privileges) Order (PO-II), 1997. 

In last, former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry has also filed 
12. 
his  para-wise comments  in  Writ Petition  No.1979/2017 through Mr. Mohiuddin  Amir Mughal, 
Advocate and denied the contention of petitioner/Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi, ASC and has referred PLD 
2009  SC  879  (Sindh  High  Court  Bar  Association  v.  FOP)  wherein  the  Larger  Bench  of  the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, with the ratio of 10:3, has quashed the Reference against former Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry; that vehicle bearing registration No.CIA-
2 was sold to former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry in 2014 after 
following due process with the permission of competent authority and petitioner/Mr. Riaz Hanif 
Rahi, ASC has no locus standi to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 as he has only scandalized the position of 
respondent No.5/ former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as well as 
the institution of judiciary as a whole. Whereas, the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar 
Muhammad  Chaudhry  has  not  submitted  any  reply  in  contempt  application  No.176-W-2017, 
however reply on his behalf was submitted in Criminal Original No.13/2017 in I.C.A. No.65/2014 
mainly on the ground that he was neither party in the I.C.A. nor even any direction was passed 
against him for return of vehicle. 

13. 
Learned Deputy Attorney General in all these cases has taken a stance that all the captioned 
writ petitions are not maintainable as petitioners have no locus standi to claim any relief under 
Article 199 of Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973; that the former Chief Justice 
of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry  is  enjoying  his  last  vehicle  in  use  bearing 
registration No.CIA-2 which was purchased by him at the time of retirement under the Rules for 
the  Use  of  Staff  Cars,  1980  and  the  protected  vehicle  bullet  proof  Mercedes  Benz  bearing 
registration  No.GD-0341  was  provided  with  the  approval  of  Prime  Minister  of  Pakistan  for  a 
period of three months from the date of his retirement as a special dispensation; that in the earlier 
round  of  proceedings  the  Hon'ble  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  has  passed  direction  in  I.C.A. 
No.65/2014  to  decide  the  questions  on  the  locus  standi  being  the  most  important  question  and 
under  the  said  order  the  first  three  petitioners  have  no  locus  standi  to  claim  any  relief  in  Writ 
Petition  No.4761/2013  on  behalf  of  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar  Muhammad 
Chaudhry, who himself has not claimed for such relief. Similarly, learned DAG has also argued 
that case of Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi, ASC is of a similar status as having no locus standi to claim any 
relief  and  in  this  regard  the  learned  DAG  has  relied  upon  1979  SCMR  299  (Nisar  Ahmad  v. 
Additional Secretary Food and Agriculture Government of Pakistan), PLD 2007 SC 386 (Province 
of Balochistan through Secretary Excise and Taxation Department v. Murree Brewery Company 
Ltd.), 1987 SCMR 1577 (Noor Jehan Begum v. Abdus Samad), 2011 SCMR 279 (Anjuman Fruit 
Arhtian v. Deputy Commissioner, Faisalabad), PLD 2007 SC 52 (Hafiz Hamdullah v. Saifullah 
Khan), 2001 YLR 916 [Sindh] (Subzi and Fruit Commission Agents Association v. Commissioner, 
Larkana), PLD 2013 Balochistan 13 (Asmatullah Khan v. Government of Balochistan), 2012 MLD 
97 (Moula Bux Khatian v. Province of Sindh), 2014 YLR 825 [Karachi] (Saeed Ismail Burero v. 
Province  of  Sindh)  and  PLD  2013  Supreme  Court  829  (regarding  Pensionary  Benefits  of  the 
Judges of Superior Courts from the date of their respective retirements, irrespective of their length 
of service as such judges), application by Abdul Rehman Farooq Pirzada, and Begum Nusrat Ali 
Gonda v. FOP, etc.)  

 
 
14. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

15. 
From the perusal of record it has been observed that petitioners i.e. Sh. Ahsan-ud-Din, Mr. 
Toufeeq  Asif,  ASC,  and  Syed  Azmat  Ali  Bukhari,  ASC,  (hereinafter  called  the  "first  three 
petitioners") who are members of Supreme Court Bar Association and remained President of High 
Court Bar Association, whereas Syed Azmat Ali Bukhari, ASC remained President of District Bar 
Association Attock, filed Writ Petition No.4761/2013 with prayer to provide foolproof security to 
former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry by way of providing bullet 
proof car and jammer vehicle along with elite force and rangers squad as the former Chief Justice 
of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry had dealt different high profile cases such as case 
of Gen. Parvez Musharaf on the charge of high treason under Article 6 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  privatization  of  Pakistan  Steel  Mills,  Hajj  Scandal,  Rental 
Power, NRO, Asghar Khan's Case, LPG, NICL, LNG, EOBI, Bank of Punjab, PIA, distribution of 
funds among nearer and dearer of former Prime Minister of Pakistan in the name of development 
scheme from government exchequer, contempt notice to yousaf Raza Gillani, Civil Aviation Fateh 
Jang Airport, Touqeer Sadiq OGRA Scam, out of turn promotion of 21-22 grade officers by Prime 
Minister Case, Reckodic Case, Suo Motu Notice against rangers for killing young boy in Karachi, 
Price Adjustment Case of Petrol and CNG, Illegal Imposition of GST, Punjab Police Foundation, 
DHA Society, and Missing Persons. 

16. 
It has further been argued in the writ petition that majority of the cases are against political 
elites  of  the  country  and  there  is  threat  to  the  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar 
Muhammad  Chaudhry,  who  was  retired  on  11.12.2013  from  the  apex  Court  and  prior  to  his 
retirement  he,  while  considering  these  factors  in  mind  as  well  as  the  prevalent  situation  of  the 
country at that time, applied for provision of a bullet proof car through Registrar of the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan vide letter dated 26.09.2013 for foolproof security arrangement for himself and 
for his family. As a result whereof, the Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan, vide letter 
dated  06.12.2013,  suggested  provision  of  a  bullet  proof  car  besides  other  measure  to  ensure 
foolproof  security  to  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry, 
however it has been observed that Mercedes Benz car bearing registration No.IDE 5445, Model 
1991,  was  taken  away  on  18.12.2013  from  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry as the said vehicle was in dilapidated condition and the same was returned 
through Nisar Ahmed, the then P.S. of former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. lftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry  on  02.01.2014.  It  has  further  been  observed  from  the  record  that  Prime  Minister  of 
Pakistan was pleased to approve the replacement of protective Mercedes Benz bearing registration 
No.IDE-5445, Model 1991 with another protected Mercedes Benz bearing registration No.GD-
0431,  Model  2005,  as  special  dispensation  for  three  months  whereas  the  cost  of  the  POL  and 
maintenance against the said vehicle was not approved and the same was placed upon the user 
through  his  personal  arrangement  on  the  reference  of  the  Islamabad  High  Court's  order  dated 
03.01.2014 passed in earlier round of this writ petition (i.e. W.P.No.4761/ 2013) and the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan's letter dated 08.01.2014. The said letter also contains direction to Nisar Ahmed, 
the then P.S. to former Chief Justice of Pakisttan, Mr. lftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry to take over 
the vehicle from the division for compliance of the order of the Islamabad High Court. 

17. 
The  above  referred  background  gives  rise  to  connected  petitions  filed  by  the  fourth 
petitioner as the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr.Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry himself not 
claimed any privilege, protection, or security by filing the captioned writ petition under Article 
199 of Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 whereas three learned members of 
the  Bar  Association  i.e.  Sh.  Ahsan-ud-Din,  ASC,  Toufeeq  Asif,  ASC,  and  Syed  Azmat  Ali 
Bukhari, ASC (first three petitioners) have filed the writ petition for claiming rights of the former 
Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry on his behalf, which is not under any 
authorization but only with reference to their association with the judicial system.  In the initial 
round  of  proceedings,  the  learned  single  Bench  of  this  Court  has  passed  a  judgment  dated 
15.01.2014  in  which  certain  directions  were  issued,  however  the  same  was  assailed  in  I.C.A. 
No.65/2014 (FOP v. Sh. Ahsan-ud-Din, etc.) which was decided by the Hon'ble Division Bench 
of this Court and matter was remanded back to this Court for consideration of the legal and factual 
issues mentioned in Para-6(i) to (ix) wherein besides other questions the Hon'ble Division Bench 

 
 
has framed question No.3 which has been reproduced as under: 

III.  Question  of  locus  standi  was  not  examined  which  could  have  been  taken  into 
consideration if such opportunity would have been afforded in the respondent side in the 
writ petition. 

Besides other issues,  this  Court has directed the  parties to  argue the case on the issue of locus 
standi  wherein  petitioners  Sh.  Ahsan-ud-Din,  ASC,  Toufeeq  Asif,  ASC  and  Syed  Azmat  Ali 
Bukhari,  ASC  (first  three  petitioners)  have  argued  their  case  on  the  strength  that  former  Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry was not allowed to act and plead in terms 
of Article 207(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, therefore, they 
have filed the instant writ petition on his behalf, however for the sake of understanding, Article 
207(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 is reproduced as under: 

"Art.207(3): A person who has held office as a permanent Judge- 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

of the Supreme Court, shall not plead or act in any court or before any authority in 
Pakistan; 

of a High Court, shall not plead or act in any court or before any authority within 
its jurisdiction ; and 

of the High Court of West Pakistan as it existed immediately before the coming 
into  force  of  the  Province  of  West  Pakistan  Dissolution)  Order,  1970,  shall  not 
plead  or  act  in  any  court  or  before  any  authority  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
principal seat of that High Court or, as the case may be, the permanent bench of 
that High Court to which he was assigned." 

18. 
The first three petitioners on the strength of above referred provision contended that former 
Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry is not allowed to plead and act before 
any Court and due to such embargo he has been left with no remedy whereupon the legal maxim 
i.e. ubi jus ibi remedium has been referred to answer the said proposition and it has further been 
argued that in terms of Article 9 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the 
right to life is the most fundamental right of an individual which has to be given protection and 
state is responsible to give protection. The petitioners have relied upon PLD 1961 SC 431 (Syed 
Akhlaque  Husain  v.  The  Judges  of  the  High  Court  of  West  Pakistan),  PLD  1963  Lahore  82 
(Hashim v. The State), and PLD 1965 SC 527 (Government of Pakistan v. Akhlaque Hussain) to 
maintain their arguments. 

19.  Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Riaz  Hanif  Rahi,  ASC  (hereinafter  called  the  "fourth 
petitioner")  has  filed  the  captioned  writ  petitions  and  criminal  original  petition  i.e.  W.P. 
No.2228/2016 (Riaz Hanif Rahi, etc. v. FOP, etc.), W.P. No.1979/2017 (Riaz Hanif Rahi, etc. v. 
FOP, etc.), W.P. No.1055/2017 (Riaz Hanif Rahi, etc. v. FOP, etc), and Cr1. Org. No.176-W-2017 
(Riaz Hanif Rahi, etc. v. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, etc.), and taken the stance therein that he 
is a taxpayer and he has every right to seek a relief from the Court in terms of Article 199 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 and raised the ground that former Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr.Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry is not permitted to take any advantage or 
facility  of  the  vehicle  bearing  registration  No.GD-0341  (2005)  which  is  not  covered  under  the 
Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) Order (PO-2), 1997, and any such facility 
is illegal and even any further dispensation granted by Prime Minister is in violation of the case 
reported as Mustafa Impex Karachi v. Government of Pakistan (PLD 2016 Supreme Court 808). 
He has also filed three different applications to the I.G. of Police, ICT, Secretary Cabinet Division, 
and Secretary Law and Justice Division with the claim that expenditure of maintenance may kindly 
be  withheld;  that  the  bullet  proof  car  given  to  former  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan,  Mr.  lftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry may be withdrawn along with security equipments and security vehicles as 
all those were beyond the scope of the Judges' privileges. In order to answer these question, this 
Court has to attend the question of locus standi of all the petitioners at the first instance, however 
in order to resolve this question, this Court has gone through the following case laws submitted by 

 
 
 
the parties during the course of arguments on the issue of locus standi and public interest. 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

*. 

*. 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

PLD 1988 SC 416 (M/s Benazir Bhutto v. FOP), 

PLD 1993 SC 473 (Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan), 

PLD 1996 SC 324 (AI Jehad Trust v. FOP), 

PLD 2011 SC 963 (Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010), 

PLD 2011 SC 407 (Munir Hussain Bhatti v. FOP), 

PLD 2012 SC 774 (Muhammad Azhar Siddiqui v. FOP), 

PLD 2010 SC 1109 (Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries), 

PLD 2012 SC 1089 (Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi v. FOP), 

PLD 2012 SC 92 (Baz Muhammad Kakar v. FOP), 

1979 SCMR 299 (Nisar Ahmed, etc. v. Additional Secretary, Food and Agriculture, 
etc.) 

PLD 2007 SC 386 (Province of Balochistan v. Murree Brewerey Company Ltd.) 
1987 SCMR 1577 (Mst. Noor Jehan Begum v. Dr. Abdus Samad, etc.), 

2011  SCMR  279  (Anjuman  Fruit  Arhtian,  etc.  v.  Deputy  Commissioner, 
Faisalabad, etc.), 

PLD 2007 SC 52 (Hafiz Hamdullah v. Saifullah Khan, etc.), 

2001 YLR 916 (Subzi and Fruit Commission Agents Association v. Commissioner, 
Larkana, etc.), 

2015 PLC (CS) 1259 Islamabad (Iftikhar Rashid, etc. v. FOP, etc.), 

PLD 2013 Balochistan 13 (Asmatullah Khan v. Government of Balochistan, etc.), 

2012 MLD 97 Sindh (Moula Bux Khatian v. Province of Sindh, etc.), 

2014 YLR 825 Sindh (Saeed Ismail Burero v. Province of Sindh, etc.), 

From the perusal of above referred case laws, following principles have been emerged on 

20. 
the question of locus standi and public interest litigation: 

(i) 

(ii) 

Aggrieved person is a sine qua non for invoking writ jurisdiction of High Court and 
petitioner has  to  establish direct  or indirect  injury  caused to  him and substantial 
interest in the subject matter of the proceedings for invoking the jurisdiction. 

Aggrieved party has not been defined in Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan,  1973  and  it  depends  upon  circumstances  of  each  case  for  invoking  of 
jurisdiction  of  Article  199(2)  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan, 1973. 

(iii)  Aggrieved person must claim a right with reference to subject matter of writ petition 

and the right has to be claimed as a fundamental right. 

(iv)  Aggrieved person has a legal right to exercise the jurisdiction under Article 199 of 

the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

 
 
(v) 

(vi) 

Article 199(1)(a) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, can 
be invoked by the aggrieved person, which denotes a person who has suffered a 
legal  grievance,  against  whom  the  decision  has  been  pronounced  which  has 
wrongly deprived him or wrongly refused to him something which he was legally 
entitled to. 

Person invoking constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution of 
the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  has  to  establish  that  any  of  his  legal  or 
fundamental right guaranteed under the Constitution has been violated and resulted 
into a legal loss. 

(vii)  Right which is the foundation of application under Article 199 of the Constitution 
of the  Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 1973 is  a personal  and individual right  and 
such right may be a statutory right or right recognized by law whereas a person or 
a party can be said to be aggrieved when he is denied of a legal right by someone 
who has a legal duty to perform relating to that right. 

(viii)   Aggrieved person has to demonstrate that relief sought is the one which he is legally 
entitled to seek under any provision of law, rules or regulations and no other forum 
or remedies are available to him. 

(ix) 

(x) 

Taxpayers have a right to inquire from the authorities as to have a right of life and 
liberty could be denied to them. 

The  burden  of  proof  was  upon  the  petitioner  to  demonstrate  as  to  which  of  his 
fundamental right has been infringed upon to maintain the petition under Article 
199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

Principles Relating to Public Interest Litigation: 

(xi) 

In cases of public interest litigation, the rule on locus standi has to be relaxed in 
order to include a person whose bona fide makes an application for the violation of 
any constitutional right of a determined class of a person whose grievances gone 
unnoticed and un-redressed. 

(xii)  While considering the guarantees of fundamental rights the approach of the Court 
should not be narrowed but elastic enough to march with the changing times and 
guided by the object for which it was embodied in the constitution of fundamental 
rights. 

(xiii) 

 A lawyer cannot survive if the judiciary is not independent, it appears that remedies 
under  Articles  199  and  184(3)  available  in  High  Court  and  Supreme  Court, 
respectively,  are  concurrent  in  nature  and  question  of  locus  standi  is  relevant  in 
High Court but not in Supreme Court. 

(xiv)   The  judiciary,  either  High  Court  and  Supreme  Court  is  bound  to  protect  and 
preserve  the  constitution  as  well  as  to  enforce  fundamental  rights  conferred  by 
Constitution either individually or collectively, in exercise of jurisdiction conferred 
upon it either Article 199 or 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973. 

(xv)  Article 184(3) empowers the Supreme Court to exercise the jurisdiction thereunder 
whenever the Court considers the matter is of public importance and that it pertains 
to enforcement of fundamental rights. The determination on both these account is 
to be made by the Supreme Court of Pakistan itself. 

(xvi)   Violation  of  any  judgment  of  the  superior  Courts  by  the  State  organizations  is 
considered  to  be  substantially  detrimental  to  the  administration  of  justice  and 

 
 
 
amounts to defiance principles of independent judiciary and trichotomy of powers 
and has also constituted a violation of the due process clause of Article 10-A of the 
Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  in  such  circumstances 
anyone can agitate the matter before the Court. 

(xvii)   To safeguard the public property the matter can be agitated if the same falls within 
public importance case relating to enforcement of any fundamental right. 

(xviii)  Question of public importance has to be determined by the Court with reference to 

facts and circumstances of each case. 

(xix)   Right  of  access  to  justice  and  independent  judiciary  is  also  one  of  the  most 
important rights of the citizen and if there is any(sic) independence to judiciary, it 
would  be  tantamount  to  denial  of  access  to  justice,  which  is  undoubtedly  a 
fundamental right under Article 199 of the Constitution. 

(xx)   Whenever there is violation of Articles 199 and 25 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 it would involved a question of public importance with 
reference to enforcement of fundamental rights of the citizens, who may approach 
the Court for enforcement of these rights under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
without having to discharge the burden of locus standi. 

(xxi)   In case of public interest litigation one can agitate the relief on his behalf and public 
against various functionaries, where they have failed to perform their duties relating 
to  welfare  public  at  large  which  they  are  bound  to  perform  under  law,  and 
petitioner's bona fide in that respect is also established. 

21. 
The above referred case laws cited by all the parties persuaded this Court to go through the 
Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  which  has  been 
reproduced as under: 

"Jurisdiction of High Court: Article 199. 

 Subject  to  the  Constitution,  a  High  Court  may,  if  it  is  satisfied  that  no  other 

1. 
adequate remedy is provided by law, - 

(a) 

on the application of any aggrieved party, make an order - 

(i) directing a person performing, within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court, functions 
in connection with the affairs of the Federation, a Province or a local authority, to refrain 
from doing anything he is not permitted by law to do, or to do anything he is required by 
law to do; or 

(ii) declaring that any act done or proceeding taken within the territorial jurisdiction of the 
Court by a person performing functions in connection with the affairs of the Federation, a 
Province or a local authority has been done or taken without lawful authority and is of no 
legal efftct; or 

(b) 

on the application of any person, make an order - 

(i)  directing  that  a  person  in  custody  within  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the  Court  be 
brought before it so that the Court may satisfy itself that he is not being held in custody 
without lawful authority or in an unlawful manner; or 

(ii) requiring a person within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court holding or purporting 
to hold a public office to show under what authority of law he claims to hold that office; 
or 

(c) 

on  the  application  of  any  aggrieved  person,  make  an  order  giving  such 

 
 
 
directions  to  any  person  or  authority,  including  any  Government  exercising  any 
power  or  performing  any  function  in,  or  in  relation  to,  any  territory  within  the 
jurisdiction of that Court as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II. 

2. Subject to the Constitution, the right to move a High Court for the enforcement of any 
of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II shall not be abridged. 

3.  

4. .. 

5. .. 

(Underlining for emphasis is mine) 

22. 
The  status  of  Sh.  Ahsan-ud-Din,  ASC,  Mr.  Toufeeq  Asif,  ASC,  and  Syed  Azmat  Ali 
Bukhari, ASC (first three petitioners) as well as Mr.Riaz Hanif Rahi, ASC (fourth petitioner) with 
reference to terms of Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, it 
can fairly be assumed that the first three petitioners do not fall within the definition of aggrieved 
person as there is no fundamental right expressed by them in their arguments nor the same was 
demonstrated on record as to how first three petitioners claims the right of former Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry for provision of a bullet proof and jammer vehicles, 
especially when he himself does not think in such a manner till this date, even otherwise, from the 
filing of writ petition since 2013 till this date, not a single incident has been referred where any 
threat has been extended to former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, 
even  this  Court  requisitioned  the  internal  reports  of  Ministry  of  Interior  to  demonstrate  any 
potential threat level, wherein it has categorically been stated that no threat was reported to the 
former Chief Justice of Pakistan and even otherwise, if such threat was available or not, it is the 
prime duty of the Government of Pakistan to provide security to every citizen of Pakistan by all 
means, whether he was former Chief Justice of Pakistan or not, in terms of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

The other important aspect which has been raised in the writ petitions is the question of 
23. 
public importance as  to  whether the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. lftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry is entitled to take any such benefit which has not been in existence under any law, Act, 
rules,  or  regulations,  although  the  first  three  petitioners  claimed  that  Article  207(3)  of  the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 placed an embargo upon the former Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry to act or plead in any case before any Court 
of law, as per their stance fundamental right of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry has also been denied and he cannot seek any remedy in this regard. The 
arguments are misplaced as the two terminologies used in the constitutional provisions of Article 
207(3)(a) are  "plead" and "act" whereas the term  "plead" means "beg, treat,  besieged, implore, 
appeal to, petition, supplicate, importune, prayed to, request, ask earnestly, call on, adjure, apply 
to,  solicit",  while  the  term  "act"  means  "take  action,  take  steps,  take  measures,  take  initiative, 
move, make a move, react, do something, proceed, go ahead, make progress, make headway, be 
active,  being  employed,  be  busy".  (referred  from  Oxford  Thesaurus  of  English).  The  said 
definitions  as  well  as  meanings  give  rise  to  a  situation  that  the  embargo  is  with  reference  to 
professional  career  of  any  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  to  earn/practice  as  an  Advocate  after 
retirement with reference to his status. 

24.  Whereas,  placing  the  matter  in  hand  in  juxtaposition  with  the  above  referred  terms  of 
"plead" and "act" along with its respective definitions and meanings, it is evident that the Article 
207(3)(a)  puts  embargo  on  retired  Judges/Chief  Justices  of  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  not  to 
practice as an advocate before any subordinate Courts or authority is only to protect the dignity, 
respect,  honour,  prestige,  or  status  of  the  Office  of  Chief  Justice  of  Pakistan  or  Judge  of  the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan as for being the highest office under Article 175 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. On the other hand, despite putting on embargo upon the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
retired  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  or  Chief  Justices  of  Pakistan  under  Article  207(3)(a),  the 
Supreme  Court  Judges  (Leave,  Pension  and  Privileges)  Order,  1997  has  been  introduced  to 
safeguard their needs and it is expected under the said Presidential Order that the Federation and 
the State is giving due protection in recognition to the services of all those who have served the 
highest  esteemed  office  in  a  fair  and  on  equitable  high  standard,  therefore,  this  Court  is  not 
convinced with the arguments of first three petitioners of Writ Petition No.4761/2013. Whereas, 
such state of affairs are dealt in details by the apex Court vide order dated 25.01.2018 passed in 
Civil Appeal No.1703 of 2013 (Shahid Anwar Bajwa v. S.M. Asif and others), wherein it was held 
that: 

"It is appropriate to consider the relevant constitutional/ statutory history of the restriction 
on the ex-Judge(s) of the superior Courts to practice before the same Court. The restriction 
was first introduced in 1956 in the shape of Article 166(3) of the 1956 of Constitution, 
however, such restriction ceased to exist in the year 1958 when the Constitution of 1956 
was abrogated. Thereafter, the restriction was reintroduced by the Retired Judges (Legal 
Practice) Order, 1962 (Order of 1962), but the same was limited to such Judges who were 
removed from service; however, a retired Judge retained the right to practice before the 
same High Court. In the Constitution of 1962, there was no provision imposing any such 
restriction  on  a  permanent  Judge  of  the  High  Court  after  his  retirement  or  removal, 
however, by means of the Legal Practice (Disqualifications) Ordinance, 1964, the Order of 
1962  was  repealed  and  the  bar  was  reintroduced.  Ultimately,  the  restriction  was  again 
introduced  in  the  form  of  Article  207(3)(b)  of  the  Constitution  of  1973. Thereafter,  the 
Ordinance  of  1964  was  also  repealed  as  the  issue  had  already  been  dealt  with  by  the 
Constitution itself. In this regard it is to be noted that the validity of the Ordinance of 1964 
was challenged on the ground of being violative of fundamental rights. The Full Bench of 
the High Court in the case of Syed Akhlaque Hussain Advocate (Writ Petition No. 217 of 
1964) held that the provisions of the said Ordinance offended against Fundamental Right, 
namely, the right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to conduct any 
lawful trade or business, but on appeal, this Court vide the majority judgment reported as 
Pakistan v. Syed Akhlaque Hussain (PLD 1965 SC 527) held that the Ordinance of 1964 
did not violate any of the Fundamental Rights of citizens embodied in the Constitution. 
The issue was again  considered by this Court in  M/S Haider Automobile's case (supra) 
wherein it was held as under: 

"The  right  to  practice  the  profession  of  law  is  a  right  available  subject  to  a  system  of 
licensing  under  the  Bar  Councils  Act  or  under  the  powers  of  the  High  Court  under  its 
Letters Patent and of the Supreme Court under its own rules and a person seeking to practise 
has to obtain a licence in that behalf upon satisfying the Licencing Authority that he fulfills 
the qualifications laid down and has paid the fees prescribed for that purpose. He is also 
subject to the disciplinary control of the Courts and the tribunals in which he practises or 
at any rate was, until the coming into force of the Legal Practitioners and Bar Councils Act, 
1965. Under the latter disciplinary control has to a large extent, been transferred to the Bar 
Councils but the right is nevertheless, not an uncontrolled or absolute right. Nor could it in 
the very nature of things be. Such regulatory provisions are not and can never be considered 
to be violative of the Fundamental Right to carry on a trade or profession. The question 
then  is  as  to  whether  Ordinance  No.II  of  1964  did  impose  any  bar  which  went  beyond 
regulation of the profession. The impugned Ordinance did not prevent, it will be observed, 
a retired Judge of the High Court from doing chamber practice, that is, advising clients in 
Chambers or practising in the jurisdiction of a High Court of which he was not a Judge or 
practising in the Supreme Court. Similarly although a retired Judge or Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court was prohibited from practising before any Court or tribunal in Pakistan, his 
right to do Chamber practice remained unaffected. The Ordinance No.II of 1964 did not, 
therefore, introduce any total prohibition but it only restricted the forums before which a 
retired  Judge  could  practise,  in  the  interest  of  maintaining  the  independence  of  the 
judiciary;  preserving  the  dignity  of  a  person  who  had  held  such  a  High  Office  and 
preventing embarrassment both to him and to the Judges before whom he was otherwise 
likely to appear. Such a restriction was not, in the circumstances, in my opinion, violative 

 
 
of the said Fundamental Right No. 8 and, therefore, the question of the Ordinance being 
void  did  not  at  all  arise.  I  am  in  this  respect,  in  agreement  with  Cornelius,  C. J.  Fazle-
Akbar, Yaqoob Ali and Abdus Sattar, JJ. with their opinions in this regard in the case of 
Government of Pakistan v. Syed Akhlaque Hussain and another." 

7. The rule that a retired Judge is not entitled to appear as a counsel before a Court of equal 
or lower jurisdiction to the one in which he sat in his capacity as a Judge is found all across 
the  common  law  world,  including  England,  Canada,  India,  several  US  states,  Jamaica, 
Trinidad and Tobago. Reference in this regard may be made to Section 75 of the Courts 
and Legal Services Act 1990 of UK, which provides a bar on a Judge as under:- 

75. Judges etc. barred from legal practice. No person holding as a full-time appointment 
any of the offices listed in Schedule 11 shall:- 

(a) provide any advocacy or litigation services (in any jurisdiction); 

(b) provide any conveyancing or probate services; 

(ba) carry on any notarial activities (within the meaning of the Legal Services Act 2007); 

(c) practice as a barrister, solicitor, public notary, licensed conveyancer or licensed CLC 
practitioner, or be indirectly concerned in any such practice; 

(d) practise as an advocate or solicitor in Scotland, or be indirectly concerned in any such 
practice; or 

(e) act for any remuneration to himself as an arbitrator or umpire. 

Schedule 11 includes the Judges of the Supreme Court, Lord Justices of Appeal, Puisne 
Judge of the High Court, Circuit Judges, District Judges, etc. The outline Conditions of 
Appointment  and  Terms  of  Service  of  High  Court  Judge  in  UK  also  provides  such 
restrictions,  i.e."A  High  Court  Judge  shall  not  practise  as  a  barrister  or  solicitor  or  be 
indirectly concerned in  any such practice (S.75 Courts and  Legal  Services Act  1990).... 
Any offer of appointment is therefore made on the understanding that appointees will not 
return to practice". Similarly, Article 220 of the Indian Constitution imposes restriction on 
legal  practice  after  being  a  permanent  Judge,  i.e.,  "No  person  who  has  held  office  as  a 
permanent Judge of a High Court ... shall plead or act in any court or before any authority 
in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts". In the light of the above it 
is clear that in the common law jurisdictions the intention of the legislature has always been 
to impose a bar on ex-judges of the superior Courts to appear as counsel before the same 
Court or the Courts/forums subordinate to that Court." 

(underlining for emphasis is mine) 

In view of the above referred judgment of the apex Court, it is clear that any former Judge of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan has only been restricted from entering into legal profession whereas 
issues pertaining to personal rights were not kept under any restriction. 

The other aspect of fundamental right available to the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. 
25. 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry for providing protection has already been taken care of by the latest 
amendment in the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) (Amendment) Order, 
2016, wherein the amendment contains the following: 

President's Order No.05 of 2016 

An 

ORDER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, 

Pension and Privileges) Order, 1997. 

Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and 
Privileges) Order, 1997 (P.O.No.2 of 1997), for the purpose hereinafter appearing: 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  in  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by  the  Fifih  Schedule  to  the 
Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  the  President  is  pleased  to  make  the 
following Order:- 

1.  Short  title  and  commencement.---(1)  This  Order  may  be  called  the  Supreme  Court 
Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) (Amendment) Order, 2016. 

(2) It shall come into force at once. 

2.  Amendment  of  paragraph  25(1),  P.O.  No.2  of  1997.  -  In  the  Supreme  Court  Judges 
(Leave, Pension and Privileges) Order, 1997, (P.O. No.2 of 1997), in paragraph 25, in sub-
paragraph (1), after clause (d), the following new clause shall be added, namely:- 

"(e) Round the clock posting of a Security Guard at the residence by the concerned Police, 
during life time of a retired Judge: 

Provided that his widow shall not be- entitled to the facility under this clause." 

MAMNOON HUSSAIN 

PRESIDENT 

26. 
The  above  referred  amendment  in  the  Supreme  Court  Judges  (Leave,  Pension  and 
Privileges)  Order,  1997  settled  the  rights  of  all  former  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  every 
manner and the security has been provided at the residence of a retired judge during the lifetime 
by the concerned police, whereas the  Federation of Pakistan has provided the details  of all the 
security personnel provided to the former Judges of the apex Court referred in the report of Law 
and Justice Division. Glimpse of the report is reproduced as under. 

. Whereas the Ministry of Interior has also submitted a report in 2017, the summary of deployment 
in case of former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, details of which 
have been reproduced as under: 

"As  per  record,  after  the  superannuation  of  Mr.  Justice  Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry 
Honourable former Chief Justice of Pakistan following security was provided. 

a. One official of ICT Police as personal gunman with former Chief Justice. 

b. An Escort vehicle bearing Registration No.GV-132 of the ICT Police in Islamabad with 
a driver and 01 Upper Subordinate and 02 officials armed with official weapons. 

c. Another Escort vehicle bearing Registration No.GV-753 of ICT Police in Islamabad with 
a driver and 01 Upper Subordinate and 03 officials armed with official weapons. 

d. A residential Guard at Islamabad comprising of 01 Head Constable and 03 Constables 
are performing duties at the residence of Mr. lftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry. 

6. Summary of the deployment is as under:- 

SI  HC 
2 

1 

Constable  Drivers  Total 
2 
9 

14 

Vehicle 
02 (Pickups) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The above referred details give rise to a situation that the law which is applicable to the 
27. 
retired  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  has  not  been  followed  in  letter  and  spirit,  whereas  it  is 
mandatory upon the organs of the State to comply with the law in a manner in which things have 
been provided. It is trite law that where law required doing things in a particular manner, such 
things had to be done in that manner and all other modes stood excluded. In view of above reasons, 
the former judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan are entitled to only those rights and privileges 
guaranteed under the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) Order, 1997. 

28. 
The first three petitioners have taken another stance with reference to terms "vulnerable 
dignitary" referred in the Rules for the Use of Staff Cars, 1980, the same has been reproduced as 
under: 

24. Category of Staff Cars and their Entitlement for use: (1) Staff cars for government 
use may be categorized as under:- 

(a) Small Cars Up to engine power not exceeding 1300 CC. 

(b) Medium Cars 

Cars with an engine power ranging from 

over 1300 CC to 1600 CC. 

(c) Big Cars 

Engine power exceeding 1600 CC. 

(d) 
All  cars  earmarked  for  foreign  dignitaries  and  Federal/Provincial  Ministers, 
Hon'ble  Judges  of  Supreme  Court  and  Chief  Justices  of  the  High  Court  will  be  air 
conditioned. (Add. Vide No.12/65/81-CS, dated 4th August, 1983) 

(2) The Prime Minister of Pakistan has been pleased to  approve the following revisited 
entitlement of Staff cars:- 

a. 

FederalMinisters/Ministers of State/ 

Advisors/ Special Assistants to the 

Prime Minister with status of Minister/ 

Minister of State. 

1800 CC 

"Provided that the protected vehicle shall be allocated to a vulnerable dignitary subject to 
availability and approval of the Prime Minister. However, the repair/maintenance and POL 
of the vehicle shall be the responsibility of the respective Ministry/Division/Department or 
the dignitary concerned". 

b. Secretaries General/Secretary/Parliamentary 

Secretaries and Officers equivalent to BPS-22. 

1300 CC 

c. Additional Secretaries/Senior Joint Secretaries/ 

Officers in BPS-21/20 and equivalent. 

1000 CC 

The above referred entitlements of Staff cars have been further covered with the proviso where 
term "protected vehicle" has been used only to vulnerable dignitary. However, the same is subject 
to availability and approval of Prime Minister, in order to understand the terms "vulnerability" and 
"vulnerable dignitary" the meanings referred in the Black's Law Dictionary have been defined in 
the following manner: 

Vulnerability:  

"degree  of  people,  resources,  property,  environments  are  susceptible  to  be  harmed, 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degrade, destroyed or exposed to hostile factors." 

Vulnerable dignitary:  

exposed to the possibility of being attacked or harmed, either physical or emotionally. 

Synonyms:  in  danger,  in  peril,  in  jeopardy,  at  risk,  exposed,  wide  open;  undefended, 
unshielded, unfortified, unarmed, without arms, without weapons, defenceless, easily hurt/ 
wounded/damaged, powerless, helpless. 

The above referred meanings clearly provide certain requirements and threshold for its application 
to any dignitary, whereas unless any potential risk has not been measured, calculated or reported 
by any law enforcement agencies, the case of any individual may not fall within the definition of 
"vulnerable dignitary" and the said requirements regarding risk factor are question of fact which 
could not be adjudicated in constitutional jurisdiction. 

29. 
The above referred terms give rise to a situation that protection is required to a person who 
is  exposed  to  threats  due  to  nature  of  his  job,  situation,  or  any  other  factor,  however  all  these 
ingredients  have  to  be  measured  in  some  manner  which  includes  the  reports  from  the  law 
enforcement agencies including Police Department, Counter Terrorism Department, Inter Services 
Intelligence,  Military  Intelligence,  Intelligence  Bureau,  etc.  therefore,  if  the  threat  has  been 
reported  by  the  law  enforcement  agencies  and  the  same  has  been  notified  to  the  Ministry  of 
Interior,  then  the  Ministry  of  Interior  under  the  command  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 has to provide due protection, however said protection is subject to 
fulfillment of criteria or a policy or a directive under which the same has to be measured in each 
case. The risk factor may vary from case to case basis and the concerned law enforcement agencies 
and Ministry of Interior are the best judge to define those parameters to place any dignitary under 
the term "vulnerable" or otherwise. 

This Court in earlier round of the proceedings has received different statements as well as 
30. 
reports on behalf of Ministry of Interior and other law enforcement agencies from the date of filing 
of this writ petition till date, however at present there is no threat available on record to the former 
Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as held by the Ministry of Interior. 
In view of said report and situation available in this case, this Court is fully convinced that the 
security arrangements provided under the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) 
Order, 1997 are well in place and same shall be applicable in this regard. This Court has asked the 
first  three  petitioners  regarding  latest  status  of  protected  vehicle  i.e.  GD-0341  Mercedes  Benz, 
whereas it was clarified that the vehicle is not in a running condition, therefore, the same is not 
under use for traveling purpose by the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry. This clearly establishes that the use of a protected vehicle is not required in this case, 
even the Ministry of Interior for that matter is the competent authority to review all such cases 
wherein protected vehicles have been provided to vulnerable dignitaries under the rules and they 
are bound to annually review all those cases of protected vehicles after requisitioning report from 
the law enforcement agencies and if Ministry of Interior feel satisfied, they have to withdraw such 
facility otherwise it will cause loss to public exchequer and in such circumstances the concerned 
officials of the Ministry of Interior are responsible to bear the loss. 

31. 
At  last,  I  have  to  attend  the  question  raised  by  Mr.  Riaz  Hanif  Rahi,  ASC  (the  fourth 
petitioner)  who  has  filed  W.P.  No.2228/  2016,  W.P.  No.1979/2017,  and  W.P.  No.1055/2017 
wherein  he  has  called  in  question  the  order  dated  05.09.2016  passed  by  the  Prime  Minister  of 
Pakistan, which has been reproduced as under: 

"10. In view of the above, the Prime Minister has been pleased to order as follows: 

i. 

A 2400CC car shall be provided to every outgoing Chief Justice with effect from 
the former Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr. Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry on whose 
behalf the present petition was filed. The facility will be available during the life 
time of the Chief Justice and the expenditure on maintenance and POL shall also 

 
 
 
 
be catered by the Supreme Court of Pakistan; 

ii. 

iii. 

A similar dispensation will be admissible to the two Chief Justices who have retired 
after him i.e. Justice (Retd) Tassaduq Hussain Jillani and Justice (Retd) Nasir-ul-
Mulk as well as future Chief Justices on retirement; and, 

Cabinet Division shall coordinate implementation of this decision in consultation 
with  Registrar,  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan.  The  bullet  proof  Mercedes  Benz 
provided  earlier  to  Justice  (Retd)  Mr.  Iftikhar  Muhammad  Chaudhry  may  be 
retrieved on provision of the alternate new vehicle as above." 

The above referred summary which was approved by the Prime Minister and forwarded by Fawad 
Hassan Fawad, Secretary to Prime Minister has been conveyed to the Supreme Court of Pakistan 
but the same has not been approved by the apex Court, however the above referred order has to be 
seen in  the light  of the judgment passed by the  apex Court in  case reported as Mustafa  Impex 
Karachi  v.  Government  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2016  Supreme  Court  808)  wherein  all  those  actions 
which were taken by the Prime Minister of Pakistan by passing the Cabinet are considered to be 
nullity  in  the  eye  of  laws  and  violation  of  Rules  of  Business  as  held  by  the  apex  Court  in  the 
following manner: 

(k) Rules of Business, 1973--- 

Power  of  Secretary  of  a  Division  to  authenticate  by  signature  all  orders  and  other 
instruments made, or executed, in the name of President--Such power was a purely formal 
power--Exercise  of  such  power  established  the  genuineness  of  the  document,  it  did  not 
confer the statutory power to issue such a document. 

(r) Constitution of Pakistan--- 

Cabinet  was  a  composite  concept  and  its  components  were  the  Prime  Minister  and  the 
Federal Ministers. 

(s) Rules of Business, 1973--- 

Power  of  Prime  Minister  to  by-pass  the  Cabinet---Vires  of--Prime  Minister  could  not 
exercise the powers of the Cabinet by himself---Prime Minister executed policy decisions, 
he did not take them by himself---Rules 16(2) of the Rules of Business, 1973 which enabled 
the Prime Minister to dispose of matters by by-passing the Cabinet was, thus, ultra vires 
(the Constitution). 

Prime Minister was the head of the Cabinet. He was the single most important person in 
the Cabinet, but he did not stand in the position of the Cabinet. He was neither a substitute 
nor a surrogate for the Cabinet. He could not exercise its powers by himself. The reason 
that he could not stand in the position of the Cabinet was because the Cabinet was, in fact, 
the Federal Government. Treating the office of the Prime Minister as being equivalent to 
that of the Cabinet, would mean that the Prime Minister, by himself as a single individual, 
would become the Federal Government. This was simply inconceivable. 

Decisions  of  the  Federal  Government  were  the  decisions  of  the  Cabinet  and  not  of  the 
Prime Minister. Any decisions taken by the Prime Minister on his own initiative lacked the 
authority of the law or the Constitution. 

(t) Constitution of Pakistan-- 

Prime  Minister--Discretionary  governmental  spending/  expenditure--  Authorization  by 
Cabinet---Any  discretionary  spending  at  the  initiative  of  the  Prime  Minister  alone  was 
manifestly un-constitutional and contrary to law---Prime Minister could not make fiscal 
changes on his own and nor could he engage in discretionary spending by himself--In all 
such cases the prior decision of the Cabinet was required, since it was unambiguously that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
body alone which was the Federal Government---Ex-post facto approval (of expenditure) 
by  the  Cabinet  would  not  suffice  since  money  once  spent  could  not  be  unspent---All 
discretionary spending without the prior approval of the Cabinet was contrary to law and 
would make the Prime Minister personally responsible for such action. 

(Underlining for emphasis is mine)  

The above referred interpretation of the apex Court gives rise to a situation that the order 
32. 
dated 05.09.2016 has no legal effect and the same was passed without any legal backing, even 
otherwise, such kind  of orders have  been considered in  violation of the Supreme Court Judges 
(Leave,  Pension  and  Privileges)  Order,  1997,  as  the  former  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan are only entitled for their privileges provided under the supra Presidential Order of 1997, 
therefore, anything contrary to the said order has no legal effect and same could not be announced 
by the Prime Minister of Pakistan nor anyone is entitled to receive such benefit under the law. 

33. 
The learned DAG while arguing his case on behalf of Government of Pakistan has referred 
the  celebrated  judgment  PLD  2013  SC  829  (regarding  Pensionary  Benefits  of  the  Judges  of 
Superior Courts from the date of their respective retirements, irrespective of their length of service 
as such judges), application by Abdul Rehman Farooq Pirzada, and Begum Nusrat Ali Gonda v. 
FOP,  etc.)  the  Larger  Bench  of  apex  Court  has  decided  the  scope  of  eligibility  of  pensionary 
benefits of the retired judges who has less than five (05) years of actual service as judge of the 
High Court were not eligible to receive pension and while deciding the said case, the case reported 
as PLD 2008 Supreme Court 522 (Accountant General Sindh v. Ahmad Ali U. Qureshi and others) 
was held to be per incuriam and have also declared that it is the legal and moral duty of the retired 
judges of the High Court who have less than five (05) years of actual service as such judges to 
return the pension and pensionary benefits availed by them. It has further been held in the said 
judgment that the right of pension and other privileges of the judge of the superior Courts has to 
be settled, claimed, and extended only on the basis of Presidential Order issued by the President 
of Pakistan from time to time and no other benefit can be received beyond the said 

34. 
The last question raised in the Writ Petition No.1979/2017 by Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi, ASC 
regarding pending reference in the Supreme Judicial Council against the former Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, Mr.Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry is a misconceived concept as the matter was already 
decided  by  the  Larger  Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  whereby  the  Reference  was 
quashed. Reliance is placed upon PLD 2010 Supreme Court 61 (Chief lustice of Pakistan Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan through Secretary), therefore, the claim of Mr. Riaz 
Hanif Rahi, ASC is not maintainable on its factual side. 

35. 
In view of above background, this Court is fully convinced that the captioned writ petitions 
are not maintainable as petitioners have no locus standi to raise all these questions which are not 
within their preview as  they  are not  aggrieved persons and neither any personal  right  nor their 
fundamental right has been infringed although the fourth petitioner i.e. Mr. Riaz Hanif Rahi, ASC 
has raised the question of public importance on the ground that he is a taxpayer and he is entitled 
to raise such question as a whistleblower, however, the said petitioner has not placed any record 
through  which  it  could  be  demonstrated  that  he  is  a  regular  taxpayer,  therefore,  all  these  writ 
petitions are hereby dismissed.  

The  Criminal  Original  No.176-W-2017  is  also  not  maintainable  in  the  light  of  findings 
36. 
referred above and same is also dismissed, therefore, the Federal Government has to exercise its 
authority to decide the issues in accordance with law and it has been expected from all the quarters 
concerned  to  do  the  needful  without  violating  the  rules,  regulations,  and  law  discussed 
hereinabove. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
