ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.4055/2021 
Mst. Ezza Masroor 
VS 
Muhammad Fahad Tanveer & 02 others  

Petitioner by: 

Hafiz Asif Ali Tamboli, Advocate along with 
petitioner and her father  

Respondent No.1 by:  Mr. Manzoor Hussain, Advocate along with 

respondent No.1 and his father  

Date of Hearing: 

13.01.2022. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  writ  petition, 

the petitioner has called in question the judgment and decree of the learned 

Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  21.10.2021,  whereby  the 

petitioner’s appeal preferred against the judgment and decree of the learned 

Judge Family Court (West), Islamabad, dated 27.07.2021, has been dismissed.  

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  Muhammad 

Fahad  Tanveer  (Respondent  No.1)  and  Mst.  Ezza  Masroor  (petitioner)  got 

married  on  22.03.2018,  from  whom  a  daughter  was  born  on  27.07.2019,  as 

such,  they  had  been  sharing  cordial  relation  until  the  petitioner’s  parents 

forcibly detained her in their home restraining her to join back the abode of 

respondent  No.1,  as  a  result  whereof  respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  for 

restitution of conjugal rights, which was decreed vide judgment and decree, 

dated  27.07.2021.  Feeling  aggrieved  thereof,  the  petitioner  preferred  an 

appeal  praying  that  a  sum  of  Rs.25,000/-  may  be  ordered  to  be  paid  by 

respondent No.1 as maintenance in favour of petitioner and the minor, each, 

alongwith  maternity  expenditures  of  Rs.100,000/-,  as  such,  the  appeal  was 

dismissed  vide  impugned  judgment  and  decree,  dated  21.10.2021.  Hence, 

instant writ petition.  

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4055/2021 

Page | 2 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the  law  provides  no 

provision  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights,  when  the  husband  is  not 

maintaining  his  wife  according  to  the  Holy  Quran  and  Sunnah  or  is  not 

ready  to  pay  the  maintenance  of  wife  and  minor,  as  such,  both  the  Courts 

below have failed to appreciate this aspect of the case and decreed the suit of 

respondent No.1 in a haste; that respondent No.1 showed negligent behavior 

towards  the  petitioner  and  the  minor  with  respect  to  their  livelihood 

expenditures,  per  se,  such  conduct  on  the  part  of  respondent  No.1  created 

hate  in  the  mind  of  petitioner,  due  to  which  she  could  not  live  with 

respondent  No.1,  therefore,  impugned  judgment  and  decree  may  be  set-

aside.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  maintained  that 

during  the  pre-trial  reconciliation  proceedings  between  the  parties  the 

petitioner expressed her willingness  to join  respondent No.1 as wife  only  if 

he  takes  care  of  her  needs  and  keep  her  with  dignity,  as  such,  respondent 

No.1 has been treating the petitioner with dignity and fulfilling the needs as 

agreed, per  se,  the  parents  of  petitioner  are pressurizing  her  not  to  join  the 

abode  of  respondent  No.1  back;  that  both  the  Courts  below  have  rightly 

appreciated each and every aspect of the case and concurrently  decreed the 

suit of respondent No.1 in accordance with law.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  Mst.  Ezza  Masroor  was 

entered into Nikah with respondent No.1 on 22.03.2018 against Haq Mehr of 7 

½  gold  (equal  value  of  Rs.  440,000/-),  which  was  paid  at  the  time  of  Nikah 

and same is mentioned in column No. 14 and 15 of the Nikahnama. Both the 

parties  were  blessed  with  minor  daughter  namely  Aimal  Zehra,  born  on 

27.07.2019,  who  is  presently  in  custody  of  petitioner.  The  dispute  started 

between the parties on primary issue of non-maintenance as per the stance of 

 
 
W.P. No.4055/2021 

Page | 3 

the petitioner, who refused to live with the respondent husband, as a result 

respondent No.1 has filed suit for conjugal rights on 22.08.2020 and referred 

the initial cause of action as 22.03.2018 when marriage was solemnized from 

the date of filing of suit i.e. 22.08.2022. 

7. 

On  the  other  hand,  petitioner  contested  the  suit  by  filing  written 

statement  and  claims  that  the  plaintiff/respondent  has  neither  brought  the 

minor  as  well  as  petitioner  to  his  house,  nor  he  has  paid  maternity 

expenditures  of  Rs.  100,000/-  and  maintenance  allowance  of  Rs.  25,000/- 

since  27.07.2019  and  same  has  been  fixed  as  condition  for  restitution  of 

conjugal  rights.  The  initial  pre-trial  reconciliation  failed  and  Family  Court 

has framed issues, whereby both the parties have recorded their evidences in 

categorical terms.  

8. 

The petitioner being wife claims that the reconciliation has been failed 

between the parties, even she has recorded her stance in the Trial Court, but 

both  the  Courts  have  not  appreciated  the  failure  of  reconciliation 

proceedings and passed the decree without adhering to the spirit of law. 

9.  While going through the record, especially the evidence of petitioner 

Exh.D1,  whereby  she  reiterated  her  stance  in  her  cross-examination,  she 

stated in categorical terms:- 

10. 

This aspect clearly establishes that the petitioner has developed hatred 

against the respondent No.1 and she is not able to live within the prescribed 

limit  of  Quran  and  Sunnah  with  her  husband  respondent  No.1,  but  despite 

that Judge Family Court has passed the decree, which has been maintained 

by the learned First Appellate Court. 

 
 
       
 
W.P. No.4055/2021 

Page | 4 

11.  While considering the judgment of the appellate Court, whereby it is 

specifically  written  in  para-12  of  the  said  judgment  and  observed  by  the 

Court in the following manner:- 

It is pertinent to mention here that this court has also made an effort to 
reconciliate  the  matter  between  parties  in  order  to  save  the  family 
institution  and  future  of  the  minor  but  remained  unsuccessful  as  the 
defendant  has  brought  up  a  new  condition  during  the  reconciliation 
proceedings  that  her  dower  weighting  7  ½  tolas  was  snatched  by  the 
plaintiff  and  if  her  returned  the  same  and  pay  the  outstanding 
maintenance  allowance  to  her  and  the  minor  since  August,  2019  she  is 
willing to reside with him. This condition of the defendant regarding the 
return of dower was not agitated before the Family Court in pleadings as 
well as in evidence, therefore, it appears that the defendant is not willing 
to  continue  with  her  matrimonial  relationship  with  the  plaintiff. 
Therefore, no misreading and non-reading of evidence is observed hence 
issue No.1 need no return.   

12. 

  The  above  referred  last  lines  of  the  impugned  judgment  spells  out 

that the appellate Court has also considered of the fact that the petitioner is 

“not “willing to continue with her matrimonial relationship with the plaintiff”, but 

despite that decree of conjugal rights has been maintained.  

13. 

In such scenario, both the Courts below have not attended the spirit of 

Islamic  law  as  well  as  West  Pakistan  Family  Court  Act,  1964,  in  which  it  has 

been  settled  that  if  reconciliation  proceedings  have  been  failed,  no  other 

decree could be passed, except decree of Khulla, although there is a technical 

handicap in this case  as the petitioner has  not  filed a suit  for dissolution  of 

marriage  till  date  and  this  aspect  was  specifically  acknowledged  in  cross-

examination  referred  above.  However,  this  hyper  technical  reason  does  not 

absolve  this  Court  as  per  recording  of  stance  of  petitioner  in  unequivocal 

terms. 

14. 

This  Court  has  given  ample  opportunities  time  and  again  to  the 

petitioner as well as to respondent No.1/husband to sit together and resolve 

their issues in amicable manner as both are well educated and professionals 

as doctor and engineer, having one daughter, who is presently in the custody 

of her mother, despite giving sufficient time, both petitioner and respondent 

 
 
   
W.P. No.4055/2021 

Page | 5 

No.1  are  not  in  agreement  to  resolve  their  issues  amicably,  even  fathers  of 

both the parties are present in the Court, but petitioner in categorical terms 

stated that she is not willing to continue with this matrimonial bond, rather 

developed hatred with the respondent No.1, who is not paying single penny 

as maintenance, even the Haq Mehr, which was referred in the Nikahnama is 

still  in  the  custody  of  husband/respondent.  She  has  been  time  and  again 

confronted with her stance, but she stated in a clear term in open Court that 

she  is  now  intended  to  dissolve  this  marriage  by  all  means  and  it  is  not 

possible  for  her  to  agree  with  the  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  under  the 

prescribed limit of Quran and Sunnah. 

15. 

In  such  scenario,  it  has  clearly  been  established  that  in  the  Courts 

below,  both  respondent  and  petitioner  have  failed  to  reconcile  the  matter 

with each other, but despite that learned Judge Family Court and the learned 

First  Appellate  Court  have  ignored  the  failure  of  reconciliation,  rather  put 

the petitioner/wife in a difficult position, who is not willing to live with her 

husband, and in this regard law envisaged in 1948 SCMR 523 (Muhammad 

Siddique  VS  Mst.  Kalsoom  Bibi  and  others),  1997  CLC  1317  Lahore  (Mst. 

Surria Bibi VS Additional District Judge Khanpur and 2 others), very much 

favours  the  petitioner.  This  Court  is  convinced  that  present  marriage  is 

unhappy  relation  between  the  parties,  with  no  hope  for  living  together 

within  the  limits  prescribed  by  Almighty  Allah.  Both  are  still  involved  in 

litigation and in this regard wife could legitimately ask for Khula, therefore, 

while considering this unacceptable reunion, which has been escaped notice 

by  the  Courts  below,  it  is  abundantly  clear  that  decree  for  restitution  of 

conjugal rights could not be passed, though the same was conditional based 

on  the  initial  stance  of  the  petitioner,  who  is  claiming  maternity  expenses 

alongwith  the  maintenance  of  minor,  as  such  respondent  has  not  paid  that 

maternity  expenses,  contends  that  petitioner  is  Doctor  by  profession,  her 

 
 
W.P. No.4055/2021 

Page | 6 

delivery  charges  were  exempted  by  her  senior  doctors,  though  evidence  to 

that  extent  is not  available on record, but  this aspect  has concurrently  been 

settled by the Courts below against the petitioner, even no evidence qua the 

expenditures  of  maternity  was  on  record,  such  aspect  further  establishes  a 

disputed situation as well as disparity among the parties.    

16.  While  going  through  the  above  discussion  and  evidence  as  well  as 

failure  of  reconciliation  between  the  parties  before  this  Court  in  terms  of 

Section 10 (4) of the West Pakistan Family Court Act, 1964, this Court is not in a 

position  to  pass  a  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage,  though  said  fact  has 

been recorded by this Court in this judgment.  

17. 

This  Court  has  also  attended  the  claim  of  petitioner  regarding 

enhancement  of  maintenance  @  Rs.  25,000/-  per  month,  which  seems  to  be 

on  higher  side,  especially  when  the  minor  is  of  two  years  and  five  months 

and  not  going  to  school  at  this  point  of  time,  therefore,  the  maintenance 

awarded by the Courts below has been maintained.           

18. 

In  these  peculiar  circumstances,  instant  writ  petition  is  PARTIALLY 

ALLOWED,  as  a  result,  judgment  and  decree  to  the  extent  of  restitution  of 

conjugal  rights  in  favour  of  respondent  No.1,  passed  by  the  Judge  Family 

Court as well as by the learned First Appellate Court are hereby SET-ASIDE. 

The  matter  is  remanded  to  the  Judge  Family  Court,  who  shall  consider  the 

request of petitioner for seeking dissolution of marriage on the basis of Khula 

or  otherwise  and  shall  decide  the  matter  accordingly  under  the  law  within 

one month. Whereas the judgment  and decree to the extent  of maintenance 

of  minor  as  well as  the  maternity  expenses  are  hereby  MAINTAINED,  as  a 

result writ petition to that extent is DISMISSED.    

19. 

Before parting with the judgment, petitioner may raise her claim qua 

dower  referred  in  the  Nikahnama  is  so  advised.  However,  the  maintenance 

decree  passed  by  the  Courts  below  to  the  extent  of  minor  has  not  been 

 
 
W.P. No.4055/2021 

Page | 7 

implemented in strict legal sense, therefore, respondent/Father is directed to 

comply with the terms of the said portion of maintenance decree accordingly 

by depositing the amount in the petitioner’s account.   

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 20.01.2022. 

RAMZAN  

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
