IUDGMENT SHEET

HIGH COURT, IS

AD,

IUDICIAL  DEP

W.P. N

Usama  Farooq

VS

Judge  Family Court  (West),Islamabad, etc

Petitioner by:

Mr. Mazhar Akram  Awan and Mirza Irfan
Ghazanlar,  Advocates.

Respondents  by:

Mr. Shahzad  Siddique  Alvi, Advocate.

Date  of Decision:

20.12.2019

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANL I:  Through this writ petition, the

petitioner has assailed the order  dated 06.10.2018,  passed by learned Judge

Family Court (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  interim maintenance  allowance of

minor daughter was fixed  @ Rs.8,500  /- Per month.

2. 

Learned  counsel for petitioner  contends  that learned trial Court has fixed

the maintenance  allowance  without considering  the minimum  standard to

maintain  balance as well as other  expenditures  of the petitioner who is also

looking after his other family members  including  the parents and by fixing the

interim maintenance at high rate would deprive the petitioner from his

legitimate right to defend  himsetf,  the same is also against the concept of fair

trial; that trial Court be directed to review the order of interim  maintenance

allowance while considering the income  as well as needs of the petitioner'

3.  Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.2 Naida Usama contends

that petitioner is working in a private  bank having handsome  salary and he can

easily  alford the maintenance allowance for single minor  daughter; that order

regarding interim maintenance  allowance  could not be assailed in  the

W.P.  No.3926/2018

Page  | 2

constitutional  jurisdiction as law has not provided remedy only to shorten the

litigation.

4.  Arguments  heard, record  perused.

5.  Perusal of record reveals  that the petitioner  and respondent  No.2  were

blessed  with minor daughter  Elaya Fatima and due to matrimonial  dispute,

respondent  No.2 filed suit for recovery  of maintenance allowance,  dower  and

gold ornaments  before the Family Court.

6. 

Learned  Judge Family  Court vide impugned  order  dated 06.10.2018,

passed  the following  order:-

5. 
As far as interim  maintenance is concerned,learned  counsel for the
plaintiff during arguments  stated thnt defendant  is seraing  in a priaate

bank, his monthly salary is more  than Rs.80,000/- and can easily  pay the

maintenance  allowance.  On the other hand, dcfendant  in para No.7 of

uritten statement  stated that thc defendant is working on operational  side

of bank and has no concern with  deposit. Defendant  also produced  the

copy  of salary  slip and as per salary slip his salary  is Rs.31,038/-  only.
6.  Admittedly, plaintiff  No.2 (minor) is ilaughter of defendant  and
admittedly  defendant is working  in a prbate bank,  ether on operational  or

deposit side.  Keeping  in oiew  the fncts, high rocketing prices  of items  and
fnancial  capacity of the defendant Rs.8,500/-  (Eight Thousand  and  Fiae
Hundred Only)  per month  is hereby fixed  as inteim  maintenance
allowance  of plaintiff  No2 (minor)  namely Alaya Fatima  which shall be

paid by the defendant  before  L4il' of each calendar  month with ffict from
this month. As far as maintenance of this month is concerned  defendant is
directed  to pay the maintenance on next date of heaing.

7. 

The above mentioned background reveals that maintenance  of minor was

fixed @ Rs.8,500  / - pe, month,  whereas petitioner's  take home salary  at that time

was  Rs.3L,038/  -, however, during the pendency  of instant writ petition petitioner

has submitted his pay slip issued by Soneri Bank Ltd. for the month  of

September,  2018, which confirms the stance taken  by petitioner,  however,  this

Court cannot  go beyond the legislative intent as interlocutory order, even though

W.P. No.3926/2018

Page | 3

in some of cases they are harsh, but the determination  of adequacy  or

inadequacy of the quantum of maintenance  would certainly  require factual

evidence  or inquiry  which  cannot  be made in the proceedings  under Article  199

of the Constitution  of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan,  7973  as held in 2078 CLC

Note 43 Ghameneh Haiiler.  etc. os. Haiiler Ali Khan\, 2077 MLD 7705 Lahore

(Amir Mehmood Hussain os. Niha Amir Syeil\. 2075 YLR 2364 (Tahir  Ayub Khan

as. Miss Alia Anutar\  PLD  2072 Lahore 420 (lbrar Hussain os. Mehoish  Rana,

etc.), and PLD  2073 Lahore 64 (Muhammail  Shahbaz  Khaliil os. Iudge  Family

Court, Lahorel while applying  the legal principles,  referred  above. It is the duty

of this Court to consider the legal aspect of the question  raised from the intention

of the legislature, who has specifically  prohibited filing of appeal  against  interim

order  and allowing  constitutional  petition would tantamount  to defeating  and

diverting intent of the legislature.  Even  othentrise,  there is no bar under the law

to challenge  the aoid ab initio  orders,  which  are without jurisdiction.  Learned

counsel  for respondents  has also explained  the principle of interlocutory  order

while relying upon judgment  reported as 7999 SCMR 7t147 (Mohtarma  Benazir

Bhutto os, The Statel. wherein  it has been held that orders  at interlocutory  stages

should not be brought to higher  courts  to obtain pragmatic  orders as it intends to

harm the advancement of fair trial, curtailing  remedies  available under the law,

and even  reducing  the right of appeal.

8. 

The epitome of entire discussion gives a complete  insight that father

should  not be punished by way of interim  maintenance  allowance  order  so that

he would not be able to pay the maintenance and resulted into consequences

provided  in Section  17-A of the Family Court Act, 1964, therefore, it is the

imperative duty of the Family Court to adopt a pragmatic  approach and fix the

interim maintenance  on the following principles:

a

W.P. No.3926/2018

Page | 4

i. 

ii. 

Financial status of father  shall be kept in view, which  should  be

based upon salary slips, bank statements, income tax record,

and business  income reflected  on record or tfuough  any other

documentary  proof  placed by either side in the Court.

Interim  maintenance  should  be fixed not on hard and fast

principles,  rather based upon a tentative view.

iii.  Maintenance  should not be fixed on a higher side,  which may
result into technical knockout of the father so that he could not
able to pay the interim maintenance,  therefore,  his option

should also be considered for payment  of interim maintenance,

iv. 

which he agrees to pay before the Family  Court.

In cases, where father  has not explained  his monthly income or
his financial  status in the pleadings, rather  concealed his
income,  the Family Court can rely upon the facts narrated in

plaint or on the basis of attached  documents ois-a-als the needs

of minor and the verbal stance given by father without reference

to his written statement  will not be considered justified,  hence
the Family  Court shall exercise discretion  to fix the interim

maintenance  while applying the above principles.
In cases,  where determination  of adequacy  or inadequacy of

v. 

quanfum of maintenance  requires facfual  inquiry and evidence

in trial, the maintenance  should  be fixed after consultation  with

the father  and mother  as well  as keeping in view the day-to-day

requirements  of minor.

vi.  The needs of minor should  be considered  on the basis of social
stratification  of family in which  minor  has been brought  up.
vii.  The financial  status of father could also be considered  on the
basis of facts narrated  in pleadings of the parties,  which
includes the living standard and previous  matrimonial life of

the parties in which the mother/wrfte has been provided with

particular kind of living, housing facilities,  transportation,  gifts,

immovable properties  of husband and the lifestyle in which
husband/father  was living  prior to separation or divorce or

before  the institution  of suit for maintenance.

viii.  In cases, where father  being civil servant  or employee  of any
orgarizatton, department  or company  has not appended  his

salary  slips or bank statements,  the Family Court shall ask for

W.P. No.3926/2018

Page | 5

an undertaking  or affidavit regarding his salary  and thereafter

shall fix the interim maintenance,  however  after  the trial of the
case, if the court comes  to the conclusion  that at the time of
fixation  of interim  maintenance allowance  the father/husband

has stated  a fact beyond his pleadings or undertaking, which  is

found  to be false, such father be burdened with heavy costs and

action of perjury may  also be initiated against him.

ix.

The Family  Court may also call the employer  of father, HR

department, admin department,  bank managers,  land revenue

department, tax record, and banking  details as well as salary
details of the father directly from the relevant offices while

deciding  the question  of interim maintenance for a prima  facie
view to fix the allowance  in favour of minor so that no
inadequacy  is  attributed while fixing the maintenance
allowance.

9. 

IA/hile  applying the above  referred principles, Family Court would be in

better position to resolve  the controversy  relating to maintenance,  however,  this

Court does not indulge in issues relating  to interim maintenance  while  exercising

the powers under Article  199  of. the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan,

1973 on the touchstone of reported judgment referred inpara-7  above, therefore,

instant writ petition  is hereby dismissed  with direction to the learned trial Court

seized with the matter  to conclude the same within a period of 02 months under

intimation  to this Court.

Zahid.

(MOHSTN

AR
IUDGE

