Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.4012/2018 

Liaqat Ali Mir 

VS

Dilshad Bibi & 2 others 

Petitioner by 

: 

Mr Zahid Ayub Rathore, Advocate. 

Respondent No.1 by 

: 

Mr Ali Hussain Bhatti, Advocate. 

Dates of Hearing 

: 

02.03.2023 

Arbab Muhammad Tahir, J.-  The petitioner, Liaqat Ali Mir, 

through  the  instant  petition  has  assailed  judgments  and  decrees, 

dated  20.05.2017  and  25.01.2018,  passed  by  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court  and  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West), 

Islamabad, respectively.  

2. 

Succinctly, the facts are that the respondent No.1, Dilshad 

Bibi,  got  married  to  the  petitioner  on  15.05.2011  against  dower 

amount of Rs.50,000/-, three tolas gold ornaments (Mua’jjal) and one 

house  consisting  of  two  rooms  with  kitchen  and  bath  or  its  price  i.e. 

Rs.500,000/-. The  pleadings reveal that  the relationship  between the 

spouses  remained  strained.  Respondent  No.1  has  asserted  in  the 

plaint  that  she  was  forcibly  ousted  by  the  petitioner  on  18.07.2012 

from  their  matrimonial  abode.  Respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  wherein 

she  had  prayed  for  a  decree  in  her  favour  for  recovery  of  (i) 

maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.10,000/- per month; monthly 

pocket  money  at  the  rate  of  Rs.5,000/-  for  the  month  of  November, 

2012;  medical  expenses  i.e.  Rs.150,000/-;  Rs.500,000/-  as  penalty 

for contracting second marriage;  residential  house  as  per  Nikahnama 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page-2 
RFA No.4012/2018 

or in alternate  its value i.e. Rs.500,000/-;  dowery articles mentioned 

in  the  list  (Exh.P-6)  and  a  decree  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights. 

Earlier  the  suit  was  decreed  ex-parte  vide  ex-parte  judgment  and 

decree,  dated  19.02.2013.  However,  later  on  application  of  the 

petitioner, the ex-parte judgment and decree were set aside. The suit 

was  thereafter  contested  by  the  petitioner.  The  learned  trial  court 

framed  eleven  (11)  issues.  Total  04  PWs  recorded  statement  in 

support  of  the  claim  of  the  plaintiff  /  Respondent  No.1,  out  of  which 

PW-2  was  later  given  up.  The  plaintiff  corroborated  her  version  by 

adducing  documentary  evidence  including  nikahnama  (Exh.P-5)  and 

list  of  dowery  articles  (Exh.P-6).  The  petitioner/defendant  produced 

03  DWs  and  adduced  documentary  evidence  including  attested 

receipts  of  payments  Exh.D-7,  Exh.D-8.  After  recording  of  evidence 

and  affording  an  opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  parties,  the  learned 

trial  court  passed  judgment  and  decree,  dated  20.05.2017.  The 

petitioner  preferred  an  appeal,  which  was  partially  allowed  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  vide  judgment  and  decree,  dated 

25.01.2018,  by  setting  aside  the  decree  to  the  extent  of  medical 

charges.  

3. 

The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that; the 

impugned  judgments  and  decree  are  not  tenable  in  law;  the  learned 

Family  Court  acted  without  jurisdiction;  the  decree  to  the  extent  of 

residential house was passed on the basis of forged document; one of 

the witnesses Munir Ahmed Abbasi (PW-2) was given up, which shows 

that his statement might have favoured the petitioner; the nikahnama 

shows  the  agreed  amount  of  maintenance  as  Rs.3,000/-  per  month 

and  any  deviation  therefrom  is  illegal;  the  findings/reasoning  of  the 

learned  trial  court  with  regard  to  the  residential  house  are  based  on 

presumptions  and  conjectures;  the  petitioner  had  divorced  the 

plaintiff/  respondent  No.1,  therefore,  the  suit  was  filed  through 

concealment  of  facts;  the  learned  trial  court  erred  by  decreeing  the 

 
 
Page-3 
RFA No.4012/2018 

dowery  articles  because  no  receipts  of  purchase  and  witnesses  in 

support thereof were produced.  

4. 

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent 

has  argued  that;  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  are  well 

reasoned  and  in  accordance  with  law;  the  petitioner  could  not  prove 

his  stance  regarding  divorce  through  documentary  evidence;  the 

residential  house  mentioned  in  Column  No.16  of  nikahnama  was 

unpaid  dower,  hence  it  was  rightly  decreed;  the  petitioner  took  the 

stance  that  he  had  contracted  the  second  marriage  with  prior 

permission  of  his  wife;  the  petitioner  could  not  prove  that  he  had 

maintained  respondent  No.1  after  separation;  admittedly 

the 

petitioner has contracted a second marriage.  

5. 

6. 

Heard. Record perused. 

The  plaintiff/respondent  No.1  had  filed  the  recovery  suit 

against  the  petitioner  seeking  recovery  of  dower,  dowery  articles, 

expenses, penalty,  etc. and restitution  of conjugal rights.  The parties 

led  their  respective  evidence,  wherein  the  date  of  divorce  has  been 

admitted by the plaintiff as 10.12.2014. The petitioner, however, took 

the  stance  that  he  had  divorced  plaintiff/respondent  No.1  on 

04.06.2012 but failed to prove this fact. The petitioner failed to prove 

that  he  had  maintained  his  wife  during 

the  period  of 

separation/desertion till expiry of the period of iddat after divorce. The 

decree to the extent of medical expenses has been rightly set aside by 

the learned appellate court on the ground that  no documentary proof 

of  the  quantum  of  expenses  was  adduced  in  evidence  by  the 

plaintiff/respondent  No.1.  The  plaintiff/respondent  No.1  had  prayed 

for  a  decree  of  Rs.500,000/-  as  penalty  for  contracting  second 

marriage on the basis of Iqrarnama Abadi (Exh.P-8). The learned trial 

court  while  addressing  issue  No.3  relating  to  recovery  of  penalty  for 

contracting second marriage by the petitioner, had concluded that the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page-4 
RFA No.4012/2018 

said claim of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 was outside the scope and 

jurisdiction of the learned Family Court in terms of the Schedule to the 

Family Courts Act, 1964.  

7. 

The petitioner during trial took the stance that the entry in 

Column  No.16  of  the  Nikahnama  with  regard  to  residential  house 

consisting of two rooms, kitchen and bath, was forged. He adduced in 

evidence  the  video  footage  of  nikah  ceremony  i.e.  Exh.D-10,  to 

establish that at the time of solemnizing nikah, the agreed dower was 

three  tolas  gold  ornaments  and  Rs.50,000/-  cash.  He  tried  to  lend 

support from the entry in Column No.15, which shows that the agreed 

dower  was  Mua’jjal  and  stood  paid  instantly.  However,  he  failed  to 

show  on  the  basis  of  record  that  the  entry  in  Column  No.16  was 

forged.  Perusal  of  the  Nikahnama  (Exh.P-5)  shows  that  nikah  was 

solemnized by Qari Muhammad Afzal (nikahkhwan) and registered by 

Syed  Waheed  Ahmed  Shah  (Nikah  Registrar).  The  petitioner  failed  to 

prove  that  the  official  record  maintained  by  Nikahkhwan  and  Nikah 

Registrar  is  different  from  the  one  produced  in  evidence  by  the 

plaintiff/respondent  No.2  before  the  learned  Family  Court.  The  claim 

of  the  plaintiff/respondent  No.2  relating  to  the  residential  house 

mentioned in Column No.16 of the nikahnama remained un-rebutted. 

The  petitioner  although  alleged  forgery,  but  failed  to  contradict  the 

version  of  the  plaintiff/respondent  No.2  on  the  basis  of  cogent 

evident.   

8. 

The  learned  courts  below  have  properly  appreciated  the 

evidence brought on record by the parties. The learned counsel for the 

petitioner,  despite  his  able  assistance,  could  not  point  out  any  legal 

infirmity, jurisdictional defect or incorrect appreciation of evidence  by 

the learned courts below.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page-5 
RFA No.4012/2018 

9. 

The  power  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 to interfere with 

concurrent findings of the learned courts below is, therefore, limited to 

the  inquiry  whether  the  learned  courts  below  have  acted  or 

undertaken  the  proceedings  in  accordance  with  law.  It  is,  therefore, 

settled  law  that  a  writ  of  certiorari  cannot  be  used  as  a  substitute  of 

appeal  or  revision  as  its  scope  is  limited.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the 

cases  titled  “Rahim  Shah  v.  The  Chief  Election  Commissioner  of 

Pakistan  and  another”  [PLD  1973  Supreme  Court  24]  and 

“Muhammad  Azim  Khan  Afridi  v.  The  President  of  Pakistan  through 

Principal Secretary and others” [2023 SCMR 68]. 

10. 

For what has been discussed above, the instant petition is 

without merit and is, therefore, accordingly dismissed. 

(ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on _________ 

Luqman Khan/* 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
