ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT  PETITION  N0.4000  OF  2019 

MST.  MALIHA  NAZIR. 
VS 
MUHAMMAD  BAKAR  FAROOQ  ANl)  ANOTHER. 

Petitioner: 

Ch.  Fayyaz  Ahmad  Padana,  Advocate. 

Respondent  No. I: 

Mr.  Amir  Naeem  Khan,  Advocate. 

Date  of Hearing: 

02.09.2020 

LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ.  J. 

Petitioner  has  invoked  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction  of this  court  by  way  of filing  instant  writ  petition  under  Article  199 

of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  seeking  setting  aside  of 

judgment  dated  14.10.2019,  passed  by  learned  Additional  District  Judge-West 

(MCAC),  Islamabad,  whereby  appeal  of Respondents  No.  1  filed  u/s  25  of the 

Guardian  and  Wards  Act,  1890  for  custody  of minor  daughter  was  allowed  and 

judgment 

and  decree  dated  11.02.2019,  passed  by 

the 

learned  Family 

Judge/Guardian  Judge-West,  Islamabad  was  set aside. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  marriage  between 

the  petitioner  and 

Respondent  No. I  was  solemnized  according 

to  Shariah-e-Muhammadi 

on 

03.11.2007,  from  of the  wedlock  a daughter  namely  Rohma  Farooq  was  born  on 

27.12.2008,  who  is  now  studying  in  Class-V  in  Allied  School  System,  G-10 

Campus,  Islamabad.  The  relation  between  the  spouses  became  sour  and  on 

07.04.2013, 

the  petitioner 

left  the  house  of  Respondent  No. I  along  with  her 

minor  daughter  and  statedly  shifted  to  Islamabad.  Father  of  Respondent  No. I 

lodged  an  FIR  No.  125/13  u/s  363,  365-B  and  380  PPC  in  P.S.  Sundar  Lahore 

on  08.04.2013.  The  petitioner  after  seeking  Khu/a  from  the  competent  court  of 

law  at  Chiniot,  contracted  second  marriage  and  started  living  with  her  second 

husband  namely  Shahzad  Aslam.  From  second  wedlock,  two  daughters  were 

----------------------- 

----- 

- --{ 

}-  ----  - -----------.------------------------wr·i'Ja460ci12019 

born  to  petitioner.  Respondent  No. I  filed  petition  u/s  25  of Guardian  and  Wards 

Act, 

I 890,  for  the  custody  of  minor  daughter  which  was  dismissed  on 

11.02.2019,  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  (West),  Islamabad  holding  that 

the  petitioner 

is  entitled  for  custody  of  minor  daughter  being  real  mother, 

whereas,  respondent  No. I  was  granted  visitation  rights  being  the  real  father. 

Respondent  No. I  assailed  the  said  judgment 

through  an  appeal  which  was 

allowed  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge 

(West), 

Islamabad  and 

judgment  and  decree  dated  11.02.2019,  was  set  aside,  vide  judgment  dated 

I 4. I 0.2019.  Hence,  instant  petition  has  been  preferred  by the  petitioner. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  inter-alia,  submitted  that  the  impugned 

judgment  has  been  passed  in  a  slipshod  manner  without  proper  appraisal  of 

evidence  which,  as  such,  suffers  from  misreading  and  non-reading  of  material 

facts  on  record;  that  the  sole  ground  on  which  the judgment  is mainly  based  for 

allowing  the  appeal  of Respondent  No.  1  is  the  allegation  of immoral  character 

of  the  petitioner,  which  actually 

is  the  misreading  and  non-reading  of  the 

evidence  and  statement  of the  witnesses;  that  key  factors  for  granting  custody  of 

minor  is  her  welfare  i.e.  age,  health,  brilliant  performance/results  of education, 

environment  provided  to  the  minor,  that  attachment  of the  minor  to  the  mother 

has  not  been  given  due  weightage  while  passing  the  impugned  judgment  and 

minor  who  is of  1  I  years  of age  has  been  detached  from  her  real  mother;  that  the 

minor  who  is  intelligent  enough  to  express  her  opinion  before  the  court  to  live 

with  her  mother  has  also  not  been  sought;  that  Respondent  No. I  has  also 

contracted  second  marriage  and  has  three  minor  children  which  fact  has  been 

ignored  while  passing  the  impugned  order;  that  Respondent  No. I  never  followed 

the  visitation  schedule  in  its true  perspective  while  the  minor  was  with  petitioner 

rather  the  proceedings  before  the  court  were  mostly  attended  by  the  grandfather 

of the  minor;  that  Respondent  No. I  has  also  failed  to  pay  interim  maintenance  to 

the  minor  as  per  orders  of the  learned  Trial  Court  and  after  coercive  measures 

adopted  by  the  Court  during  execution  proceedings  an  amount  of  Rs.  20,000/  

was  deposited,  whereas,  balance  amount  of  Rs.  I ,09,500/-  is  still  outstanding. 

---···---···- 

... 

. 

.  -  - 

-- 

-  { 

)-  .. 

-  --  ---·--·-···- 

-  ··-  --W-PN04ooo/2019 

Learned  counsel,  to  strengthen  his  arguments,  referred  the  case  re:  Munawar 

Bibi  VS  Muhammad  Amin  and  another  (1995  SCMR  1206)  and  prayed  for 

setting aside impugned judgment  dated  14.10.2019. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.1  supported  the 

impugned judgment  being  justified  as  well  as  lawful  by  stating  that  same  is 

result  of application  of proper judicial  mind,  based  on  proper  appreciation  of 

material available on record as well as relevant law and deserves to be protected; 

that  petitioner  has contracted  second marriage  with a person  who  is not  related 

to the minor daughter within the prohibited degree; that petitioner  left the house 

of  the  Respondent  No. 1  along  with  minor  and  fled  away  with  her  second 

husband and a criminal case in this regard has also been registered against them; 

that  petitioner  lived  with  person  not  related  to  her  during  subsistence  of  her 

marriage  with  the  Respondent  No. I;  that  father  of  the  petitioner  has  also 

deposed against her;  that petitioner has contracted second marriage thus, she has 

become  disentitled  for  custody  of  minor  girl  as  per  relevant  law.  Learned 

Counsel in support of his contentions placed reliance on the case law reported as 

Mst.  Zainab  VS  Urooj  Ahmed  and  2  others  (2019  CLC  Note  47),  Maham 

Shabbir  and  another  VS  Additional  District  Judge,  West,  Islamabad  and  2 

others  (2018  CLC  452  Islamabad),  Mst.  Fahmida  Bibi  VS  Abdul  Bari  and 

another  (2018 MLD  591), Muhammad Alam  V.  Nazish  Qazi and 2 others  (2018 

YLR  1771),  Shabana  Naz  VS  Muhammad  Saleem  (2014  SCMR  343),  Mst. 

Ammara  Waseem  VS  Syed  Khawar  Hussain  and  another  (2011  SCMR  148), 

Mst. Munira  Bibi  VS  Additional  District Judge,  Sheikhupura  and  others  (2007 

CLC  1612 Lahore),  Mst.  Ayisha  Bibi  VS  Safdar  Ali  Shah  and  another  (2005 

CLC  894  Lahore),  Muhammad  Naeem  Ahmad  VS  Asgeeri  (2002  YLR  2854 

Karachi)  and  Mst.  Shamshad  Parveen  (1994  CLC  525  Lahore)and  prayed  for 

dismissal of instant writ petition. 

5. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the 

impugned judgment  as well as available record. 

---  -----{ 

--- 

6. 

The  impugned  judgment  dated  14.10.2019,  as  well  as  judgment  dated 

11.02.2019,  have  been  carefully  examined  keeping  in view  the  peculiar  facts  and 

controversy  over  custody  of  the  minor  girl  who  is  in  her  tender  and  sensitive 

age.  The  learned  Appellate  Court  has  allowed  the  appeal  filed  by  Father  of the 

minor  mainly  for  the  reason  that  the  mother  of  the  minor  being  of  immoral 

character  cannot  retain  the  custody  of  minor  female.  This  view  of the  learned 

Appellate  Court  is  based  on  the  evidence  of A W-3  who  is the  real  father  of the 

petitioner  and  on  the  peculiar  facts  of the  case  i.e.  she  got  married  with  the  man 

who  has  been  alleged  in  the  FIR  No.  125/2013,  as  abductor  of  the  petitioner. 

The  evidence  of  the  A W-1,  2  &  3  as  well  as  the  petitioner  who  was  DW-1 

before  the  trial  Court,  have  also  been  examined  and  it has  been  noticed  that  AW  

I  &  A W-2  have  nowhere  in  their  statements  have  alleged  the  petitioner  as  a 

characterless 

lady  rather  it  has  been  stated  that  the  person  nominated  in  the  FIR 

has  abducted  the  petitioner.  However,  the  statement  of  father  of the  petitioner  I 

A W-3,  shows  uncertain  view  that  she  might  left the  house  of her  husband  on  her 

own  will  or  on  the  instigation  of  Shahzad  Aslam  whom  she  subsequently 

married.  He  denied  any  contact  with  petitioner  after  she  left  the  house  of 

Respondent  No. I.  Prima  facie,  the  statement  of  the  father  is  also  based  on 

circumstances  and  events  as  no  documentary  proof  was  produced  during  trial  to 

substantiate  that  the  petitioner  and  Shahzad  Aslam  were  living  together  before 

Nikkah.  Whereas,  the  statement  of the  petitioner  shows  that  she  has  contacted 

her  parents  who  forced  her  to  go  back  to  her  husband's  house.  As  per  her 

statement  she  married  Shahbaz  Aslam  in  May,  2014,  after  obtaining  Khula 

decree  on  14. l 0.2013,  and  whereafter  they  started  living  together.  Therefore,  the 

reasons  given  by  the  Appellate  Court  regarding  character  of  the  petitioner  are 

found  to  be  not  in  line  with  the  evidence  available  on  record  as  there  is  no 

documentary  evidence  available  on  record  to  substantiate 

that  the  petitioner 

resided  with  Shahzad  Aslam/her  second  husband  after  leaving  the  Respondent 

No.l's 

house 

and  before 

contracting 

second  marriage.  Moreover, 

the 

authenticity  of  the  contents  of  the  said  FIR  is  to  be  established  after  the 

conclusion  of the  trial  in  the  said  case  stated  to  be  pending  with  the  concerned 

-···------ 

. 

--· 

... 

- 

...  ---  .. --  ---- 

"" 

-  { 

)--  .. 

trial  court.  Thus,  from  perusal  of  the  record  it  cannot  be  ascertained  that  the 

petitioner  had  lived  with  Shahzad  Aslam  during  period  of  subsistence  of  her 

marriage  with  Respondent  No. I  or  before  her  Nikkah  with  said  person  and, 

therefore,  the  observations  of  the  learned  appellate  Court  to  that  extent  are  ill 

founded  and  are  expunged. 

7. 

So  far  as  the  custody  of  the  minor  female  is  concerned, 

the  governing 

principle 

in  this  regard 

is  at  para  353  of  the  Muhammadan  Law,  and  the 

principle  has  been  settled  by  the  superior  courts 

that  when  mother  after 

obtaining  divorce/khulla  from  the  husband  enters  into  a  second  marriage  with  a 

person  who  is not  related  to  the  female  child  within  the  prohibited  degree  and  a 

complete  stranger  to  her  then  in  that  case  the  mother  losses  the  right  of Hizanat 

and  cannot  retain  the  custody  of the  minor  female  child  as  in that  case  welfare  of 

the  minor  would  lie  with  her  real  father.  In  this  regard  reliance  is placed  on  the 

following  judgments: 

Shabana  Naz v.  Muhammad  Saleem  (2014 SCMR  343): 

Thus,  it is apparent  from  reading  of the  two  paras  of the  Muhammadan 
13. 
Law  that  though  the  mother  is  entitled  to  the  custody  (Hizanat)  of her  minor 
child  but  such  right  discontinues  when  she  takes  second  husband,  who  is  not 
related  to the  child  within  the  prohibited  degree  and  is a stranger  in which  case 
the  custody  of minor  child  belongs  to the  father ...  It has  been  construed  by  the 
Courts  in  Pakistan  that  this  may  not  be an  absolute  rule  but  it may  he  departed 
from,  if  there  are  exceptional  circumstances 
to  justify  such  departure  and  in 
making  of such  departure  the  only  fact,  which  the  Court  has  to  see  where  the 
welfare  of  minor  lies  and  there  may  be  a  situation  where  despite  second 
marriage  of the  mother.  the  welfare  of minor  may  still  lie  in her  custody. 

Maham  Shabbir  and  another  VS Additional  (2018 CLC  452): 

In  the  instant  case,  petitioner  No. I  has  contracted  second  marriage 
6. 
i.e.  Riyana  Suleman  is  almost  reaching  the  age  of 
and  the  minor  daughter 
puberty  hence,  under 
the  above 
the  circumstances 
pronouncements  of  the  august  apex  Court,  she  loses  her  right  of  Hizanat. 
Even  otherwise,  respondent  No. I,  while  allowing  appeal  of respondent  No.3, 
has  discussed  the  evidence  led  by  the  parties  in detail  and  has  rightly  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of the  case,  the  welfare  of 
children  is that  they  should  live  with  their  father  i.e.  respondent  No.3. 

in  view  of 

and 

Muhammad  Alam  V.  Nazish  Qazi  and  2  others  (2018 YLR  1771): 

the  available 

We  have  heard,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  have  gone 
9. 
through 
record.  On  perusal  of  the  record,  we  are  of  the 
considered  opinion  that  the  provisions  of Muhammadan  Law  is  personal  law, 
which  apply  for  the  purposes  of determining 
the  custody  of the  minor,  while 
the  course  of  law  have  always  consider  the  welfare  of  the  minor  to  be  the 
paramount  consideration  for  deciding  as  to  whether  the  hizanat  of the  minor  to 

--  ---------------{ 

6 

be  entrusted  to  the  father  or  to  remain  with  the  mother.  Father  is  the  natural 
guardian  and  there  is  no  need  of  appointment  of  father  as  guardian  of  the 
lordships  of  the  Hon'ble 
minor.  The  issue  is  of  custody  of  minor.  Their 
Supreme  Court  in  various  judgments  have  considered  this  aspect  of the  matter 
and  while  determining 
the  facts  to  be  considered  under  Section  17  of  the 
Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  had  laid  down  the  criteria,  which  is  reported  in  the 
case  of Mst.  Akbar  Bibi  v.  Shoukat  Ali  (1981  CLC  78  Lahore).  Furthermore, 
according  to  various  judgments  pronounced  by  the  Courts  of  law,  it  has  been 
the  question  of  custody  of  a  female  ward,  the 
held  that  while  determining 
if  the  lady  contracts 
question  of  chastity 
second  marriage  with  stranger,  she  loses  her  right  of  hizanat.  Reference 
is 
made  to  the judgment  reported  in case  of Mst.  Nazir  v.  Hafiz  Ghulam  Mustafa 
and  others  (1981  SCMR  2000) ........  ". 

to  be  jealously  guarded, 

in  case, 

8. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  judgment  passed  by  the  learned 

appellate  Court 

is  partially  modified  as  observations 

recorded 

regarding 

character  of  the  petitioner  are  hereby  expunged  as  being  contrary  to  facts  and 

evidence  produced  by the  parties.  However,  its decision  regarding  custody  of the 

minor  daughter  to  Respondent  No. I  is upheld. 

9. 

Instant  petition  stands  dismissed  in the  above  terms. 

(LUBNA  SAL'EEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in open  Court  on this  2-).. -n4  day  of September,  2020. 

AtlnaN'* 

JODGE 

