ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

R.F.A. No.70 of 2020 

Rana Masood Iqbal  

VS

Muhammad Ayub Iqbal Rana  

Date of Hearing 

Appellant by 

: 

: 

10.03.2022 

Mr. Asif Irfan and Shahid Munir,  

Respondent by 

:  

In person. 

Advocates.  

_________________________________________________________________ 

ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR, J. Through the instant Regular First 

Appeal, the appellant/defendant, Rana Masood Iqbal, has called in 

question  the  ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated  07.01.2020  

passed by the learned Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad, whereby the 

suit for recovery of Rs.2,59,00,000/- along with prevailing interest 

instituted by the respondent/plaintiff was decreed as prayed for. 

Factual Background:- 

2.    

Tersely the facts leading to the filing of the present appeal 

are  that  the  contesting  parties  agreed  to  enter  into  an  oral 

agreement  to  the  effect  the  appellant/defendant  proposed  that  if 

the 

respondent/plaintiff  agrees 

to 

invest  an  amount  of 

Rs.60,00,000/- 

in 

the  business  of 

transport, 

then 

the 

appellant/defendant  would  pay  an  amount  of  Rs.4,00,000/-  per 

month  as  an  operational  profit  to  the  respondent/plaintiff.  While 

posing 

confidence 

onto 

the 

appellant/defendant, 

the 

respondent/plaintiff  paid  an  amount  of  Rs.58,00,000/-  in  the 

presence  of  witnesses.  Subsequently,  in  furtherance  of  the  said 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

oral  agreement,  the  appellant/defendant  started  paying  the 

operational profits which sums up  to Rs.7,00,000/- in a period of 

ten  months  whereas  the  actual  amount  due  during  the  said 

period,  as  agreed  between  the  parties,  was  Rs.40,00,000/-.  After 

sometime, the respondent/plaintiff came to know that the owner of 

the  transport/busses  was  someone  else  and  upon  gaining  such 

information,  the  relationship  between  the  parties,  being  relatives, 

turned sour. The appellant/defendant stopped the payment of the 

profit  to  the  respondent/plaintiff  and  upon  demand,  he  (the 

appellant/defendant)  made  lame  excuses  on  one  pretext  or  the 

other  which  caused  the  respondent/plaintiff  to  institute  the 

aforementioned  suit.  The  learned  trial  Court  after  hearing  the 

respondent/plaintiff and going through the record decreed the suit 

against  the  appellant/defendant  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

07.01.2020. Hence this appeal.  

SUBMISSIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  THE 

APPELLANT/DEFENDANT:- 

3.   

Mr.  Asif 

Irfan,  Advocate, 

learned  counsel 

for  the  

appellant/defendant  submitted  that  the  suit  instituted  by  the 

respondent/plaintiff  was 

frivolous  and  vexatious; 

that 

the 

appellant/defendant  never  received  any  amount 

from 

the 

respondent;  that  the  suit  instituted  by  the  respondent/plaintiff 

was in fact a counterblast of the dispute between the parties inter-

se;  that  the  respondent/plaintiff  had  kept  on  filing  different 

applications  against  the  appellant/defendant  due  to  a  family 

grudge;  that  the  appellant/defendant  never  did  any  business 

regarding  transport;  that  the  respondent/plaintiff  is  an  habitual 

litigant  inasmuch  as  in  the  2013,  he  filed  a  suit  for  recovery 

against  his  own  father;  that  indeed  the  appellant/defendant 

personally  appeared  as  DW-1  before  the  learned  trial  Court  and 

got  recorded  his  statement;  that  the  examination  in  chief  of  the 

 
 
 
 
3                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

appellant/defendant  was  conducted  on  23.07.2019,  but  the 

respondent,  for  the  reasons  best  known  to  him,  did  not  cross-

examine  the  appellant/defendant  despite  his  being  present  in  the 

Court 

on 

30.09.2019; 

that 

subsequent 

thereto, 

the 

appellant/defendant  fell  ill  due  to  cardiovascular  and  backbone 

diseases;  that  despite  the  appellant/defendant’s  indisposition,  he 

kept on appearing before the learned trial Court. 

4.   

It  was  further  contended  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant/defendant  that  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  is  

based on mis-appreciation of the evidence available on the record; 

that the learned trial Court did not consider the evidence produced 

by the appellant/defendant before it; that the respondent/plaintiff 

did  not  comply  with  the  directions  of  the  learned  trial  Court  by 

filing  the  list  of  witnesses  within  a  period  of  seven  days;  that 

during  the  cross-examination,  the  respondent/plaintiff  (PW-1) 

admitted 

the  witnesses  produced  by  him 

to  be  his 

“employees/servants”, but the learned trial Court did not take this 

important  aspect  of  the  matter  into  account;  that  the  bank 

statements  produced  by  the  respondent/plaintiff  did  not  disclose 

any 

transaction/transfer 

of 

the 

amount 

to 

the 

appellant/defendant; 

that 

the 

appellant/defendant  was 

deliberately  not  cross-examined  by  the  respondent;  that  the 

learned  trial  Court  in  a  hasty  and  cursory  manner  decreed  the 

respondent’s suit  without affording the  appellant/defendant a full 

opportunity  to  substantiate  his  stance.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant/defendant prayed for the instant appeal to be allowed in 

terms of the relief prayed therein.  

SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT: 

5.   

On  the  other  hand,  the  respondent/plaintiff  appeared  in 

person  and  supported  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated 

07.01.2020. 

 
 
 
4                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

6.   

Heard the learned counsel for the appellant/defendant as 

well  as  the  respondent/plaintiff  in  person  and  perused  the 

available record. 

CASE HISTORY: 

7.   

Perusal of the record shows that the respondent/plaintiff 

is the brother-in-law of the appellant/defendant. The latter entered 

into an oral agreement with the former in order to run a business 

of  transport.  Out  of  the  said  business,  the  profit  mutually  agreed 

between the parties was Rs.4,00,000/- per month which was to be 

paid  by  the  appellant/defendant  to  the  respondent/plaintiff.  As 

per  the  averments  of  the  suit,  the  respondent/plaintiff  allegedly 

paid  an  amount  of  Rs.58,00,000/-  to  the  appellant/defendant  for 

the purposes of the said business. Subsequently, as per the suit’s 

pleadings,  the  appellant/defendant  kept  paying  monthly  profit  to 

the respondent/plaintiff and as such a total profit of Rs.7,00,000/-

was  paid  by  the  appellant/defendant  within  a  period  of  ten 

months. 

8.   

The  respondent/defendant  was  summoned  by  learned 

trial Court, who contested the suit by filing his written statement. 

Contentious points of the parties were reduced into issues and the 

parties  were  allowed  to  lead  their  evidence.  Out  of  the  divergent 

pleadings  of  the  parties,  the  learned  trial  Court  framed  the 

following issues on 27.10.2018:- 

1.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get decree for recovery 
of amount of Rs.2,59,00,000/- along  with prevailing rate 
of interest as prayed for? OPP 

2.  Whether the plaintiff has neither any cause of action nor 
any  locus  standi  to  file  the  present  suit.  Hence  same  is 
liable to be rejected? OPD 

3.  Whether  the  plaintiff  is  estopped  by  his  words  and 

conduct to file the present suit.OPD 

4.  Whether the suit of the plaintiff if (sic) time barred? OPD 
5.  Relief.”  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

9.   

On  23.07.2019,  the  appellant/defendant  appeared  as 

DW-1 and on the same day, his statement was recorded as DW-1. 

Thereafter,  on  19.07.2019,  the  appellant/defendant  absented 

himself  from  the  learned  trial  Court  and  accordingly  the  matter 

was  posted  for  24.09.2019  for  documentary  evidence  of  the 

appellant/defendant  and  his  cross-examination.  On  24.09.2019, 

again  the  appellant/defendant  did  not  appear  before  the  learned 

trial  Court  and  the  case  was  adjourned  to  30.09.2019  with  a  last 

opportunity  to  the  appellant/defendant.  On  30.09.2019,  the 

appellant/defendant  did  appear  before  the  learned  trial  Court 

along with his counsel and according to the said order, the learned 

counsel 

for 

the  appellant/defendant  closed  his  oral  and 

documentary  evidence.  The  matter  was  then  adjourned  to 

26.10.2019  with  last  opportunity  to  the  respondent/plaintiff  to 

cross-examine  the  appellant/defendant.  On  26.10.2019,  the  case 

got  adjourned  to  11.11.2019  due  to  a  general  strike.  On 

11.11.2019, clerks on behalf of the learned counsel for the parties 

appeared  and  the  matter  was  adjourned  to  20.11.2019  for  cross-

examination  on  the  appellant/defendant.  The  said  order  shows 

that  an  absolute 

last  opportunity  was  given 

to 

the 

respondent/plaintiff 

for 

cross-examination 

on 

the 

appellant/defendant.  On  20.11.2019,  again  cross-examination  on 

the appellant/defendant could not take place due to the absence of 

the  appellant/defendant  as  well  as  the  plaintiff/respondent’s 

counsel  and  the  matter  was  adjourned  to  03.12.2019.  On 

03.12.2019,  the  respondent/plaintiff  appeared  in  person  whereas 

none  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant/defendant.  The  said 

order also makes mention the issuance of notice under Order XVII 

Rule 3 C.P.C. to the appellant/defendant on 11.07.2019. However, 

in  the  interest  of  justice,  final  opportunity  was  given  to  the 

 
 
  
 
6                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

DW/appellant/defendant  along  with  a  notice  under  Order  XVII, 

Rule 3 C.P.C.  

10.  

According  to  the  order  sheet  of  the  learned  Court  below, 

several  opportunities  were  given  to  the  appellant/defendant  so 

that  he  could  be  cross-examined  by  the  respondent/plaintiff,  but 

he 

did  not 

turn  up.  Finally, 

on 

16.12.2019, 

the 

appellant/defendant’s  right  of  defence  was  struck  off  by  the 

learned  Court  below  by  invoking  the  penal  provisions  of  Order 

XVII, Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  Order XVII, Rule 

3 C.P.C. reads thus:- 

“ORDER  XVII  ADJOURNMENTS  1.-(1)  The  Court  may,  if 
sufficient cause is shown at any stage of the suit grant time to 
the  parties  or  to  any  of  them,  and  may  from  time  to  time 
adjourn the hearing of the suit. (2) In every such case the Court 
shall  fix  a  day  for  the  further  hearing  of  the  suit,  and  may 
make  such  order  as  it  thinks  fit  with  respect  to  the  costs 
occasioned  by  the  adjournment:  Provided  that,  when  the 
hearing  of  evidence  has  once  begun,  the  hearing  of  the  suit 
shall  be  continued  from  day  to  day  until  all  the  witnesses  in 
attendance  have  been  examined,  unless  the  Court  finds  the 
adjournment  of  the  hearing  beyond  the  following  day  to  be 
necessary for reasons to be recorded.  
2.  Where,  on  any  day  to  which  the  hearing  of  the  suit  is 
adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court 
may proceed to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed 
in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks 
fit.  
3.  Where  any  party  to  a  suit  to  whom  time  has  been 
granted  fails  to  produce  his  evidence,  or  to  cause  the 
attendance of his witnesses, or to perform any other act 
necessary  to  the  further  progress  of  the  suit,  for  which 
time  has  been  allowed,  the  Court  may,  notwithstanding 
each default, proceed to decide the suit forthwith.  
[4. Where a suit or proceeding is set down for a day which is a 
holiday,  the  parties  thereto  shall  appear  in  the  Court  on  the 
day next following  that day, or,  when  two  or  more successive 
days  are  holidays,  on  the  day  next  following  the  last  of  such 
successive  days,  and  the  Court  may  then  either  proceed  with 
the suit on such day, or fix some other day thereafter.] 
 [5. When on day the presiding officer of the Court is absent by 
reason  of  illness  or  any  other  cause,  the  parties  to  the  suit  or 
proceeding  set  down 
the 
knowledge  that  the  presiding  officer  would  be  absent)  shall 

that  day(notwithstanding 

for 

 
 
 
 
7                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

appear  in  the  Court  in  the  |Courthouse  on  that  day  and  the 
ministerial  officer  of  the  Court  authorized  in  that  behalf  shall 
hand over to the parties slips of paper specifying the other date 
fixed for proceeding with the suit or proceeding and signed by 
him].” 

ALLEGED ORAL AGREEMENT:- 

11.  There  is  nothing  on  the  record  which  would  show  that  an 

agreement  between 

the  parties  was  ever  executed.  The 

respondent/plaintiff  appeared  as  PW-1  and  in  his  examination  in 

chief  had  deposed  that  on  02.01.2011,  the  appellant/defendant 

took an amount of Rs.58,00,00/- from him in the presence of the 

witnesses.  In  the  cross-examination,  the  said  PW/respondent/ 

plaintiff had categorically admitted that he paid the said amount to 

the  appellant/defendant,  but  there  is  nothing  in  writing.  The 

relevant excerpt of his deposition is as under-.  

  "

۔ےہ ہن تھڑپ تھکل یئوک تباب سا ۔ےھت ۓیدےھٹکا ےسیپ ےن

نی م": 

12.  Now,  the  astonishing  factor  of  the  matter  is  that  the 

respondent, who claims himself to be a Ph.D. Scholar  and having 

done  an  MBA  degree,  while  allegedly  paying  such  a  huge  amount 

of  Rs.58,00,000/-  to  the  appellant/defendant  did  not  bother  to 

reduce  the  alleged  oral  agreement  into  writing.  Had  he  agreed  to 

the terms of the alleged transaction and executed an agreement in 

writing  with  the  appellant/defendant,  he  could  have  been  in  a 

good possible position to have substantiated his version regarding 

the  payment  of  the  said  amount  to  the  appellant/defendant.  The 

bank  statements  produced  by  the  respondent/plaintiff  before  the 

learned Court below show the withdrawal of the amounts from the 

respondent’s  bank  account.  These  bank  statements  by  no  stretch 

of  imagination  can  be  termed  as  an  agreement  or  payment  to  the 

appellant/defendant. These bank statements show the withdrawal 

of  certain  amounts  from  the  appellant/defendant’s  bank  account, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

but  to  whom  these  amounts/payments  were  made,  is  a  question 

mark? Furthermore, in this  day and  age, the non-execution  of an 

agreement  for  a  transaction  and  that  too  for  a  huge  amount, 

bespeaks the negligence on the part of the respondent. If at all, it 

is  presumed  that  the  respondent/plaintiff  paid  an  amount  of 

Rs.58,00,000/-  to  the  appellant/defendant,  he  could  have 

produced any sort of evidence establishing such a transaction. The 

mere 

filing  of  the  bank  statements  did  not  absolve  the 

respondent/plaintiff  from  discharging  his  part  of  obligation  by 

producing  confidence 

inspiring  evidence. 

It 

is  well  settled 

proposition  of  law  that  the  Courts  are  not  bound  to  take  into 

account  oral  agreements.  Although  an  unwritten  agreement  is 

recognized  by  the  law,  but  the  same  is  required  to  be  proved  by 

unimpeachable and credible evidence. In the event, a party asserts 

his/her  rights  on  the  basis  of  an  oral  agreement,  then  he/she 

would  be  under  a  bounden  duty  to  produce  unimpeachable, 

cogent, reliable and confidence inspiring evidence to prove his/her 

claim.  No  doubt,  the  respondent/plaintiff  heavily  relied  upon  the 

alleged  oral  agreement  and  under  the  maxim  of  Secundum 

allegata  et  probata  (he  who  alleges  a  fact  must  prove  it),  it  was 

the  respondent/plaintiff,  who  was  required  to  satisfy  the  Court 

about  the  existence  of  the  alleged  oral  agreement  relied  upon  by 

him.   

13.  It is an equally settled principle of law that it is the duty and 

obligation  of  the  beneficiary  of  a  transaction  or  a  document  to 

prove  the  same.  The  respondent/plaintiff  was  obliged,  being  the 

beneficiary of the transaction, to prove the alleged payment of the 

amount  to  the  appellant/defendant.  Such  is  not  only  settled  law, 

but  has  been  consistently  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan and followed by all the Courts in the country. The august 

Supreme  Court  in  paragraph-8  of  the  judgment  in  case  titled 

 
 
 
9                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

Amjad  Ikram  v.  Mst  Asia  Kousar  and  2  others  (2015  SCMR  1) 

has held as follows: 

“It  is  an  equally  settled  principle  of  law  that  it  is  the 
duty and obligation of the beneficiary of a transaction or 
a document to prove the same. Reference in this behalf may 
be  made  from  the  judgments  of  this  Court,  reported  as  Akhtar 
Ali  v.  The  University  of  the  Punjab  (1979  SCMR  549),  Haji 
Muhammad  Khan  and  others  v.  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan 
and  2  others  (1992  SCMR  2439)  and  Khan  Muhammad  v. 
Muhammad Din through L.Rs. (2010 SCMR 1351).” 
Emphasis laid: 

14.  Moreover,  in  the  plaint,  the  date,  time  and  place  of  the 

alleged oral agreement are not mentioned. All that is mentioned in 

the plaint is “the year of 2011” and no specific time, place and date 

is mentioned in the plaint as to at  what time, at which place and 

on which date, the alleged transaction took place.  However, in the 

examination  in  chief,  PW-1/respondent/plaintiff  had  mentioned 

that  on  02.01.2011,  the  appellant/defendant  received  an  amount 

of  Rs.58,00,000/-.  It  is  my  view  that  the  failure  to  mention  the 

date, time and place  of the alleged oral agreement in the plaint is 

not 

just  creating 

further  doubt 

in 

the  version  of 

the 

respondent/plaintiff,  but  mentioning  the  date  and  time  in  the 

plaint  was  also  necessary  to  obtain  the  relief  on  the  basis  of 

alleged  oral  agreement.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  cases  titled 

Muhammad  Waryam  VS  Rehmat  Ali  (2007  MLD  17),  Sultan 

Khan v. Saddar-ud-Din (2018 CLC Note 37) and Bashir Ahmad 

and  21  others  v.  Shah  Muhammad  and  another  (2010  CLC 

734). 

15. 

As discussed above, it is by now a well settled principle of 

law  that  it  is  the  duty  and  obligation  of  the  beneficiary  of  a 

transaction  or  a  document  to  prove  the  same.  Reference  in  this 

regard  may  be  made  to  the  law  laid  down  in  the  cases  of  Akhtar 

Ali  v.  The  University  of  the  Punjab  (1979  SCMR  549),  Haji 

 
 
 
 
 
10                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

Muhammad  Khan  and  others  v.  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan 

and  2  others  (1992  SCMR  2439)  and  Khan  Muhammad  v. 

Muhammad  Din  through  L.Rs.  (2010  SCMR  1351).  Law  to  the 

said effect has also been laid down in the cases of Muhammad 

Nawaz  through  L.Rs.  v.  Haji  Muhammad  Baran  Khan  through 

L.Rs.  and  others  (2013  SCMR  1300),  Tariq  Javaid  and  11 

others  v.  Muhammad  Sattar  (2011  MLD  832),  Karamdad  v. 

Manzoor  Ahmad  and  2  others  (2015  CLC  157)  and  Noor 

Muhammad  and  others  v.  Mst.  Rabia  Bibi  and  others  (2019 

MLD 1286). 

DEFECTS IN THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT AND DECREE:- 

16.  

As  per  the  record,  the  alleged  transaction  took  place  in 

the  year  2011  whereas  the  suit  was  instituted  on  23.06.2015, 

meaning thereby it was a time barred suit. The learned trial Court 

framed an issue with respect to the limitation and placed its onus 

upon  the  appellant/defendant.  According  to  Section  3  of  the 

Limitation  Act,  1908,  the  Court  of  plenary/competent  jurisdiction 

is  under  a  legal  obligation  to  apply  its  mind  as  to  the  question  of 

limitation and it is not mandatory for the defence to take a specific 

plea  as  regards  the  limitation.  The  Court  on  its  own  has  to  look 

into the question of the limitation and if it finds the suit to be time 

barred, keeping in view the facts and circumstance of the case, it 

could  decide  the  issue  of  limitation  even  if  it  is  not  raised  by  the 

defence.  Section  3  has  been  couched  in  mandatory  form  which 

empowers the court before whom the  lis is brought to dismiss the 

same if it is found having not been brought before the Court within 

the  time  prescribed  by  the  first  schedule  of  limitation  Act,  1908. 

Section 3 provides that every suit instituted, appeal preferred and 

application  made  after  the  period  of  limitation  prescribed  therefor 

shall  be  dismissed  although  limitation  has  not  been  setup  as  a 

defence. It appears to proceed  on the assumption that it is in the 

 
 
 
 
11                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

public  interest  that  actions  must  be  brought  within  the  statutory 

time limit; and the words “although limitation has not been setup 

as  a  defence”  provides  a  clear  indication  of  the  legislative  intent 

that  it  is  not  left  to  the  parties  to  take  or  not  take  the  objection, 

that the suit, appeal or application is outside the limit fixed by the 

law.  It  would  be  advantageous  to  reproduce  Section  3  ibid  which 

reads thus:- 

3.  Dismissal  of  suit,  etc.  instituted,  etc.  after  period  of 
limitation.---Subject to the provisions contained in sections 4 
to 25 (inclusive), every suit instituted, appeal preferred, and 
application  made  after  the  period  of  limitation  prescribed 
therefor  by  the  First  Schedule  shall  be  dismissed  although 
limitation has not been set up as a defence. 

17.  

Furthermore,  the  learned  trial  Court  struck  off  the 

appellant /defendant’s defence by invoking the provisions of Order 

XVII,  Rule  3  C.P.C.  and  decreed  the  suit  in  favour  of  the 

respondent/plaintiff  without  taking  into  account  the  written 

statement filed by the  appellant/defendant.  It  is my view that  the 

Court  is  duty  bound  to  take  into  consideration  all  the  pro  and 

contra  evidence  and  then  proceed  to  decide  the  matter  on  its 

merits rather than technicalities.  In the present case, the learned 

trial Court in a whimsical manner proceeded to decide the suit on 

technicalities  in  the  respondent/plaintiff’s  favour  without  taking 

into 

account 

the  written 

statement 

filed 

by 

the 

appellant/defendant.  

ISSUES TO BE DISCUSSED SEPARATELY:-  

18.  

The  learned  trial  Court  while  relying  upon  the  evidence 

produced by the respondent/plaintiff decided issue No.1 in favour 

of  the  respondent/plaintiff  and  decreed  the  suit  against  the 

appellant/  defendant.  The  learned  Court  below  while  deciding 

issues  No.2  to  4,  based  its  findings  on  the  decision  of  issue  No.1 

and  declared  issues  No.2  to  4  to  have  become  infructuous  on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
12                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

account  of  the  striking  of  the  appellant/defendant’s  right.  The 

learned  Court  below  was  duty  bound  to  give  its  findings  on  every 

issue regardless of the fact that the defence right had been struck 

off. If at all, it is presumed that the appellant/defendant absented 

himself  from  the  Court  and  his  right  to  produce  evidence  stood 

struck  off  under  Order  XVII,  Rule  3  C.P.C.  even  then  the  learned 

Court  below  was  under  a  legal  obligation  to  give  its  findings  on 

each issue separately.  

IMPUGNED  DECREE  NOT 

IN  CONFORMITY  WITH  THE 

IMPUGNED JUDGMENT:- 

19.  

 As  discussed  above,  the 

learned  trial  Court  vide 

impugned judgment dated 07.01.2020 decreed the suit with costs 

and  a  decree  sheet  was  ordered  to  be  drawn  up.  The  impugned 

judgment  does  not  set  out  the  decreetal  amount.  All  that  the 

impugned judgment sets out is that the suit is decreed with costs. 

It  does  not  specify  the  amount  as  to  what  extent  it  has  been 

decreed  and  as  to  whether  the  suit  was  decreed  as  prayed  for 

along with the prevailing interest rate. The decree sheet  so drawn 

up also does not make mention of the decreetal amount. If at all, it 

is held that the evidence produced by the respondent/plaintiff was 

confidence  inspiring  and  the  alleged  oral  agreement  stood  proved 

even  the  decree  does  not  withstand  the  test  of  an  executable 

decree.  Hence,  the  same  is  liable  to  be  set  aside  on  this  score 

alone.  

20.  

Section  33  of  the  C.P.C.  provides  that  the  decree  'shall' 

follow  the  judgment  and  rule  6  of  Order  XX,  C.P.C.  provides  that 

decree 'shall' agree with the judgment. Where a provision uses the 

word  'shall'  and  requires  an  authority  to  do  something  in  a 

particular  manner,  it  is  deemed  to  be  mandatory  as  laid  down  by 

the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of “The Collector of Sales 

 
 
 
 
 
13                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

Tax  Gujranwala  and  others  v.  Messrs  Super  Asia  Mohammad 

Din  and  Sons  and  others  (2017  SCMR  1427),  wherein  it  has 

been  laid  down  that  word  'shall'  was  to  be  construed  in  its 

ordinary grammatical meaning and normally the use of word 'shall' 

by  the  legislature  branded  a  provision  as  mandatory,  especially 

when  an  authority  was  required  to  do  something  in  a  particular 

manner.  

21.  

Perusal  of  the  referred  case  laws  and  provisions  of  the 

law  cited  hereinabove  make  it  abundantly  clear  that  it  is  a 

mandatory  provision  of  law  that  the decree  should  agree  with  the 

judgment and has to express what is determined in the judgment. 

Therefore, by not drawing the decree sheet in accordance with the 

judgment,  the  Court  had  not  properly  exercised  the  jurisdiction 

vested  in  it  as  this  omission  to  prepare  decree  sheet  that  agreed 

with the judgment was against the principle of law, which provides 

that where a law requires an act to be done in a particular manner 

it had to be done in that manner alone and such dictate of the law 

could  not  be  termed  a  mere  technicality  and  if  done  otherwise  it 

would be non-compliance of the legislative intent. Reliance  in this 

regard  is  placed  upon  the  law  laid  down  in  the  cases  of  Shahida 

Bibi and others VS Habib Bank Limited and others (PLD 2016 

SC  995),  Muhammad  Anwar  and  others  VS  Mst.  Ilyas  Begum 

and  others  (PLD  2013  SC  255)  and  Zia  ur  Rehman  VS  Syed 

Ahmad  Hussain  (2014  SCMR  1015).  Apart  from  this,  it  is  the 

duty  of  the  Court  to  apply  correct  law.  Reference  in  this 

regard may be made to the judgment reported as Government 

of  NW.F.P.  and  others  v.  Akbar  Shah  and  others  (2010  SCMR 

1408) wherein it has been held as under: 

"It  is settled principle of law  that  it  is  the duty  and 
obligation  of  the  Court  to  apply  correct  law  on  the  well-
known  maxim  that  judge  must  wear  all  the  laws  of  the 
country  on  the  sleeve  of  his  robe  and  failure  of  the 

 
 
 
 
 
14                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

counsel to properly advice is not a complete excuse in  the 
matter  as  law  laid  down  by  this  Court  in  Muhammad 
Sarwar's case PLD 1969 SC 278 ." 

22.  

Additionally, it is the decree and not the judgment that is 

to be executed. Reliance in this regard may be placed on the case 

of  Rehmat  Wazir  and  others  v.  Sher  Afzal  and  others  (2005 

SCMR  668),  wherein  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  has  held  as 

follows: 

"It  is  a  matter  of  settled  law  by  this  Court  in  Ghulam 
Muhammad's case PLD 1963 SC 265 that not the judgment 
but the decree is executable and executed" 

23.  

It  is  also  pertinent  to  mention  that  the  connection  of  a 

decree  drawn  in  a  suit  with  the  judgment  passed  therein  is  such 

that  the  judgment  is  the  substratum  on  which  the  decree  has  its 

foundation  and  it  cannot  stand  independent  of  the  same  and 

decree  falls  down  when  its  substratum  (i.e.  the  judgment)  ceases 

to exist or  hold the field, exception being the decree being  upheld 

on different grounds. Reliance is placed on the case titled Pakistan 

Industrial  Credit  and  Investment  Corporation  Ltd.  v.  Mahboob 

Industries  Ltd.  and  10  others  (PLD  1984  Kar.  82),  wherein  the 

Sindh High Court while referring to Section 33 and Rule 7 of Order 

XX  of  C.P.C.  has  held  that  where  the  judgment  became  null  and 

void the decree that must follow the judgment shall also become 

void. 

24.  

It is settled by now that the act of court shall prejudice no 

one  and  where  any  court  did  not  comply  with  a  mandatory 

provision  of  law  or  omitted  to  pass  an  order  in  the  manner 

prescribed  by  law,  then  the  litigant/parties  could  not  be  taxed, 

much less penalized for the act or commission of the court. Fault 

in such cases did lie with the court and not with the litigants and 

no  litigant  should  suffer  on  such  account  unless  he/they  were 

contumaciously  negligent  and  had  deliberately  not  complied  with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

mandatory provision of law. Reliance in this regard is placed upon 

the  case  of  Muhammad  Ijaz  and  another  v.  Muhammad  Shafi 

through  L.Rs.  (2016  SCMR  834)  wherein  it  has  been  laid  down 

as under: 

"17  ...  ...There  is  a  well-known  maxim  "Actus  Curiae 
Neminem  Gravabit"  (an  act  of  the  court  shall  prejudice  no 
man)  thus,  where  any  court  is  found  to  have  not 
complied  with  the  mandatory  provision  of  law  or 
omitted  to  pass  an  order,  required  by  law  in  the 
prescribed manner then, the litigants/ parties cannot 
be taxed, much less penalized for the act or omission 
of  the  court.  The  fault  in  such  cases  does  lie  with  the 
court and not the litigants and no litigant should suffer on 
that  account  unless  he/they  are  contumaciously  negligent 
and  have  deliberately  not  complied  with  a  mandatory 
provision of law. (see PLD 1972 SC 69) ......." 

25.  

In such like situation where injustice is caused due to the 

act or omission on the part of the Court, the Courts are required to 

remedy  the  defect  that  occurred  as  a  consequence  thereof. 

Reliance  is  placed  on  Sherin  and  4  others  v.  Fazal  Muhammad 

and  4  others  (1995  SCMR  584)  wherein  it  has  been  held  as 

under: 

"13.  We  may  refer  here  with  advantage  to  the  classic 
remarks of Lord Eldon  in Pulteney v. Warren (1801) 6 Ves. 
73, 92, quoted by Meclean C.J., in Lakhan Chunder Sen v. 
Madhu Sen (ILR 35 Calcutta 209):- 
"If there be a principle, upon which Courts of justice ought  to 
act  without  scruple,  it  is  this;  to  relieve  parties  against  that 
injustice  occasioned  by  its  own  acts  or  oversights  at  the 
instance of the party, against whom the relief is sought. That 
proportion  is  broadly  laid  down  in  some  of  the  cases:"  This 
view  was  approved  of  by  the  House  of  Lords  in  The  East 
India Company v. Campion (1837) 11 Bli. (ICS.) 158."  

26.  

In  the  same  way,  there  are  the  observations  of  Lord 

Cairns,  L.C.  in  Rodger  v.  The  Comptoir  d'Escompte  de  Paris 

(1871)  3  P.C.  465,  which  were  quoted  with  an  approval  by  Lord 

Carson in Jai Berham v. Kedar Nath (AIR 1922 PC 269), which 

read as under:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

"One of the first and highest duties of all Courts is to take 
care that the act of the Court does not cause injury to any 
of  the  suitors  and  when  the  expression  'the  act  of  the 
Court',  is  used,  it  does  not  mean  merely  the  act  of  the 
Primary  Court,  or  of  any  intermediate  Court  of  Appeal, 
but the act of the Court as a whole from the lowest Court 
which  entertains  jurisdiction  over  the  matter  up  to  the 
highest Court which finally disposes of the case” 
Emphasis laid:  

27.  

The  above-referred  judgments  lead  me  to  the  conclusion 

that  not  only  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Court  to  apply  correct  law  but 

also  to  apply  the  law  correctly.  Therefore,  failure  to  adherence  to 

the  law  in  its  true  perspective  renders  the  decree,  as  it  stood, 

merely one for a declaration and was not executable as such.   

28.  

In view of what has been discussed above, the impugned 

judgment  and  decree  dated  07.01.2020  passed  by  the  learned 

Court below having been based on misinterpretation of the law on 

the  subject  and  the  result  of  misreading  and  non-reading  of  the 

evidence available on the record, suffers from material irregularity 

and illegality calling for interference by this Court. Resultantly, the 

instant  appeal  stands  allowed  and  consequently,  the  impugned 

judgment and decree dated 07.01.2020 is set aside. There shall be 

no  order  as  to  costs.  Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  it  is  to 

observe  that  if  this  matter  is  remanded  back  to  the  learned  trial 

Court  for  decision  afresh,  it  would  serve  no  useful  purpose  since 

the  alleged  oral  agreement,  which  has  been  discussed  in  detail 

supra,  could  not  be  proved  by  the  respondent  /  plaintiff.    Appeal 

succeeds.  

(ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR) 

 JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 06.06.2020 

      JUDGE 

ISLAMABAD │ 06.06.2022 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  

**//Kamran//** 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17                                                        R.F.A. No. 70 of 2020 

 
 
 
 
