ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 812 OF 2022 

MUHAMMAD IRFAN. 
VS    
FARHAT NAWAZ, ETC. 

Petitioner by       : 

Ch. Abdul Khaliq Thind, Advocate. 

Respondent by  : 

Mr. Aziz Ahmed Wajahat, Advocate. 

Date of hearing     : 

21.07.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:- 

Through 

the 

instant  writ  petition, 

the 

Petitioner  has  assailed  the    Judgment  and  Decree  dated  31.05.2021  (“Impugned 

Judgment  and  Decree”)  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  East-

Islamabad (“Family Court”) as well as the Order dated 20.11.2021 (“Impugned 

Order”)  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge-I  (East),  Islamabad 

(“Appellate  Court”),  whereby  suit  for  Dissolution  of  Marriage  on  the  basis  of 

Khulla  and  Recovery  of  Maintenance,  Dowery  Articles,  etc.  filed  by  the 

Respondents  No.  1  to  3  has  been  allowed  and  the  Petitioner’s  appeal  along  with 

application for condonation of delay have been dismissed respectively.  

2. 

The brief facts, as per the Memo of Petition, are that the Respondent No. I 

filed a suit for Recovery of Maintenance and Dowry Articles against the Petitioner. 

The  Petitioner  contested  the  suit.  Out  of  the  divergent  pleadings  of  the  parties 

issues  were  framed  and  after  recording  of  documentary  as  well  as  oral  evidence, 

the  learned  Trial  Court  passed  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  allegedly 

without  providing  opportunity  for  arguments  to  the  Petitioner  /defendant. 

Thereafter  the  said  Judgment/  decree  was  assailed  before  the  learned  Appellate 

Court, which appeal was dismissed by the learned Appellate Court vide Impugned 

Order in limine. Hence, present petition. 

3. 

The  learned counsel for the Petitioner argued that maintenance for the two 

minors was fixed as Rs. 9,000/- each aggregating to Rs. 18,000/- per month vide 

order dated 22.11.2019; that the Petitioner’s evidence was struck off on 07.04.2021 

which was contrary to the record as he had been making payment regularly; that in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 812/2022 

any event the Impugned Judgment and Decree passed by the learned Trial Court is 

in excess of jurisdiction as it pertains to matters which are beyond the purview of 

the learned Family Court; and that the maintenance has been fixed at Rs. 15,000/- 

per month for each minor Respondent as a result of non-reading and misreading of 

evidence, which is beyond the means of the Petitioner. With regard to the appeal 

dismissed in limine by the learned Appellate Court he submitted that such order is 

wrongful because the Petitioner was unable to file an appeal within the limitation 

period  as  he  was  suffering  from  depression  due  to  which  he  was  also  dismissed 

from service.  

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  Respondents,  at  the  very  outset,  conceded  to  the 

submission  made  on  behalf  of  the  Petitioner  to  the  extent  of  Issue  No.  (1)  and 

acknowledged  that  such  issue  was  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the  learned  Family 

Court.  With  regard  to  Issue  No.  (2)  he  submitted  that  the  Petitioner  is  serving  

as  Sub-Inspector  and  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  has  been  passed  with 

due  regard  to  the  Petitioner’s  salary  as  well  as  the  needs  of  the  minor  children, 

which  therefore  does  not  require  interference.  He  further  submitted  that  the 

Petitioner  was  given  seventeen  (17)  opportunities  to  make  payment  of  past 

maintenance but he failed to comply, therefore, he was neither condemned unheard 

nor is the order striking off his defense unlawful or illegal in any respect.  

5. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  have  also  perused  the 

available  record  including  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  and  Impugned 

Order with their able assistance.  

6. 

First and foremost, it has to be borne in mind that this Court in exercise of 

Constitutional  jurisdiction  does  not  act  like  a  Court  of  appeal.  It  neither 

reappraises  evidence  nor  does  it  substitute  the  concurrent  findings  of  fact 

recorded  by  the  Family  Court  with  its  own  findings  solely  on  the  ground  that 

another view was possible on the same evidence. A party approaching the High 

Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  has  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  a 

gross misreading or non-reading of evidence or jurisdictional error or such legal 

infirmity that has caused miscarriage of justice.  

7. 

No  illegality  or  lack  of  jurisdiction  or  misreading/non-reading  of  evidence 

has  been  pointed  out  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  in  the  Impugned 

Judgment and Decree in respect of Issue No. 2 regarding maintenance of the minor 

P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 812/2022 

Respondents  which  would  warrant  interference  of  this  Court  in  exercise  of  its 

Constitutional jurisdiction. Even otherwise the Petitioner  had an adequate remedy 

available in the form of appeal under Section 14 of West Pakistan Family Courts 

Act,  1964  which  he  failed  to  avail  within  the  limitation  period.  The  grounds 

mentioned  to  justify  the  delay  are  factual  in  nature  which  cannot  be  adjudicated 

upon in the exercise of constitutional jurisdiction by this Court and even otherwise 

the  findings  of  the  learned  Appellate  Court  are  unexceptionable  and  as  such  the 

learned  Appellate  Court  rightly  dismissed  the  Petitioner’s  appeal  as  well  as 

condonation application vide the Impugned Order. 

8. 

Even  otherwise,  Constitutional  jurisdiction  is  discretionary  and  equitable. 

The scope of such jurisdiction was discussed ably in the following judgments: 

Muhammad Arif VSUzma Afzal and others, 2011 SCMR 374: 

jurisdiction 

“5.  There  is  no  cavil  to  the  proposition  that  the  "conduct  of 
petitioner can be taken into consideration in allowing or disallowing 
equitable relief in constitutional jurisdiction. The principle that the 
Court  should  lean  in  favour  of  adjudication  of  causes  on  merits, 
appears to be available for invocation only when the person relying 
on  it  himself  comes  to  the  Court  with  clean  hands  and  equitable 
considerations also lie in his favour. High Court in exercise of writ 
jurisdiction  is  bound  to  proceed  on  maxim  "he  who  seeks  equity 
must  do  equity".  Constitutional 
is  an  equitable 
jurisdiction. Whoever comes to High Court to seek relief has to satisfy 
the conscience of the Court that he has clean hands. Writ jurisdiction 
cannot be exercised in aid of injustice. The High Court will not grant 
relief  under  this  Article  when  the  petitioner  does  not  come  to  the 
Court with clean hands. He may claim relief only when he himself is 
not violating provisions of law, especially of the law under which he is 
claiming  entitlement".  Manzoor  Hussain  v.  Zulfiqar  Ali  1983  SCMR 
137, Khan Gul v. District Judge (PLD 1990 Lah. 263), Syed Shah v. 
Political Agent Bajaur Agency (PLD 1981 Pesh. 57), Muhammad Asif 
v.  Province  of  Sindh  1990  MLD  2192,  Wali  Muhammad  v.  Sakhi 
Muhammad  PLD  1974  SC  106,  Saleh  Shah  v.  Custodian of  Evacuee 
Property  1971  SCMR  543,  Ahmad  Khan  v.  Custodian  of  Evacuee 
Property  PLD  1963  Kar.  450,  A.K.M.  Fazlul  Quader  Chowdhury  v. 
Govt. of Pakistan PLD 1957 Dacca 342, Momin Motor Co. v. R.T.A. 
Dacca PLD 1962 Dacca 310, Fazal Elahi v. Shaikh Muhammad PLD 
1962(2) W.P.1, Abdul Wahid Khan v. Custodian of Evacuee Property 
PLD 1966 Quetta 25, P.G. Braganza v. Border Area Allot. Committee 
1984 CLC 1479). It is well-settled by now that "who is guilty of bad 
faith  and  unconscionable  conduct.  The  right  is  in  the  nature  of  ex 
debito  justitiae,  but  will  only  be  granted  if  the  petitioner  can  show 
that  his  conduct  has  not  been  such  as  to  disentitle  him  of  such  a 
relief. This jurisdiction of the High Court should not be exercised if it 
leads  ultimately  to  a  patent  injustice.  The  Court  refused  to  issue  a 

 
P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 812/2022 

writ  where  the  conduct  of  the  petitioner  from  the  outset  had  been 
rather  dubious  and  shady.  "(Syed  Shah  v.  Political  Agent  Bajaur 
Agency  PLD  1981  Pesh.  57,  Saifullah  Khan  v.  Settlement 
Commissioner  1982  SCMR  853,  Sardar  Muhammad  v.  Deputy 
Administrator Residual Property 1981 SCMR 738, Ali Muhammad v. 
Secretary  Housing  and  Physical  Planning  Deptt.  1984  CLC  2203, 
Abdul  Wahid  Khan  v.  Custodian  of  Evacuee  Property  PLD  1966 
Quetta 25)." [Emphasis added]. 

9. 

Following  such  principles,  I  am  not  compelled  to  exercise  discretion  in 

favour  of  the  Petitioner  given  his  negligent  and  inequitable  conduct  toward  the 

minor Respondents who are his legal and moral responsibility.  The record shows 

irregular  payments  made  by  him  toward  their  monthly  maintenance  and  then 

eventually  he  stopped  making  payment  altogether  which  is  when  his  right  of 

defence  was  struck  off.    The  Petitioner  paid  the  arrears  only  when  this  Court 

directed him to do so before proceeding with the instant writ.  

10. 

Issue  No.(1)  pertained  to  an  alleged  loan  of  Rs.  250,000/-  given  by  the 

Respondent No. 1  to the  Petitioner for which recovery was sought by the former 

and  has  been  decreed  by  the  learned  Family  Court  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment 

and Decree. As noted above, the learned counsel for the Respondents has conceded 

and  acknowledged  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  had  no  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate 

upon such issue. Indeed, the issue does not come within the scope of Section 5 read 

with Schedule 1 of the Family Courts Act, 1964 and as such, it is correct that the 

said issue was beyond the jurisdiction of the learned Family Court.   

11.  Consequently, the instant Writ Petition is partly allowed and the findings of 

the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  East-Islamabad  regarding  Issue  No.  (1)  i.e. 

“whether  the  Plaintiff  is  entitled  to  recovery  of  Rs.  250,000/-  from  defendant  as 

prayed for?” recorded vide Impugned Judgment and Decree dated 31.05.2021 are 

hereby  set  aside.  As  far  as  Issue  No.  (2)  is  concerned,  in  view  of  the  discussion 

hereinabove,  the  titled  petition  stands  dismissed.  Decree  sheet  be  modified 

accordingly. 

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

 
   
 
