ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl. Misc. No.948-B-2021 

Mst. Attiya Bibi 

VS

The State and another.   

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 
(04) 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 
27.09.2021  Mr.  Muhammad 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary.  

Furqan 

Shabbir 

and  

Mr. Muhammad Asif, Advocates for the petitioner.  
Rao Sabir Hussain, Advocate for respondent No.2. 
Mr. Zohaib Hassan Gondal, State Counsel.  
Usman  Tipu,  S.P  (Rural),  Abdul  Ikram,  DSP, 
Khurram Shehzad, S.H.O, P.S Koral, Islamabad. 
Basharat, ASI, S.I, Forensic Team Incharge. 
Ameer Ali, ASI, P.S Koral, Islamabad.  

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI  J.  Through  the 

instant  petition,  the  petitioner  is  seeking  post  arrest 

bail in case FIR No.780/21, dated 05.09.2021, under 

Sections 392/411/34 PPC P.S Koral, Islamabad.   

2. 

Brief facts referred in the instant FIR lodged on 

the  complaint  of  Imtiaz  Hussain  Qazi/respondent 

No.2  are  that  on  19.08.2021  at  about  09:00  a.m,  he 

was  present  alongwith  his  wife  in  his  house,  when 

mate Attiya reached in the said house, who has been 

informed  that  there  is  no  usual  work  today,  but  she 

again  appeared  at  about  half  an  hour,  when 

complainant’s  wife  opened  the  door  and  Attiya 

present  petitioner  entered  into  the  house  for  daily 

routine  work  in  the  kitchen,  whereafter  two  young 

boys  entered  into  the  said  house,  wearing  white 

clothes,  one  tall  person,  brown  complexion,  aged 

about  22/25  years  armed  with  pistol,  whereas  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Crl. Misc. No.948/B/2021 

second  one  having  middle  height  armed  with  pistol 

tied  the  complainant  and  his  wife  and  immediately 

took  the  keys of  the  Almirah  from  the dressing table 

and  snatched  gold  jewelry  comprising  of  four  gold 

bangles,  two  gold  sets  of  three  tolas,  one  locket  of 

one  tola,  two  mobile  phones,  OPPO-A53  and  fled 

away from the scene, whereas present petitioner is in 

league with the said accused persons.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends 

that petitioner is a woman, who has been involved in 

this  case  without  any  justification,  even  challan  has 

been  submitted  in  the  Court  and  she  is  no  more 

required  for  the  purpose  of  investigation.  He  further 

contends that no specific role has been attributed to 

the petitioner in the entire crime scene.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent 

No.2/complainant  and 

learned  State  Counsel 

contend  that  both  the  accused  persons  referred  in 

the  alleged  incident,  one  of  them  is  the  husband  of 

the  present  petitioner,  who  is  main  mastermind  of 

the  entire  arm  robbery  and  even  recovery  of  

Rs.50,000/-  and  gold  ear  rings  further  connects  the 

petitioner with the hideous crime. 

5. 

Arguments heard and record perused. 

6. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  has 

been  nominated  in  the  above  mentioned  case  with 

the  specific  allegation  that  she  has  facilitated  two 

arm  robbers,  who  entered  into  the  house  of  the 

complainant  on  the  fateful  date  and  tied  the  hands 

of  the  complainant  and  his  wife  and  snatched  gold 

 
3 

Crl. Misc. No.948/B/2021 

jewelry  and  two  mobile  phones  after  unlocking  the 

Almirah  lying  in  the  bed  room,  which  is  only 

accessible  after  the 

information  of  the  present 

petitioner.  The  investigation  further  reveals  that  two 

accused  persons  referred  in  the  said  case,  who  were 

armed,  entered  into  the  house,  one  of  them  is 

husband  of  the  present  petitioner,  even  amount  of  

Rs.50,000/-  and  one  pair  of  ear-rings  gold  has  been 

recovered on the pointation of present petitioner.  

7. 

Superintendent  of  Police  (S.P),  Rural,  DSP 

alongwith  S.H.O,  P.S  Koral  have  categorically  stated 

before  this  Court  that  fingerprints  have  also  been 

obtained  from  the  crime  scene  and  incident  was 

reported on the fateful day, however, application was 

received  later  on  and  there  is  no  apparent  delay  in 

lodging of this case. The challan has been submitted 

in  the  Court on  13.09.2021 and as  such  prime  facie 

involvement  of  petitioner  in  the  hideous  crime  is 

visible  on  record.  The  offence  with  which  petitioner 

has  been  charged  falls  within  the  prohibitory  clause 

of Section 497 Cr.P.C. and she could not be excluded 

from the criminal liabilities on the ground that she is 

a woman as instant case is of hideous nature, where 

a family has been deprived of from their hard earned 

property  including  gold  and  mobile  phones  and  two 

accused persons are still at large.  

8. 

In  such  like  situation,  the  bail  could  not  be 

granted,  however,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  issue 

direction  to  the  learned  Trial  Court  to  conclude  the 

trial  within  specific  period.  Reliance  is  placed  upon 

 
4 

Crl. Misc. No.948/B/2021 

2011  SCMR  1332  (Rehmatullah  VS  The  State 

and another).    

9. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant 

criminal  miscellaneous  petition  stands  DISMISSED. 

However,  learned  Trial  Court  seized  with  the  matter 

is  directed  to  conclude  the  trial  within  Six  (06) 

months under intimation to this Court. 

    (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)                   

         JUDGE  

RAMZAN 

 
 
 
 
       
   
 
                   
