Form No: HCJD/C-121 
JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

C.O. No.04/2018 

M/s Relief International 
VS
Securities & Exchange Commission of Pakistan, etc. 

Petitioner By 

:  Mr.  Nabeel  Rehman  and  Barrister  Aqeel 

Malik, Advocates. 

Respondents By 

:  Ms.  Komal  Malik  Joiya,  Advocate  for 

respondents No.2 to 6. 
Mr. Ibrar Saeed, Advocate for SECP. 
Ch. Muhammad Tahir Mehmood, AAG. 

Date of Hearing 

: 

29.10.2021. 

AAMER FAROOQ, J. –  M/s  Relief  International  (“the  petitioner”), 

through  the  instant  petition,  seeks  winding  up  of  M/s  Relief  Pakistan  (“the 

Company”).  In  this  behalf,  respondents  No.3  to  6  are  the  Directors  of  the 

company.  

2. 

The  background  leading  to  filing  of  the  instant  petition  is  that  the 

company  is  registered  as  non-profit  entity  under  section  42  of  the  erstwhile 

Companies  Ordinance,  1984,  now  replaced  by  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  with 

respondents  No.  3  to  6  as  its  Directors.  The  petitioner  with  its  principal  head 

office  in  the  United  States  of  America  (USA)  is  an  International  Non-profit 

Organization and carries out social welfare works overseas; with the said purpose, 

it 

incorporated 

the  company  with 

respondents  No.3 

to  6  as 

its 

nominees/directors.  The  Company  was  registered  with  Securities  and  Exchange 

Commission of Pakistan (“SECP”) and license was granted to it by the Regulator 

within  the  mandate  of  section  42  of  the  then  Companies  Ordinance,  1984  on 

28.03.2008.  The  license  granted  to  the  company  was  revoked  on  29.01.2016, 

which order was challenged in review by the company where after the matter was 

sent  to  the  Ministry  of  Interior  for  security  clearance,  but  since  nothing  was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
C.O. No.04/2018    

          2 

conveyed,  it  was  never  renewed.  On  11.04.2018,  a  request  was  made  for 

revocation  of  the  license  which  was  allowed  and  confirmed  on  18.04.2018. 

Basically  the  licence  earlier  granted  was  never  renewed.  The  petitioner  signed 

Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  with  Ministry  of  Interior,  Federal 

Government  for  indulging  in  social  welfare  works  in  Pakistan,  however,  it  was 

advised by the Federal Government that the needful shall be done for dissolution 

of  the  Company.  Accordingly  the  petitioner  advised  respondents  No.2  to  6  to 

start/commence  procedure  for  winding  up  of  the  company  but  despite  lapse  of 

considerable  period,  nothing  was  done,  hence  the  instant  petition  under  section 

305 of the Companies Act,2017 has been filed.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  inter  alia,  contended  that  the 

company  was  incorporated  with  the  sole  object  to  represent  and  carry  out  as  a 

subsidiary  or  local  chapter  of  the  petitioner  and  since  the  memorandum  has 

directly been signed between the Federation of Pakistan and the petitioner, hence 

there is no need for existence of the company; that on 16.05.2017, SECP advised 

the petitioner to proceed further with the dissolution of the Company and, in this 

behalf, meeting of the Board of Directors (BoD) was convened and the petitioner 

resolved  to  dissolve  the  company  in  accordance  with  law  which  decision  was 

intimated  to  SECP  but  despite  the  same,  respondents  No.3  to  6  have  done 

nothing  to  conclude  the  matter.  Learned  counsel  further  argued  that  licence 

issued by the SECP dated 28.03.2008 stands revoked and in any case there is no 

requirement  for  the  company  to  continue  as  petitioner  has  entered  into 

Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the  Federal  Government.  It  was  submitted 

that  respondents  No.3  to  6  are  not  acting  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 

law,  hence  winding  up  order  of  the  company  be  passed  and  all  its  assets  be 

transferred to the parent company/petitioner.  

4. 

At the very outset, learned counsel for respondents No.2 to 6 objected to 

the maintainability of the petition. It was contended that the company is not an 

ordinary  company  but  has  been  incorporated  under  section  42  of  the  erstwhile 

 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          3 

Companies  Ordinance,  1984,  now  replaced  by  section  42  of  the  Companies  Act, 

2017  and  the  process  for  dissolution/winding  up  as  such  is  provided  under 

sections  42  and  43  of  the  Act  of  2017,  hence  the  instant  petition  is  not 

maintainable. It was argued that since special procedure exists for winding up of 

the  Company,  the  general  provision  cannot  be  invoked  under  the  facts  and 

circumstances.  The  learned  counsel  attracted  attention  of  the  Court  towards 

Associations with Charitable and Not for Profit Objects Regulations, 2018 as well 

as section 43 of the Act of 2017.  She also placed reliance on cases reported as 

Province of Punjab through Secretary Excise and Taxation Department, Lahore 

and others VSMurree Brewery Company Limited and another (2021 SCMR 

305), The Collector of Sales Tax, Gujranwala and others VSMessrs Super Asia 

Mohammad Din and Sons and others (2017 SCMR 1427), Ghulam Hassan VS

Jamshaid Ali and others (2001 SCMR 1001).  It  was  argued  in  alternative  that 

even if winding up petition can be filed under the provision of 304 (b) of the 2017 

Act, it can only be done by the SECP. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  SECP  conceded  the  arguments  addressed  by  the 

learned counsel for respondents No.2 to 6  on maintainability of  the petition and 

submitted  that  under  the  law,  the  entire  exercise  for  dissolution  is  to  be 

undertaken by the Company with SECP. 

6. 

In rebuttal, learned counsel for the petitioner opposed the contention of 

learned counsel for respondents No.2 to 6 and argued that it is the prerogative of 

the company to initiate proceedings for winding up as a parent company. It was 

also contended that the grounds mentioned in section 305 of the Act of 2017 are 

duly  attracted  and  where  such  is  the  case,  a  petition  under  section  304  is 

maintainable.  He  placed  reliance  on  cases  reported  as In the matter of: Messrs 

Investec Mutual Fund Ltd. (2011 CLD 4), In the matter of: Messrs Progressive 

Insurance Company Ltd. (2009 CLD 1602), Integrated Technologies & Systems 

Ltd VSInterconnect Pakistan (Pvt) Limited through Acting Chief Executive and 

others (2001 CLC 2019), In re: Synthetic Chemicals Co. Ltd. Karachi  (PLD 1985 

 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          4 

Karachi 193),  Pakistan State Oil Company Limited VSPakistan Oil Pipelines 

Limited and 6 others (PLD 1993 Karachi 322), Messrs Consolidated Exports Ltd 

VSMessrs Dyer Textile and Printing Mills Ltd. (PLD 1984 Karachi 541), The 

Additional Registrar Company VSAl-Qaim Textile Mills Limited (2021 CLD 

931), Dr. Muhammad Imran Qureshi and 2 others VSMuhammad Asif and 

others (2020 CLD 1960), Messrs  Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan 

VSOfficial Liquidator, Islamic Investment Bank Limited and 10 others (2016 

CLD 1164),  Creek Marina (Pvt) Ltd. VSPakistan Defence Officers’ Housing 

Authority (2012 CLD 1525), Additional Registrar of Companies, Karachi VSTri 

Star Power Ltd. (2010 CLD 1115),  Additional Registrar of Companies VS

Messrs Noorie Textile Mills Ltd. (2010 CLD 143),  Shaukat Ali VSMessrs 

Bawany Sugar Mills Ltd. (2009 CLD 947),  Najeeb Fibres (Pvt) Ltd. VSTanya 

Knitwear (Pvt ) Ltd (2009 CLD 643), PICIC Commercial Bank Ltd VSSpectrum 

Fisheries Ltd (2006 CLD 440),  Arshad Tanveer, Chairman, Site Association of 

Industry VSSindh Industrial Trading Estates Ltd (1997 CLC 456), Freewheels 

(P) Ltd. VSVeda Mittra (AIR 1969 Delhi 258),  Salomon v A Salomon and 

Company Ltd (HL 16 Nov 1896),  Commissioner of Income Tax VS United 

Breweries (1973 89 ITR 17 Kar.), M/s Rajesh and Co. vs M/s Ravissant Pvt. Ltd 

(2012) 171 CompCas 30 (Delhi), M/s Convergys Corporation vs Mr. Sreenivasu 

Ruttala and 4, dated 05.08.2016 (High Court Andhra Paredesh). 

7. 

Arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  have  been 

heard and the documents placed on record examined with their able assistance. 

8. 

Since 

respondents  No.2 

to  6  have 

raised  objection 

regarding 

maintainability  of  the  petition,  hence  the  referred  objection  is  taken  up  first  for 

adjudication. Arguments of respondents No.2 to 6 hinge upon sections 42 and 43 

of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  hence  it  is  appropriate  that  the  referred  provisions 

be reproduced for the sake of brevity. The said sections are as follows:- 

“42.  Licencing  of  associations  with  charitable  and  not  for  profit 

objects.—(1)  Where  it  is  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Commission 

that an association is to be formed as a limited company— 

 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          5 

(a) 

for  promoting  commerce,  art,  science,  religion,  health, 

education, research,   sports,  protection  of  environment, 

social welfare, charity or any other useful   object; 

(b) 

such company— 

(i) 

intends  to  apply  the  company’s  profits  and  other 

income in promoting its objects; and 

(ii) 

prohibits 

the  payment  of  dividends 

to 

the 

company’s members; and 

(c) 

such  company’s  objects  and  activities  are  not  and  shall 

not,  at  any  time,  be  against  the  laws,  public  order, 

security, sovereignty and national interests of Pakistan,  

the Commission may, by licence for a period  to be specified,  permit the 

association to be registered as a public limited company, without addition 

of  the  word  “Limited”  or  the  expression  ”(Guarantee)  Limited”,  to  its 

name. 

(2)  

A  licence  under  sub-section  (1)  may  be  granted  on  such 

conditions  and  subject  to  such  regulations  as  the  Commission  thinks  fit 

and  those  conditions  shall  be  inserted  in  and  deemed  part  of  the 

memorandum and articles, or in one of those documents. 

(3)   Memorandum  and  articles  of  association  of  a  company,  licenced 

under this section, shall be in accordance with the form set out in Table F 

in  the  First  Schedule  or  as  near  thereto  as  circumstances  admit  and 

approved by the Commission. 

(4)  

The  association  on  registration  under  this  section  shall  enjoy  all 

the privileges and be subject to all the obligations of a limited company. 

(5)  

The  Commission  may  at  any  time  by  order  in  writing,  revoke  a 

licence  granted  under  sub-section  (1),  with  such  directions  as  it  may 

deem fit, on being satisfied that— 

(a) 

the company or its management has failed to comply with 

any of the terms or conditions subject to which a licence is 

granted; or 

(b)  

any of the requirements specified in sub-section (1) or any

regulations  made  under  this  section  are  not  met  or

complied with; or 

(c)  

affairs  of  the  company  are  conducted  in  a  manner 

prejudicial to public interest; or 

(d) 

the  company  has  made  a  default  in  filing  with  the 

registrar  its  financial  statements  or  annual  returns  for 

immediately preceding two consecutive financial years; or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          6 

(e)  

the  company  has  acted  against  the  interest,  sovereignty 

and  integrity  of  Pakistan,  the  security  of  the  State  and 

friendly relations with foreign States; or 

(f)  

the number of members is reduced, below three; or 

(g)  

the company is— 

(i)  

conceived  or  brought  forth  for,  or  is  or  has  been 

carrying on, unlawful or fraudulent activities; or 

(ii) 

run  and  managed  by  persons  who  fail  to  maintain 

proper  and  true  accounts  or  they  commit  fraud, 

misfeasance  or  malfeasance  in  relation  to  the 

company; or 

(iii) 

run  and  managed  by  persons  who  are  involved  in 

terrorist financing or money laundering; or 

(iv)  managed  by  persons  who  refuse  to  act  according 

to the requirements of the memorandum or articles 

or  the  provisions  of  this  Act  or  failed  to  carry  out 

the  directions  or  decisions  of  the  Commission  or 

the  registrar  given  in  exercise  of  the  powers 

conferred by this Act; or 

(v)  

not  carrying  on  its  business  or  is  not  in  operation 

for one year; or 

(h) 

 it is just and equitable that the licence should be revoked: 

Provided  that  before  a  licence  is  so  revoked,  the 

Commission  shall  give  to  the  company  a  notice,  in  writing  of  its 

intention to do so, and shall afford the company an opportunity to 

be heard. 

(6) 

Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  Act  or  any  other  law, 

no  association  shall  be  registered  as  a  company  with  the  objects  as 

mentioned in clause (a) and the conditions provided in clause (b) of sub-

section (1) without a licence granted in pursuance of this section. 

43. Effect of revocation of licence.— (1) On revocation of licence of a 

company under section 42, by the Commission— 

(a)  

the company shall stop all its activities except the recovery 

of money owed to it, if any; 

(b) 

the  company  shall  not  solicit  or  receive  donations  from 

any source; and 

(c)  

all the assets of the company after satisfaction of all debts 

and liabilities shall, in the manner as may be specified, be 

transferred to another company licenced under section 42, 

preferably  having  similar  or  identical  objects  to  those  of 

the  company,  within  ninety  days  from  the  revocation  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          7 

the licence or such extended period as may be allowed by 

the Commission: 

Provided that  a reasonable amount  to meet  the expenses 

of voluntary winding up or making an application to the registrar 

for striking the name of the company off the register in terms of 

sub-section (3), may be retained by the company. 

(2) 

 After  compliance  of  the  requirements  mentioned  in  sub-section 

(1), the board of the company shall file within fifteen days from the date 

of such compliance, a report to the registrar containing such information 

and supported with such documents as may be specified. 

(3) 

 Within  thirty  days  of  acceptance  of  the  report  by  the  registrar, 

submitted by the company under sub-section (2), the board shall initiate 

necessary  proceedings  for  winding  up  of  the  company  voluntarily  or 

where it has no assets and liabilities make an application to the registrar 

for striking the name of the company off the register. 

(4)  

If  the  company  fails  to  comply  with  any  of  the  requirements  of 

this  section  within  the  period  specified  or  such  extended  period  as  may 

be allowed by the Commission, the Commission may, without prejudice to 

any  other  action  under  the  law,  appoint  an  administrator  to  manage 

affairs  of  the  company  subject  to  such  terms  and  conditions  as  may  be 

specified in the order and initiate necessary proceedings for winding up of 

the company. 

(5)  

The  provisions  of  section  291,  except  those  of  sub-section  (1) 

thereof,  shall  apply  mutatis  mutandis  to  the  administrator  appointed 

under this section. 

(6)   Where any assets of the company are transferred, in consequence 

of  revocation  of  licence,  to  another  company  licenced  under  section  42, 

the members and officers of the first mentioned company or any of their 

family  members  shall  not  be  eligible  to  hold  any  office  in  the  later 

company  for  a  period  of  five  years  from  the  date  of  transfer  of  such 

assets. 

(7)   Where  the  licence  of  a  company  has  been  revoked  before  the 

commencement  of  this  Act  and  such  company  is  not  in  the  process  of 

winding  up,  this  section  shall  apply  as  if  the  licence  was  revoked 

immediately after the commencement of this Act.” 

Under section 42 of the Act, the company is to operate as charitable and not for 

profit objects and under the law, license is granted by the SECP under the terms 

and conditions it deems appropriate. SECP, under sub-section 5 of section 42, can 

revoke  the  licence  under  certain  circumstances  as  mentioned  in  the  referred 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          8 

provision. After revocation of the license or upon such eventuality, the company 

has  to  stop  its  activities  except  recovery  of  money  owed  to  it,  if  any.  The 

company  in  question  then  is  to  transfer  all  its  assets  to  other  company  licenced 

under section 42 and having similar or identical objects as of the Company whose 

licence  has  been  revoked  within  90-days  from  the  date  of  revocation  of  the 

license.  The  Board  of  the  company  in  question  then  within  15-days  is  to  file  a 

report to the Registrar, which is to be accepted by the Registrar of the Companies 

and  also  the  Board  is  to  initiate  necessary  proceedings  for  winding  up  of  the 

company  voluntarily  and  where  there  are  no  assets  and  liabilities  make  an 

application to the Registrar for striking the name of the Company off the Register. 

Under sub-section 4 of section 43, if the company fails to fulfill the requirement or 

procedure,  SECP  has  power  to  take  appropriate  action  under  the  law  and  even 

can appoint an administrator to manage the affairs of the company. Sub-section 6 

of  section  43,  bars  the  officers  and  members  of  the  first  company  to  become 

members  of  the  Company  to  whom  assets  have  been  transferred.  Under  sub-

section 7 ibid, where the license of the company has been revoked before the Act 

of 2017 and such company is not in process of winding up, section 43 would be 

applicable if license was revoked immediately after commencement of the Act.   

9. 

Under clause 11 of Associations with Charitable and Not for Profit Objects 

Regulations,  2018,  the  consequences  of  revocation  of  license  and  procedure 

subsequent thereto to be followed by a company is provided. The relevant clause 

reads as follows:- 

“11.  Revocation of license.- (1) In addition to the grounds provided 

under  sub-section  (5)  of  section  42  for  revocation  of  the  license,  where 

the  promoters,  directors  or  chief  executive  officer  of  the  company 

licensed  under  section  42  of  the  Act  and  registered  under  these 

regulations  or  company  law  do  not  comply  with  any  of  the  conditions 

imposed  by  these  regulations  or  are  disqualified  under  regulation  10  at 

any  time  or  fail  to  get  the  license  renewed  within  the  time  period 

provided under these regulations or have violated any provision of these 

regulations  or  of  the  Act,  the  Commission  may,  after  giving  a  notice  in 

writing and an opportunity of being heard, revoke the license. 

 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          9 

(2)  Where the Commission revokes the license granted under 

section 42 of the Act, it shall send the revocation order to the company at 

its registered office address and place this information on the website of 

the Commission. 

(3) 

Upon  revocation  of  the  license  by  the  Commission,  the 

company  shall  cease  to  enjoy  the  exemptions  and  privileges  conferred 

upon it by virtue of license granted under section 42 of the Act. 

(4) 

The company shall immediately prepare and arrange audit 

of its  financial statements  for the period  starting  from the day following 

the  date  of  last  audited  financial  statements  till  date  of  revocation  of 

license in case the latest available audited financial statements are older 

than  three  months  and  the  auditor  shall  submit  its  report  within  fifteen 

days of its engagement for the purpose. 

(5) 

Subject  to  the  requirements  of  section  43  of  the  Act,  the 

board  of  directors  of  the  company  shall  within  a  period  of  ten  days  of 

revocation  of  license  shortlist  and  approve  the  name  of  transferee 

company  which  has  provided  concurrence  to  receive  the  assets  of  the 

company. 

(6) 

Subsequent  to  the  approval  of  the  board,  the  chief 

executive officer shall proceed to transfer the assets of the company after 

satisfaction  of  all  debts  and  liabilities  by  entering  into  agreement  with 

approved transferee company and such agreement shall set out the roles 

and  responsibilities  of 

transferor  and 

transferee  companies  and 

mechanism  for  transfer  of  assets  along  with  details  of  assets  to  be 

transferred. 

(7) 

Subject  to  the  provisions  of  sub-section  (2)  of  section  43  of  the 

Act,  the  board  shall  file  the  report  to  the  registrar  in  the  manner  as 

provided in NFP Form 4  along with following documents,- 

(i) 

affidavit  by  the  chief  executive  officer  stating  that  all 

requirements  of  the  Act  and  these  regulations  have  been 

fully  complied  regarding  transfer  of  assets  to  another 

section 42 company; 

(ii) 

latest  audited  financial  statements  along  with  auditors 

report  exhibiting  complete  details  of  total  assets,  total 

debts and liabilities along with net assets to be transferred 

to another company licensed under section 42 of the Act; 

(iii) 

copy  of  minutes  of  board  meeting  in  which  transferee 

company was short listed; 

(iv) 

copy  of  letters  of  concurrence  from  the  transferee 

company; 

(v) 

copy of agreement for transfer of assets; and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.O. No.04/2018    

          10 

(vi) 

certificate  confirming  completion  of  transfer  of  assets 

issued by the auditor of transferee company.” 

Admittedly,  the  actions  which  the  company  was  required  to  undertake  have  not 

been done and under clause 16, contravention of the regulations attract penalties 

provided in the Act of 2017.  

10. 

As noted above, the petitioner as well as the company has not followed 

the  procedure  provided  under  sections  42  and  43  of  the  Act  of  2017  and  the 

Regulations of 2018, which they were required to do so. In any case, the license 

of  the  company  got  expired  and  was  never  renewed  and  even  in  2018,  SECP 

confirmed  the  revocation/expiry  of  the  license.  The  company  was  required  to 

transfer  its  assets  to  another  company  incorporated  under  section  42  ibid and 

furnish a report to the Registrar and pass resolution for voluntarily winding up of 

the  company.  In  case,  there  were  assets  and  liabilities  otherwise  making  an 

application  to  the  Registrar  for  striking  the  name  of  the  company  from  the 

register.  The  company  was  also  required  to  comply  with  procedure  provided  in 

clause 11 ibid. 

11. 

Since  mandatory  provisions  of  law  have  not  been  followed,  under  sub-

section  4  of  section  43,  the  SECP  is  empowered  to  take  appropriate  action, 

including  appointment  of  the  Administrator  for  completion  of  the  dissolution 

process. The SECP can also initiate a petition for winding up under sub-section (c) 

of section 304 of the Companies Act, 2017 and in light of the provision, the same 

is not required to investigate in the affairs of the company. The case law cited by 

the learned counsel for the respondents No.2 to 6 to substantiate her arguments 

that where special procedure is provided general procedure is not to be adopted, 

is  instructive.  Reliance  is  placed  on Province of Punjab through Conservator of 

Forest, Faisalabad and others VSJaved Iqbal (2021 SCMR 328) and Province 

of Punjab through Secretary Excise and Taxation Department, Lahore and others 

VSMurree Brewery Company Limited and another (2021 SCMR 305). There is 

 
 
 
 
  
C.O. No.04/2018    

          11 

no cavil with the principles laid down in judgments relied by learned  counsel for 

the petitioner, however, they are not applicable in facts and circumstances.  

12. 

In view of the above position of law and facts, the instant petition by the 

petitioner  is  not  competent  and  is  accordingly  dismissed.  The  SECP  can  take 

action  in  the  matter  as  the  company  has  not  done  the  needful  and  can  even 

invoke penal provision under section 44 of the Companies Act, 2017. It can also 

agitate  the  winding  up  petition  under  section  304  of  the  companies  Act,  2017. 

The  petitioner  at  best  can  be  a  whistleblower  by  pleading  to  SECP  that 

respondents  No.  2  to  6  are  not  complying  with  the  provisions  of  law  and  doing 

the needful for dissolution of the company.  

(AAMER FAROOQ) 

                                  JUDGE 

    Announced in open Court this 27th day of January, 2022. 

M.Shah/. 

JUDGE 

Approved for Reporting. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
