I

,.i

TUDGMENT  SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAI)

Jail Appeal No. 5812020

SHAKILA BUTT  VS THE STATE,  ETC.

Appellant by:

Mr. Ajmnl Khan  Khattok, Advocate.

State by:.

Mr. Muhammad  Sohail Khurshid, State Counsel.

Date  of heartng:

16.04.2020.

M uhammod Aslam, Inspector.

LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ:  T:

This Criminal Jail Appeal  has been filed by

the appellant Shakila Butt w/o Afsar Nisar through Superintendent,  Central  Jail,
Rawalpindi, against the judgment  dated 19.02.2020,  passed  by the learned

Additional  Sessions Judge/Special Judge,  Control of Narcotics  Substances, West-

Islamabad,  whereby appellant has been convicted u/s 9-A, 9-Cll5 of Control of

Narcotic  Substances Act, 1997 (CNSA)  and sentenced  to undergo one year R.I

with a fine of Rs. 20,000/- and in default whereof to further  undergo two months
S.I in case FIR No.l27,  dated 13.10.2019,  registered  at P.S Shams Colony,
Islamabad.  Benefit of section 382(B) Cr.PC has also been extended  to the

Appellant.

2.  Facts in brief are that on spy information search warrant  for raiding Naina
Beauty Parlor  situated in Street  No. 24, main  street Shams  Colony, Islamabad, was

obtained by SHO P.S. Shams Colony, Islamabad, as according  to the information,

appellant  Shakila  Butt is doing business of drug trafficking  under the garb of

beauty parlor. The police party entered the house  adjacent  to the beauty parlor

through  gate  as one part of it was opened and behind the close part a lady namely

Shakila Butt / appellant,  was siuing on a chair and on her search  a white  shopper

was found from the chair therein contained 1630 gram of charas in the form of

littar, one silver  electronic scale, mobile phone tape and Rs. 49,7001- (49 notes of

Rs. 1000/- and 07 notes of Rs. 100/-).  In the meantime, another  lady namely

Komal Bibi entered the room from whom 20 grams of ice was also recovered.

Hence,  the FIR was registered against Shakila Butt, Komal  Bibi and the owner of

a

t2l

JailAppeolNa  58/2020

the house  namely Afsar Nisar alias Arslan  alias Kala Butt. The samples  were
taken from the recovered  contraband and sent to laboratory  for chemical
examination on 15.10.2019.  The finaVSupplementary  challan  in the present  case

was submitted on 29.11.2019,  and charge was framed on 21.12.2019,  against  all

the said three accused  persons.  The trial was conducted and in conclusion  whereof
the charges against Shakila Butt and Komal Bibi were found to be proved,
whereas, prosecution failed to prove  their case  against  Afsar Nisar  alias Arslan
alias Kala Butt as such he was acquitted.  Komal Bibi was sentenced to Rs.
10,000/- fine as minor quantity  of contraband  was recovered from her possession

and that she had no previous criminal history. Shakila  Butt was sentenced to one

year rigorous imprisonment and Rs. 20,0001-  fine and in case of default to further

undergo two months  simple imprisonment,  however,  the appellant was allowed

benefit of 382-8  Cr.PC.

3.  Learned  counsel  appearing  on behalf of the appellant contended that there
are glaring  contradictions  and infirmities  in the evidence produced  by the
prosecution;  that the lady constable  namely Sanam Ishaque, who claimed to have

carried out personal search  of the the convict and recovered  the alleged contraband

at the time of raid was given up; that the appellant  has been  falsely  implicated  in

the case; that the case against the appellant and his family  was the outcome of
personal grudge  due to quarrel with Inspector,  Mehar  Muhammad  Aslam and

Afsar Nisar, the husband of the appellant;  that the judgrnent  of the Trial Court  is

based  on misreading and non-reading of evidence;  that appellant has a suckling
baby with her in Jail; that she has no previous criminal  history  and has already

undergone  six months of imprisonment.

4.  Learned  State Counsel  along with I.O. strongly refuted the arguments  made
on behalf of the appellant  and submitted  that she was caught red handed  with the

confraband;  that the appellant was operating drug trafficking business under the

garb of beauty parlor; that the premises was raided  after obtaining  search warrant

from the Assistant  Commissioner  Pothohar, Islamabad; that the contrabands  in the

white  shopper were recovered  from her possession  from the chair on which she

was sitting; that lady constable  Sanam  Ishaque was given up being  unnecessary

witness  as she did not personally search  the appellant;  that there is no misreading

and non-reading  of evidence by the learned  Trial Judge  and the appeal is liable  to

be dismissed.

13l

Jail  Appcal  No.  582020

5.  Arguments  heard and record perused.

6.  The Appellant  in the present case  has been convicted  to serve one year
imprisonment and fine of Rs. 20,000/- and in default whereof to further  undergo

two months simple  imprisonment  for possessing  1630 gram of charas for the
purposes of sale. In order to decide  the present appeal the FIR bearing No.
12712019,  dated  13.10.2019  and the impugned judgment 19.02.2020,  were

carefully  examined and it is noted that action as per FIR, was initiated  on the basis
of information disclosed during interrogation of an accused namely Zeeshan
arrested in FIR No. 12612019, dated 13.10.2019, in the same  Police Station  i.e.

Shams  Colony. It is also noteworthy  that Muhammad  Asif Tipu, ASI, PW-4 in the

present case, is the complainant  in FIR No. 12612019, but as per the facts recorded

in the impugned  judgment, the action against the appellant was commenced on spy

information. Further the search warrant  was obtained to raid the Naina Beauty

Parlor situated in Street No. 24, Shams  Colony, Islamabad, from AC Pothohar,

Islamabad, by the SHO Police Station Shams Colony, Islamabad,  on the ground

that appellant is actually operating drug trafficking  activities from Beauty  Parlor. It

is noted  that application/search  warrant  dated 13.10.2019,  though is the part of the

record,  however,  has not been  exhibited as evidence by the prosecution.  Contents

of the said search warrant shows  that the same  was obtained for raiding  Niana
Beauty  Parlor, quoting, reliable source of information of drug trafficking  by

appellant.  However,  the house the house of appellant was raided without search

wa:rant. From perusal of the record  it is noted that accused Zeeshan  was arrested

and FIR No. 12612019  dated 13.10.2019, was registered at about  04:00  pm by

Muhammad  Asif Tipu, ASI (PW-4)  and the search  warrant  was obtained  from AC
at 4:30 p.m as stated in cross-examination of PW-5, thereafter,  the house of

appellant was raided at about 06:00 pm.

7 .  We have also gone  through sections 20, 2l & 22 of the CNSA, 1997 which
provide for power to issue search warrants, seizure  and arrest without warrant and
the judgment of Hon'ble Apex  Court in case reported as "Fida Jan VS The Stote"
(2001 SCMR 36), whereby, these provisions  have been held to be directory and not

mandatory,  however, the Hon'ble  Apex Court  in another  judgment  tiled as "The
State  VS Hemjoo" (2003  SCMR  881) has observed  that "Combined  study of Ss. 20
& 2I of the Control  of Narcotic  Substances Act, 1997, would show that only in

I4I

JoilAppealNa  5E/2020

exceptiorutl cases in which  the search warrant cannot possibly  be obtained before

conducting the raid, an Officer  authorized in this behalf can proceed for conduct
of raid without  the wqrrqnt, but this power cannot  be allowed to be used in every
case in the normal ctrcumstances".  The prosecution  story thus appears to be

unreliable  as there seems no reason  to get search  warrant  despite paucity of time to

raid Beauty Parlor  when they intend to raid appellant's  house, where there were

only ladies, without any search warrant.  This act of the Police raiding  party is

without lawful justification  and in utter violation of right of privacy of citizens in

view of the above referred judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan.

8.  Record further revealed  that lady constable  Sanum Ishaq  who has conducted
the personal  search  of the female appellant was given up as wifiress despite the fact

that said lady constable  claimed  to have recovered  the white shopper from the
possession  of appellant wherein  the narcotics, silver colored  weighing  scale,

mobile  phone tape and cash were found. Argument of learned  counsel  for appellant

in this regard appearc to be convincing that the lady constable is one of the main

witnesses, who recovered  the contraband  from the appellant and has also signed

the memo of recovery iN witness,  therefore,  giving up her from list of witnesses
also creates doubt of involving  appellant falsely. It is observed that the silver

colored electronic weighing  scale and cash were produced  as exhibits  i.e. Ex:P-2,
Ex: P3ll-49 & Ex: P4ll-7, during  evidence  in trial but the other important
objects/recoveries i.e. white shopper  and mobile  phone  tape, have not been

exhibited  during the trial. The white shopping bag was an incriminating  material as

not only the alleged 1630 grams  Charas but also  a weighing  scale was also placed

in it. In a recent judgment passed by this Court in case of "Mst. Mariam ulias
Maria alias Shakeeba VS The State" (2019 WR 2082) it has been  observed that

non production of incriminating  material before the Court results into acquiual on

the basis of benefit of doubt extended  to the appellant. The relevant  portion of the

said judgment is reproduced  here in below:-

"It is trite law that prosecution  is bound  to produce  the case
property  allegedly  being  used in a criminal  activity. Reliance  is
placed  upon 2012 SCMR 577 (Amjad Ali v. The State), 2017 PCT.IJ
l4 (AbrarHussainv.The  State), 2009 PCrLI  1334  (Agha Qais  v.The
State), and 1997 PCT.IJ  1093 (Mst. Nargis v. The State), therefore,
by non-production  of such incriminating  piece of evidence,  a serious
doubt  emerges  on record,  benefit of which should be extended  to the
accused  not as a matter  of grace but as a matter  of right."

Isl

Jail  Appcal Na  58/2020

9.  Thus, omission  to produce  important incriminating  material the white
shopping bag allegedly containing  Charas recovered from the possession of the

appellant is another suspicious act on the part of the prosecution  for which benefit

of doubt goes  in favour  of the appellant, in view of the above judgment.

10. In addition to the above, the evidence  and testimonies of PWs were also

perused carefully which  revealed  the following  contradictions  in their statements:-

PW- I constable Saj idNazir  :

o  We straight  away  went to the house of accused/place  of

. 

occurrence.
House  of the accused was double  storey/the color of house was
white  and the color of main  gate was  black.

PW-4 ASI, Muhammad Asif Tipu:
. 

Shakila Butt was sitting on a chair, she was over powered  by a
lady constable and on her personal search a white color  shopper
was recovered  in which churs (color brown), weighing 1630
gram  (Ex-PI)  tn shape of littar was recovered.
Informer informed  the I.O qua the occurrence, I do not lorcw
when I.O received spy information.
The inter-se  distance between  P.S and  place of occurrence  is 1.5 lon.
We did not go straight  away to place of occurrence.
House of accused was single storey and color was red and white.
After  seen  a police party accused  shakila butt tried  to skip  away.
Alleged churas  was not recovered.fro*  personal  possession  of
accused Shaktla Butt.
Durtng  such proceedings all poltce fficials were present  at the
gate and nobody including lady constable entered  the
hotne/rooms.

o

a

Pl4/-5, Mehr Muhammad  Aslam, Inspector:

o

a

a

o

o

a

a

a

After receiving search  waruant from A.C Pothohar  Islamabad at
06:00 PM with raiding party raided  the house of Afsar  Nisar
Arslan  alias  Kala  Butt.
She was surrounded by lady constable  and on her personal
search a shopper bearing  colored white as recovered in which
churs (color brown), weighing l6j0 gram (Ex-Pl) in shape of
liltar was recovered.
SHO took warrant on 13.10.2019 and handed over to me the
same at 04:30 pm.
We lefi police station  at 05:30 pm.
The distance  between  the P.S and alleged place of occurrence is
0.5ktn.
The house of accused was a single  storey.
Alleged recovery of charas was not fficted fro* personal
possession  of Shakila Butt.
We searchedwhole housefrom  the inside.
Cash  Rs. 49,700/-  was recoyeredfrom  the house of the accused.

15l

Joil  Appeal  No.  58/2020

. 
. 

. 

Both the accused did not try to skip after seeing  the police party.
Sajid Nazir constable took complaint at 06:55  pm and came  back
at_07:10  pm.
We lefi the place of occurrence at 07:00 pm.

11.  The above  cited inconsistencies in evidence and testimonies  are sufficient  to
create  serious  doubts about the prosecution  story and it is settled law that accused

is not required to establish a series of dents and doubts in prosecution  case but for

giving  the benefit  of doubt if a single doubt is created even then accused is entitled

to the benefit of doubt not as a matter of grace and concession  but as a matter of

right. Reliance in this regard can safely be placed on the case law reported  as

Muhammad Shahbaz Ali Khalid  vs State  (2019 SCMR  2012),  Safdar  Mehmood

vs Tanvir Hussoin (2019 SCMR 1978) & Rajmeer Khan vs Noor-Ul-Haq  (2019

SCMR 1949).It is observed  from the record that prosecution  failed to establish its

case before  the learned Trial Court, who also did not consider  the above material

contradictions  in the statements of the wifiresses  during trial, thus, the present  case

is one which is based  on misreading  and non-reading  of evidence,  therefore, the

sentence  awarded  on the basis of the above inconsistencies is not sustainable  in the

eye of law.

12. At this point it is necessary to reproduce the passage from the judgment  of
this Court  reported as 2019 YLR  2082 Mst. Mariarn supra for similar  action in the

present case:-

"Before parting with this judgment, we have  observed  that the
Investtgation  Officer,  although, has taken the black color bag and o
chaddar in his possession,  but both these incriminating articles  have
neither been produced in the Court nor the same  have been
exhibited,  which  also resulted  into acquittal of the appellant  and
such lapse  on the part of prosecution should be rectified, therefore,
General of  PoLice and ^S^SP
we herebv  direct  the
(lnvestigationl to direct all the Investigation  Ofrcers to ensure
submission qf all incriminating  articles  in the Trial Court at the time
of evidence as the Investisat
Officers dre resoonsible  for

les in the Trial  C

the Prosecutors are also bound

qf those incriminating articles  which  are necessary to be exhibited.
the learned  Trial Courts to call
We also expect a sacred  dutv
such incriminating  articles .from  the police and after notitvins the
same in the iudicial  oroceedinss. exhibit  those articles  while
recordins  the evidence.  includinq the remaining contraband  which
was sealed  separately  at the time of recovery proceeuliwL"
13. Keeping in view the above discussion  and placing reliance on the judgments
cited  supra,  it is held that the judgment of the learned Trial Court  dated 19.02.2020

171

Joil  Appeal  No.  58n020

is not legally  sustainable, hence, sarne is hereby set-aside.  The present appeal is
allowed. The appellant  is acquitted,  who is in jail, shall be released,  forthwith if
not required in any other case.

(MOHSIN 

JUDGE

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ)
JUDGE

Announced  in the Open Court  on :

$r4

t I la>o  ,

Shrkccl

E

JUDGE

