Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

         Criminal Appeal No. 170/2019 

                               Habib Akhtar VS The State, etc.  

                               Adnan Tariq VS Zahid Hussain, etc.  

Criminal Appeal No. 194/2020 

Criminal Revision No. 68/2019 
                                Adnan Tariq VS Habib Akhtar, etc. 

and  
 Murder Reference No. 19/2019 
 The State VS Habib Akhtar  

       APPELLANT BY:   

Raja Gul Nawaz, Advocate.  

COMPLAINANT BY:     Mr. Jan Muhammad Khan, Advocate. 

STATE BY: 

  Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed, State Counsel. 

       DATE OF HEARING:    28-09-2021. 

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  Through  this  judgment  we 

will  decide  (i)  Criminal  Appeal  No.  170/2019  filed  by 

Habib  Akhtar  against  the  judgment  of  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge  dated  23.05.2019,  whereby  he  has  been 

found guilty under section 302(b) PPC and sentenced to death 

and  liable  to  pay  compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  Tariq 

Mehmood (Deceased) in the amount of Rs.500,000/- in terms 

of  section  544-A,  Cr.P.C  and  in  default  of  payment  or 

recovery of compensation undergo further imprisonment for a 

period of six months (S.I) under section 544-A(2) of Cr.P.C., 

(ii)  Criminal  Appeal  No.  194/2020  filed  under  section 

417(2) of Cr.P.C by the complainant Adnan Tariq, challenging 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
           
 
 
 
          
 
  
 
 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 2 

acquittal  of  Zahid  Hussain  and  Sharafat  under  sections 

302(b)/34  of  PPC,  (iii)  Criminal  Revision  No.  68/2019 

(Adnan  Tariq  VS  Habib  Akhtar,  etc.)  whereby 

enhancement  of  compensation  amount  payable  by  Habib 

Akhtar  has  been  sought  and  (vi)  Murder  Reference  No. 

19/2019,  whereby  the  judgment  of  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge,  East-Islamabad  dated  23.05.2019,  through 

which he has found Habib Akhtar son of Saleem Akhtar guilty 

for  an  offence  under  section  302(b)  of  Pakistan  Penal  Code, 

1860 (“PPC”) and sentenced him to death, has been referred 

to  us  under  section  374  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 

1898 (“Cr.P.C”) for confirmation.   

2.   

Adnan Tariq filed a private complaint on 03.05.2012 

which was fixed before the learned Additional Sessions Judge 

(East),  Islamabad,  who  after  recording  statements  of  the 

complainant  and  his  witnesses  admitted  the  complaint  for 

regular hearing. Adnan Tariq had previously filed a complaint 

with  the  police  under  sections  302/34  and  109  PPC  against 

Zahid  Hussain,  Sharafat  and  Habib  Akhtar  for  committing 

murder  of  his  father  Tariq  Mehmood  on  05.08.2011  around 

1.20  p.m.,  pursuant  to  which  FIR  No.  315  dated  05.08.2011 

was  registered  at  Police  Station  Koral,  Islamabad.  Upon 

conclusion  of  the  investigation,  the  police  submitted  an 

incomplete  report  under  section  173  of  Cr.P.C  before  the 

Magistrate on 05.10.2011.  

3.   

Being  dissatisfied  by  the  investigation  conducted  by 

the  police  pursuant  to  the  said  FIR,  Adnan  Tariq  filed  the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 3 

aforementioned  private  complaint,  by  which  time  the  charge 

had been framed in the state case against Habib Akhtar under 

section 302/34 and 109 of PPC on 18.07.2012. In view of the 

private complaint, proceedings in the state case were stopped 

and  proceedings  were  continued  in  the  private  complaint 

pursuant  to  which  charge  under  section  302/34  and  109  of 

PPC  was  framed  against  Habib  Akhtar,  Sharafat  and  Zahid 

Hussain on 24.08.2013. The content of the private complaint 

was the same as that of the complaint on the basis of which 

FIR No. 315 dated 05.08.2011 was registered. 

4.   

Adnan  Tariq  (“Complainant”)  had  alleged  that  on 

05.08.2011  at  about  1.20  pm  he  along  with  his  father  Tariq 

Mehmood  (“Deceased”)  and  Muhammad  Safeer  were 

walking towards Masjid for offering Jumma prayer close to the 

complaint’s  home.  When  they  reached  at  Japan  Road,  Habib 

Akhtar  armed  with  12-bore  single  barrel  gun  approached 

them from western side and shot the Deceased from behind, 

which  hit  his  left  shoulder  and  he  fell  down.  Muhammad 

Safeer  and  the  Complainant  tried  to  help  the  Deceased. 

Meanwhile Habib Akhtar fled towards the west from where he 

had approached the Complainant, Muhammad Safeer and the 

Deceased.  Co-accused  Sharafat  was  also  hiding  in  hemp 

surrounding the place of incident. He emerged from the hemp 

with 30-bore gun resorted to aerial firing and fled in the same 

direction  as  Sharafat.  Samar  Mukhtar  s/o  Muhammad 

Mukhtar  allegedly  saw  Habib  Ahmed  and  Sharafat  fleeing 

from  the  place  occurrence.  Adnan  Tariq  alleged  that  Habib 

Akhtar  shot  the  Deceased  and  Sharafat  aided  and  abetted 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 4 

him  on  the  behest  of  Zahid  Hussain  who  is  uncle  of  Habib 

Akhtar  and  a  relative  of  Sharafat,  as  Zahid  Hussain  had 

enmity  with  the  Deceased.  He  also  alleged  that  at  02.23  in 

the  afternoon  after  Tariq  Mehmood  was  murdered  Zahid 

Hussain  called  Muhammad  Safeer  on  his  cell  phone  and 

informed  Muhammad  Safeer  that  he  had  the  Deceased  killed 

and  threatened  Muhammad  Safeer  will  the  same  fate.  He 

alleged  that  Zahid  Hussain  had  plotted  the  murder  of  the 

Deceased  in  2009  as  well,  but  such  plot  could  not  succeed 

and  it  was  discovered  when  Zahid  Hussain  sent  members  of 

his family to Gujrat and engineered their arrest so that when 

they murdered the Deceased there would be a record of them 

being  in  police  custody.  He  asserted  that  the  plan  was 

communicated  by  Police  Station  Kunjah,  District  Gujrat  to 

Police  Station  Koral  through  a  phone  call  due  to  which  Zahid 

Hussain  could  not  succeed  back  in  2009.  He,  however, 

acknowledged  that  the  Deceased  did  not 

initiate  any 

proceedings  against  Zahid  Hussain  at  that  time  and  that 

Zahid Hussain did not directly attack the Deceased during his 

lifetime.  The  Complainant  also  alleged  that  Sharafat  along 

with  his  relatives  had  broken  the  arms  and  legs  of  the 

Deceased  and  FIR  No.  233/2007  was  registered  as  a 

consequence.  

5.   

Upon  receipt  of  information  about  the  occurrence, 

Abdul Waheed, S.I (CW-6) reached Polyclinic hospital and he 

was handed over complaint (Exh.PA) by Adnan Tariq pursuant 

to  which  FIR  No.  315  dated  05.08.2011  (Exh.PB)  was 

registered. After preparing inquest report, receiving the death 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 5 

certificate and transmitting the dead body of the deceased to 

PIMS for postmortem, Abdul Waheed S.I. went to the place of 

occurrence  and  collected  blood  through  cotton  (Exh.PH), 

recovered  one  empty  cartridge  of  12-bore  gun  (Exh.P4).  On 

09.08.2011  a  site  plan  prepared  by  draftsman,  Aamir 

Shehzad,  was  handed  over  to  Abdul  Waheed  (CW-6).    On 

10.08.2011 Habib Akhtar was arrested from the street where 

he  lived,  and  according  to  the  prosecution  upon  his 

revelation,  immediately  after  his  arrest,  a  12-bore  single 

barrel  rifle  was  recovered  hidden  in  a  room  under  a  heap  of 

chaff  adjacent  to  his  house.  On  15.08.2011  Dr.  Farrukh 

Kamal,  MLO  (PW-3)  handed  over  postmortem  report  and  a 

sealed  bottle  containing  six  pallets  to  Constable  Muhammad 

Arshad  (CW-2).  On  23.08.2011  Zahid  Hussain  and  Sharafat 

joined  the  investigation  and  appeared  before  Abdul  Waheed 

S.I  after  getting  ad-interim  bail.  On  conclusion  of  the 

investigation  an  incomplete  report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C 

was  submitted.  Thereafter  the  private  complaint  was  filed 

against the accused pursuant to which their trial commenced.    

6.   

After  conclusion  of  the  trial,  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions Judge passed judgment dated 23.05.2019, pursuant 

to  which  it  found  Habib  Akhtar  guilty  of  an  offence  under 

section 302(b) of PPC for qatl-e-amd punishable as ta’zir and 

awarded  him  the  death  sentence  and  acquitted  co-accused 

Sharafat and Zahid Hussain.   

7.   

The learned trial court in its judgment has provided a 

summarized account of the evidence adduced before it, which 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 6 

need  not  be  recapitulated  here.  The  relevant  parts  of  the 

evidence  will  be  discussed  in  the  later  part  of  this  judgment 

where  this  Court  analyzes  the  evidence  and  expresses  its 

opinion.  

8.   

In  relation  to  Habib  Akhtar  the  learned  trial  court 

found  that  the  eye-witness  account  provided  by  the 

Complainant  remained  unimpeached  and  that  such  account 

was corroborated through the evidence of Muhammad Safeer 

as  well  as  the  postmortem  report,  recoveries  and  other 

circumstances  of  the  case.  As  regards  Sharfat,  the  learned 

trial  court  concluded  that  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  did  not 

see  him  at  the  place  of  occurrence,  no  firearm  injury  was 

attributed to him, no weapon was recovered from him and the 

Call Record Data (CDR) of his cell phone made his presence at 

the  place  of  occurrence  doubtful  and  consequently  Sharafat 

was acquitted. The learned trial court concluded in relation to 

Zahid Hussain that he was admittedly not present at the place 

of occurrence and the role of abetment attributed to him had 

not been proved through evidence produced before the Court 

and consequently Zahid Hussain was also acquitted.   

9.   

The  learned  counsel  for  Habib  Akhtar,  Sharafat  and 

Zahid  Hussain  (Defence  Counsel)  submitted  that  this  was  a 

case  of  unseen  occurrence  and  the  eye-witnesses  were  all 

planted  being  interested  witnesses  and  consequently  their 

testimony  was  not  reliable.  That  there  were  serious 

contradictions  in  the  account  presented  by  the  prosecution, 

the  recovery  of  the  alleged  murder  weapon  as  well  as  the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 7 

empty  cartridge  allegedly  recovered  from  the  place  of 

occurrence  was  inconsequential,  the  site  plan  was  disowned 

by  the  prosecution  and  there  was  no  corroborating  evidence 

supporting 

the 

testimony  of 

the 

interested  witnesses 

produced  by  the  prosecution.  He  submitted  that  the 

testimony  of  the  prosecution  witnesses  and  court  witnesses 

regarding  the  identity  of  the  person  who  informed  the  police 

regarding  the  incident  remained  a  mystery  throughout  the 

trial. That what was evident was that the FIR was registered a 

few  hours  after  the  stated  time  of  occurrence  at 1.20  pm  on 

05.08.2011  and  due  deliberation  took  place  before  it  was 

lodged.  That  as  per  the  prosecution  narrative  the  Deceased 

was accompanied by the Complainant (PW-1) and Muhammad 

Safeer  (PW-2)  and  they  were  walking  together  with  the 

Deceased  who  was  shot  behind  from  a  distance  of  8  to  10 

feet. Given that the alleged murder weapon was single barrel 

shotgun, in the event that the shot was fired from close range 

the  postmortem  report  would  have  been  reflected  that  there 

was  blackening  around  the  wounds  of  the  Deceased.  And  in 

the  event  that  it  was  fired  from  a  distance  of  more  than  six 

feet, stray pallets ought to have hit the Complainant as well, 

who was supposedly walking next to the Deceased at the time 

of  the  incident.  But  the  postmortem  report  neither  reflects 

blackening nor does the Complainant admit to having been hit 

by  any  stray  pallet.  That  the  logical  conclusion  is  that  the 

Complainant  was  not  present  at  the  place  of  occurrence.  He 

further  submitted  that  the  prosecution’s  account  of  the 

conduct of the Complainant, Muhammad Safeer as well as the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 8 

accused Habib Akhtar and co-accused Sharafat was unnatural 

and  did  not  appeal  to  a  prudent  mind.  That  according  to  the 

prosecution,  Habib  Akhtar,  after  firing  the  shot  that  claimed 

the  life  of  the  Deceased,  reloaded  his  weapon  but  faced 

difficulty  doing  so.  During  the  period  in  which  he  was 

struggling to reload the gun, the Complainant, being the real 

son  of  the  Deceased,  and  Muhammad  Safeer,  his  close 

associate, did not try to confront or apprehend Habib Akhtar. 

Further,  that  Sharafat  was  hiding  in  hemp  fields  at  the  time, 

but instead of continuing to hide after the Deceased had been 

shot,  he  emerged,  resorted  to  aerial  firing  and  then  left  the 

scene of the occurrence. His actions seem to be influenced by 

no apparent reason other than to make his identity known to 

the  eye-witnesses  to  the  murder.  That  Samar  Mukhtar,  who 

allegedly  witnessed  Habib  Akhtar  and  Sharafat  fleeing  from 

the  place  of  occurrence,  had  a  vehicle,  according  to  the 

account of Abdul Waheed I.O. (CW-6), but he did not come to 

the  aid  of  the  Deceased  or  help  transport  his  body  to  the 

hospital  and  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  called  one  Fida 

Hussain  instead,  who  brought  his  vehicle  which  was  used  to 

transport to body of the Deceased to Polyclinic Hospital.    

10. 

The  Defence  Counsel  emphasized  that  as  per  Call 

Data  Record  (CDR)  of  the  cell  phone  of  Muhammad  Safeer 

(PW-2),  he  was  in  Jhang  Syedan  at  1.27  pm  i.e.  seven 

minutes after the stated time of the incident and not in Kirpa 

where  the  occurrence  took  place  and  consequently  could  not 

possibly  have  been  at  the  place  of  occurrence  at  the  time  of 

the  incident  of  which  he  claimed  to  be  an  eye-witness.  He 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 9 

submitted that as the Complainant testified that he along with 

Muhammad  Safeer  accompanied  the  Deceased  when  he  was 

shot,  and  the  CDR  established  that  Muhammad  Safeer  was 

not  present  at  the  place  of  occurrence  at  the  relevant  time, 

the  testimony  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  could  also  not  be 

relied  upon.  He  further  submitted  that  according  to  the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  there  were  other  passers-by  who 

witnessed the occurrence but none were produced before the 

trial  court.  That  Samar  Mukhtar  who  was  identified  as  a 

witness  was  given  up  and  consequently  there  was  no 

evidence  to  corroborate  the  presence  of  Habib  Akhtar  or 

Sharafat  at  the  place  of  occurrence.  He  submitted  that  the 

empty  cartridge  was  allegedly  recovered  from  the  place  of 

incident  on  05.08.20211,  the  murder  weapon  was  allegedly 

recovered  upon  Habib  Akhtar’s  revelation  on  the  date  of  his 

arrest  i.e.  10.08.2011.  But  the  empty  was  sent  to  Forensic 

Science  Laboratory  on  20.09.2011  and  the  alleged  murder 

weapon  was  not  sent  up  until  18.02.2012  and  consequently 

the  recoveries  were  inconsequential.  In  view  of  these  facts 

and circumstances, he submitted  that  there was no evidence 

that  Habib  Akhtar  was  present  at  the  place  of  occurrence  or 

had been involved in the murder  of the Deceased except the 

account  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1),  whose  testimony  was 

also  not  reliable  for  being  false  on  the  material  aspect  given 

that he had claimed that Muhammad Safeer had accompanied 

him  and  also  witnessed  the  incident  and  Muhammad  Safeer 

was  in  Jhang  Syedan  at  the  time  of  incident,  as  established 

by  the  CDR  of  his  cell  phone  as  opposed  to  Kirpa  and  could 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 10 

not  possibly  have  been  an  eyewitness  to  the  incident.  In 

relation to Sharafat, he submitted that the learned trial court 

had  acquitted  him  on  the  basis  that  Muhammad  Safeer  had 

not  corroborated  the  account  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1) 

identifying  him  as  being  at  the  place  of  occurrence  and  the 

prosecution  story  that  he  emerged  from  hiding  while  armed 

with 30-bore pistol and did nothing other than firing 7-8 shots 

in  the  air  to  attract  attention  did  not  appeal  to  an  ordinary 

prudent  mind.  In  relation  to  Zahid  Hussain  the  learned 

Defence Counsel stated that the learned trial court had rightly 

acquitted  him  as  there  was  no  evidence  of  conspiracy  and 

there  was  no  proof  as  regards  the  content  of  the  telephone 

call he made to Muhammad Safeer after the incident. That in 

the  event  that  Zahid  Hussain  secretly  plotted  to  arrange  the 

murder  of  the  Deceased  it  made  no  sense  that  he  would 

subsequently call and confess his crime.          

11. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant  submitted 

that  Habib  Akhtar’s  presence  at  the  place  of  occurrence  was 

proved.  The  eyewitness  account  presented  by 

the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  was  confirmed  by  the  eyewitness 

account  of  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2).  That  the  murder 

weapon  had  been  recovered  from  Habib  Akhtar  and  his  guilt 

had  been  established  beyond  reasonable  doubt  and  he  had 

been  rightly  found  guilty  and  convicted  by  the  learned  trial 

court.  In  relation  to  Sharafat  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Complainant  submitted  that  his  presence  had  also  been 

proved through the testimony of the Complainant (PW-1) and 

while  the  same  had  not  been  corroborated  by  Muhammad 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 11 

Safeer,  a  single  unimpeached  eyewitness  account  was 

sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  conviction  of  Sharafat.  He 

submitted  that  as  the  learned  trial  court  held  that  the 

testimony  of 

the  Complainant  (PW-1)  was 

remained 

unimpeached,  Sharafat  ought  to  have  been  found  guilty  and 

punished  for  the  offence  that  he  had  been  charged  for.  In 

relation to Zahid Hussain, he submitted that the said accused 

and  the  Deceased  had  a  checkered  history  of  litigation  and 

enmity  and  that  the  learned  trial  court  did  not  take  into 

account the fact that he hatched a plot to have the Deceased 

killed  in  2009  which  could  not  succeed  as  Police  Station 

Kunjah, Gujrat, had informed Police Station Koral, Islamabad, 

at the relevant time and a report of such communication was 

brought  to  the  notice  of  the  police  by  the  Complainant. 

Further  that  the  Deceased  during  his  lifetime  conducted  a 

press  conference  and  claimed  that  he  feared  he  would  be 

harmed  by  Zahid  Hussain  and  reports  of  such  press 

conference  were  also  shared  with  the  police.  He  further 

submitted  that  Habib  Akhtar  was  the  nephew  of  Zahid 

Hussain  and  it  was  Zahid  Hussain  on  whose  direction  Habib 

Akhtar  murdered 

the  Deceased.  That  Zahid  Hussain 

subsequently  called  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2) 

in  the 

presence  of  individuals  who  appeared  before  the  police 

authorities  to  confirm  that  they  were  present  when  Zahid 

Hussain  called  Muhammad  Safeer  to  admit  that  he  had 

succeeded in having the Deceased killed and also threatened 

to  Muhammad  Safeer  with  dire  consequences.  That  CDR  of 

Zahid  Hussain’s  cell  phone  confirmed  that  he  had  called 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 12 

Muhammad  Safeer  approximately  an  hour  after  the  incident 

that claimed the life  of the Deceased. He submitted that  this 

was  sufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  that  Zahid  Hussain 

had conspired to have killed the Deceased.        

12. 

The  learned  State  Counsel  supported  the  judgment 

passed  by  the  learned  trial  court  and  submitted  that  Habib 

Akhtar  had  been  rightly  convicted  in  view  of  the  evidence 

adduced before the learned trial court.  

13. 

Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, and 

having  reviewed  and  reappraised  the  evidence  as  produced 

before  the  learned  trial  court  we  do  not  agree  with  the 

conclusion reached by the learned trial court. While appraising 

the evidence, the learned trial court noted that in view of the 

CDR  of  the  cell  phone  of  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  his 

presence  at  the  place  of  occurrence  seemed  doubtful.  The 

CDR  of  the  cell  phone  of  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  reflects 

that  he  was  at  Ali  Medical  Centre,  F-8  Markaz,  Islamabad  at 

12.13  pm,  Bhatti  Plaza  main  Bazar  Ali  Pur  at  12.55  pm,  and 

in  Jhang  Syedan  at  01.27  pm.  In  view  of  the  CDR  it  is  not 

possible  to  place  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  at  the  place  of 

occurrence  at  the  reported  time  of  incident  (i.e.  01.20  pm). 

The  prosecution  has  provided  no  explanation  as  to  how  the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  and  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  could 

both  claim  that  the  latter  was  present  at  the  place  of 

occurrence  when  the  CDR  reflects  that  he  was  almost  10 

kilometers away in Jhang Syedan at least eight minutes after 

the  time  of  incident.  The  Complainant  or  the  State  led  no 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 13 

evidence to address the doubt created due to the CDR of the 

cell phone of Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) that he admitted was 

in  his  possession  on  the  fateful  day.  In  the  presence  of  the 

CDR  and  lack  of  explanation  as  to  why  it  places  Muhammad 

Safeer  (PW-2)  in  Jhang  Syedan  at  the  time  of  incident  and 

lack  of  explanation  by  the  prosecution  for  such  discrepancy 

between the scientific data and verbal testimony produced by 

the  Complainant  (PW-1)  and  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2),  we 

find it hard to believe that Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) was an 

eyewitness  of  the  occurrence.  Apart  this  there  are  other 

aspects  of  eyewitness  testimony  that  do  not  appeal  to  the 

ordinary logical mind. The prosecution story is that after firing 

the fatal shot from  close range Habib  Akhtar chose to reload 

the murder weapon due to which empty cartridge fell out and 

was  recovered  by  the  Investigating  Officer  (CW-6)  from  the 

place  of  occurrence.  However,  during  such  period  when  he 

was reloading the murder weapon, he was struggling to do so 

as the cartridge was stuck. He was thus holding an unloaded 

gun,  but  neither  the  Complainant  (PW-1),  son  of  the 

Deceased, nor Muhammad Safeer (PW-2), a close associate of 

the  Deceased,  chose  to  confront  Habib  Akhtar  or  apprehend 

him even though at the said time Habib Akhtar while holding 

unloaded  gun  was  only  a  few  feet  away  from  them.  The 

explanation  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  and  Muhammad 

Safeer  (PW-2)  is  that  at  the  relevant  time  that  they  were 

trying  to  take  care  of  the  Deceased  who  had  fallen  down. 

Again,  if  Habib  Akhtar  was  trying  to  reload  his  weapon  and 

was  struggling  to  do  so,  the  Complainant  and  Muhammad 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 14 

Safeer could not have known that they would not be the next 

targets  of  Habib  Akhtar.  Thus,  the  action  of  allowing  Habib 

Akhtar  to  reload  his  weapon  at  leisure  makes  no  sense. 

Further,  by  their  own  account,  the  Deceased  fell  to  the 

ground  upon  being  hit  and  the  Complainant  and  Muhammad 

Safeer they changed the location of the body of the Deceased 

from the point where he was hit to the point from where the 

Investigating  Officer  (CW-6)  collected  blood  samples.  The 

distance between these points according to site plan and the 

Complainant’s 

testimony  was  approximately  20 

feet. 

However, while moving the body of the deceased by about 20 

feet  for  no  valid  reason,  the  blood  oozing  out  of  the  wounds 

of the Deceased did not fall down on the road making a trail, 

as  according  to  the  Complainant  (PW-1),  he  and  Muhammad 

Safeer (PW-2) were holding the body of the Deceased and the 

blood  soaked  their  clothes  instead  of  falling  on  the  road. 

However,  the  police  did  not  take  into  possession  the  blood-

stained  clothes  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  and  Muhammad 

Safeer  (PW-2)  to  support  the  prosecution  story.  The 

Complainant  (PW-1)  and  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  claimed 

that  the  body  of  the  Deceased  was  transported  to  Polyclinic 

Hospital  in  a  vehicle  brought  by  one  Fida  Hussain,  who  was 

asked  to  come  to  the  place  of  occurrence  by  Muhammad 

Safeer but no blood was collected from the vehicle and made 

part of evidence. Further, the conduct of Habib Akhtar as well 

as  Sharafat  as  reported  by  Complainant  (PW-1)  and 

Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  seems  equally  unnatural.  There 

appears no purpose for Habib Akhtar to reload his gun, after 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 15 

firing  a fatal shot that claimed  life of the Deceased, if he  did 

not  intend  to  harm  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  or  Muhammad 

Safeer  (PW-2)  who  were  accompanying  the  Deceased.  That 

he  would  leave  the  place  of  incident  with  two  eyewitnesses 

unharmed  and  able  to  identify  him  and  send  him  to  the 

gallows,  when  he  had  the  ability  to  shoot  at  them,  is 

inexplicable.  Further,  if  he  only  meant  to  kill  the  Deceased, 

why  would  he  reload  his  shotgun  and  leave  an  empty  at  the 

place of occurrence to help the police find it and pin it on him.  

14. 

The  conduct  of  Sharafat  as  stated  by 

the 

Complainant (PW-1) is even more mindboggling. The accused 

Sharafat,  according  to  Complainant  (PW-1)  was  hiding  in 

hemp fields towards the west of the place of occurrence. He is 

stated to have emerged from his hiding place with his 30-bore 

gun in his hand and resorted to aerial firing before fleeing the 

place  of  occurrence  along  with  Habib  Akhtar.  The  natural 

conduct  of  someone  involved  in  an  offence  would  be  to  hide 

his  identity.  Crimes  committed  in  the  name  of  honour  might 

be exceptions, but even in such cases the offender choses to 

admit  the  offence  committed  to  bolster  his  perceived  honour 

as  opposed  to  hiding  before  the  occurrence  and  denying  his 

role after the occurrence. The purpose of Sharafat’s action, as 

reported, could be nothing other than to reveal himself to the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  so  as  to  enable  the  Complainant  to 

testify against Sharafat. In order words, Sharafat hid himself 

while the Deceased was being shot and subsequently revealed 

himself  and  his  30-bore  weapon,  fired  7-8  shots  to  attract 

attention  to  himself  and  then  scrambled  without  hurting  the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 16 

eyewitnesses to the murder of the Deceased. According to the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  and  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2),  Samar 

Mukhtar  was  an  eyewitness  to  Sharafat  and  Habib  Akhtar 

fleeing the place of occurrence. However, Samar Mukhtar was 

not  produced  as  a  witness.  According  to  the  Complainant 

(PW-1),  Samar  Mukhtar  (who  is  the  father-in-law  of  the 

Complainant’s  brother)  was  250  feet  from  the  place  of 

incident. But he couldn’t somehow reach the place of incident 

for  the  7-8  minutes  that  it  took  Fida  Hussain  to  bring  his 

vehicle that transported the Deceased’s body to the hospital, 

even  though  according  to  the  Investigating  Officer  (CW-6), 

Samar  Mukhtar  had  a  vehicle  at  the  time.    While,  the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  does  not  remember  Samar  Mukhtar 

reaching  the  place  of  incident  before  the  body  of  the 

Deceased  was  moved  to  the  hospital,  Muhammad  Safeer 

(PW-2)  believes  Samar  Mukhtar  did  arrive  before  the  body 

was  moved.  According  to  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  that  there 

were  other  passersby  who  witnessed  the  occurrence.  The 

prosecution  however  was  unable  to  present  any  of  them  as 

witnesses. Even Fida Hussain in whose vehicle the body of the 

Deceased was moved to the hospital  was not presented as a 

witness.  

15. 

The  recovery  affected  by 

the  police 

is  also 

inconsequential and does not help the prosecution’s case. The 

I.O.  (CW-6)  claims  to  have  recovered  an  empty  from  the 

place  of  occurrence  on  the  date  of  occurrence.  However,  for 

some  incomprehensible  reason,  before  sending  the  empty  to 

the laboratory for analysis he held on to it from 05.08.2011 to 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 17 

20.09.2011.  According  to  the  prosecution,  Habib  Akhtar  was 

arrested from his street on 10.08.2011 and immediately upon 

being  interrogated  while  standing  in  the  same  street,  he 

straightaway  volunteered  to  guide  the  arresting  party  to  a 

room adjacent to his house where he had chosen to hide the 

murder  weapon  under  a  heap  of  chaff.  Again,  for  some 

inexplicable  reason,  the  I.O.  (CW-6)  elected  not  to  send  the 

alleged  murder  weapon 

for 

forensic  analysis  up  until 

18.02.2012. It is the prosecution story that after postmortem 

six  pallets  recovered  from  the  body  of  the  Deceased  were 

handed  to  Muhammad  Arshad  Constable.  However,  the 

pallets  were  also  not  sent  for  forensic  analysis.  In  other 

words, the empty cartridge which Habib Akhtar allegedly used 

while  killing  the  Deceased,  the  murder  weapon  recovered  on 

the revelation of Habib Akhtar and the pallets recovered from 

the  body  of  the  Deceased  were  all  held  on  by  the 

investigators  without  sending  them  all  to  the  laboratory  for 

examination.  Such  recoveries  are  therefore  inconsequential. 

The  blood  collected  from  the  place  of  occurrence  by  the  I.O. 

(CW-6) was sent to the laboratory but was not matched with 

the blood of the Deceased. Consequently, such sample serves 

no  purpose  other  than  to  verify  that  it  is  a  human  blood.  In 

the  event  that  blood  sample  collected  from  the  place  of 

occurrence  was  matched  with  that  of  the  Deceased,  such 

report would have at least confirmed the place of occurrence. 

Further, in the event that the empty recovered from the place 

of  occurrence  was  sent  for  forensic  examination  immediately 

and  subsequently  the  weapon  recovered  from  Habib  Akhtar 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 18 

and  the  pallets  recovered  from  the  body  of  the  Deceased 

were  also  sent  for  examination  immediately  upon  recovery, 

and  all  the  three  items  had  not  been  kept  in  custody 

simultaneously,  forensic  reports  matching  the  three  items 

would have been effective corroboratory evidence  linking the 

accused Habib Akhtar to the murder of the Deceased. Due to 

incompetence or  complicity of the investigator the recoveries 

have become inconsequential and have no evidentiary value. 

As the recovered empty and the alleged murder weapon were 

in  police  custody  at  the  same  time,  there  is  no  way  to 

establish beyond reasonable doubt that the empty is not from 

a  cartridge 

fired 

from  the  murder  weapon  after  the 

occurrence  in  order  to  concoct  evidence  and  pin  it  on  the 

accused.          

16. 

The  medical  evidence  is  not  helpful  in  the  instant 

case. Nothing turns on the cause of death of the Deceased in 

this case. The medical evidence is merely supportive evidence 

which in the facts and circumstances of the case does nothing 

to  help  determine  the  identity  of  the  culprit  who  claimed  the 

life  of  the  Deceased.  And  consequently,  it  cannot  be  used  to 

corroborate  the  account  of  the  eyewitnesses  to  attribute 

liability upon the accused for the death of the Deceased.  

17. 

In  the  facts  and  circumstances  as  discussed  above, 

this  Court  finds  in  hard  to  believe  that  Muhammad  Safeer 

(PW-2)  was  at  the  place  of  occurrence  and  an  eyewitness  to 

the  murder  of  the  Deceased  when  the  CDR  of  his  cell  phone 

reflects  that  he  was  in  Jhang  Syedan  at  the  time  of  the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 19 

incident.  We  therefore  conclude  that  his  testimony  is  not 

reliable.  The  Complainant  (PW-1)  is  the  son  of  the  Deceased 

who testified that Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) was with him at 

the  time  of  the  incident,  helped  him  take  care  of  the 

Deceased  after  he  was  shot  and  move  the  body  of  the 

Deceased approximately 20 feet from the place of occurrence 

where he was shot, and subsequently accompanied him along 

with  the  body  of  the  Deceased  to  Polyclinic  Hospital.  If 

Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  was  in  Jhang  Syedan  at  the 

relevant time, the testimony of Complainant (PW-1) becomes 

untruthful  in  material  respect  and  contradicts  the  principle 

that  falsus  in  uno,  falsus  in  omnibus  in  view  of  the  law  laid 

down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Notice  to  Police 

Constable  Khizar  Hayat  Son  of  Hadait  Ullah  (PLD  2009 

SC 527) wherein it was held that if an eyewitness resorts to 

falsehood  in  a  material  respect,  his  testimony  cannot  be 

found  reliable  and  taken  into  consideration  for  any  other 

purpose  either.  As  we  have  concluded  that  there  is  no  real 

possibility of Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) to be an eyewitness, 

we  believe  that  the  testimony  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1) 

claiming that Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) accompanied him all 

along and was an eyewitness is false in a material respect and 

is therefore unreliable. Even if we had come to the conclusion 

that the testimony of the Complainant (PW-1) was not false in 

a material respect and had concluded  that the parts that  are 

false  are  divisible  and  can  be  distinguished  from  the  parts 

that  are  true,  the  account  of  the  events  as  presented  by 

Complainant  (PW-1)  does  not  appeal  to  a  prudent  mind  for 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 20 

not  being  sync  with  natural  human  conduct.  Further,  the 

Complainant  (PW-1)  is  also  an  interested  witness.  The 

prosecution’s  case  is  founded  in  the  belief  that  the  accused 

Zahid Hussain was the mastermind who plotted the murder of 

the  Deceased  and  he  used  Habib  Akhtar,  his  nephew,  and 

Sharafat,  another  relative,  as  tools  to  carry  out  his  design. 

The prosecution story as presented by the Complainant (PW-

1)  and  reflected  in  the  content  of  the  FIR  as  well  as  in  the 

private complaint is therefore inspired by the enmity between 

Zahid  Hussain  and  the  Deceased  as  allegedly  articulated  by 

the  Deceased  during  his 

lifetime.  According 

to 

the 

Complainant (PW-1) the accused Sharafat was involved in an 

attack  on  the  Deceased  in  the  year  2009,  when  he  attacked 

the  Deceased  and  broke  his  arms  and  legs.  Likewise, 

Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) and Sharafat also shared acrimony 

as Sharafat had a case registered against Muhammad Safeer 

under  sections  324  and  34  of  PPC  at  PS  Koral,  Islamabad. 

Given  this  history,  the  eyewitnesses  PW-1  and  PW-2  were 

interested  in  seeking  to  have  Zahid  Hussain  and  Sharafat 

punished  and  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  believed  that  Zahid 

Hussain  hatched  the  plan  to  kill  his  father  on  basis  of  past 

enmity.  In  the  instant  matter  the  trial  court  has  rightly 

concluded  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  conspiracy 

implicating  Zahid  Hussain  in  the  murder  of  the  Deceased. 

Admittedly the Deceased filed no complaint during his lifetime 

stating  that  he  feared  that  Zahid  Hussain  sought  to  kill  him. 

Zahid Hussain admittedly called Muhammad Safeer (PW-2) on 

the date of demise of the Deceased, within a couple of hours 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 21 

of  the  incident.  Zahid  Hussain  claimed  making  a  call  to 

enquire  about  the  incident  and  to  assure  the  Deceased’s 

family  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  incident.  While 

there is evidence that Zahid Hussain called Muhammad Safeer 

(PW-2), there is no evidence regarding the content of the call 

other  than  the  words  of  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2).  For 

reasons  already  stated  above,  we  have  not  found  the 

testimony  of  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  to  be  true  and 

therefore  his  words  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  evidence  of 

conspiracy  for  the  murder  of  the  Deceased.  Other  than  the 

account  of  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2),  there  is  no  other 

evidence  connecting  Zahid  Hussain  to  the  offence  he  is 

charged  with.  We,  therefore,  conclude  that  he  was  rightly 

acquitted  by  the 

learned  trial  court.  Given  that  the 

prosecution  has  been  unable  to  prove  motive  for  the  offence 

committed against the Deceased and the eyewitness accounts 

of both the Complainant (PW-1) and Muhammad Safeer (PW-

2)  have  been  found  not  to  be  reliable,  there  is  no  other 

evidence placing Sharafat at the place of occurrence or linking 

Habib  Akhtar  to  the  murder  of  the  Deceased.  In  the  event 

that even that the  testimony of the Complainant (PW-1)  was 

not found to be unreliable in a material respect, he would be 

treated  as  an  interested  witness  in  relation  to  the  accused 

persons  and  his  testimony  would  need  to  be  supported  by 

corroboratory  evidence  in  order  to  be  relied  upon  to  find  the 

accused  guilty.  In  the  instant  case,  as  has  already  been 

discussed  above,  there  is  no  corroboratory  evidence.  The 

motive  has  not  been  proved  by  the  prosecution.  The 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 22 

recoveries  have  been  rendered  inconsequential  and  have  no 

evidentiary  value  in  view  of  the  conduct  of  the  investigators, 

and  likewise  the  forensic  evidence  is  of  no  utility  to  the 

prosecution.  The  medical  evidence  is  merely  supporting 

evidence and does not help in any way to identify the culprit 

or  corroborate  the  testimony  of  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  or 

Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2).  Thus,  even  if  this  Court  had  not 

come  to  the  conclusion  that  testimony  of  the  Complainant 

(PW-1)  is  not  reliable  to  convict  the  accused,  being  an 

interested witness, his testimony could be of limited value as 

it  is  not  corroborated  with  independent  evidence  possessing 

intrinsic value.   

18. 

The  motive  attributed  to  Zahid  Hussain  is  based  on 

prior  FIRs  registered  against  individuals  in  Gujrat  allegedly 

acting on Zahid Hussain’s behest and newspapers reports of a 

press  conference  convened  by  the  Deceased.  The  I.O  who 

lodged or investigated the FIR lodged in Gujrat has not been 

produced.  Similarly,  the  author  of  newspaper  reports,  copies 

of which were made part of the evidence, were not produced 

before  the  learned  trial  court.  It  has  been  held  by  this  Court 

in  Syed  Hamid  Saeed  Kazmi  and  others  VS  The  State 

(2017  PCr.L.J  854)  that  documents  are  not  admissible  in 

evidence  unless  their  authors  are  produced  to  verify  the 

content.  Similarly,  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  State  VS 

Ahmed  Omar  Sheikh  (2021  SCMR  873)  held  that 

newspaper  reports  cannot  be  relied  upon  unless  the  authors 

of  such  reports  are  produced.  This  was  not  happened  in  the 

present  case.  It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 23 

Muhammad  Bux  VS  Abdul  Aziz  (2010  SCMR  1959)  that 

if  motive  is  not  proved,  the  court  should  be  very  careful  in 

accepting  the  prosecution  story  and  the  evidence  of  such 

witness  who  gave  evidence  on  motive  should  be  accepted 

with  great  caution.  It  is  also  settled  law  that  if  motive  is 

disbelieved, death penalty cannot be awarded as lack of proof 

of motive constitutes a mitigating circumstance. (Reliance is 

placed  on  Qaddan  VS  State  (2017  SCMR  148),  Hashim 

Qasim  VS  State  (2017  SCMR  986),  Ali  Bux  VS  State 

(2018 SCMR 354) and Ghulam Murtaza VS State (2021 

SCMR 149)). It was held in Sabir Hussain VS State (2020 

MLD 1492) that where last call was made by the accused to 

the  deceased,  the  same  could  have  been  for  reasons  not 

connected  to  the  offence  that  the  accused  is  charged  with, 

and that the fact of making a call by itself is of no use to the 

prosecution.  In  the  instant  case  as  well,  while  placing  of  the 

call  by  Zahid  Hussain  to  Muhammad  Safeer  (PW-2)  is  not 

denied,  the  fact  that  such  call  was  made  is  not  useful  to  the 

prosecution as there is no proof regarding the content of the 

call. It was held by full bench of learned Federal Shariat Court 

in Shahnawaz VS  State (2014 YLR 724) that motive is a 

double edge sword, which cuts both ways in a sense that the 

enmity  that  could  prompt  a  person  to  commit  a  crime  could 

also inspire the other party to falsely implicate such perceived 

enemy.        

19. 

In  the  cases  of  Sharafat  and  Zahid  Hussain,  who 

have  been  acquitted  by  the  learned  trial  court,  double 

presumption of innocence is attracted. It has been held by the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 24 

august  Supreme  Court  that  strong  and  cogent  reasons  are 

required  to  dislodge  double  presumption  of 

innocence 

(Reliance  is  placed  on  Muhammad  Tasweer  VS  Hafiz 

Zulkarnain  (PLD  2009  SC  53),  Zaheer  Sadiq  VS 

Muhammad  Ijaz  (2017  SCMR  2007)  and  Khuda-e-Dad 

alias Pehlwan VS State (2017 SCMR 701)). It was held in 

Zulfiqar  Ali  VS  Imtiaz  (2019  SCMR  1315)  that  acquittal 

once granted is not to be recalled merely on the possibility of 

contra  view.    In  the  instant  case,  we  have  been  given  no 

strong  and  cogent  reasons 

to  disbelieve 

the  double 

presumption  of  innocent  that  attaches  to  Sharafat  and  Zahid 

Hussain.   

20. 

It  was  found  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Shahid Abbas VS Shahbaz (2009 SCMR 237) that where 

two  sons  of  the  deceased  were  present  when  the  accused 

allegedly  killed  their  father  in  their  presence,  circumstances 

suggested  that  they  were  not  present  at  the  scene  of 

occurrence  at  the  relevant  time  in  the  backdrop  that  prior 

enmity between the parties was admitted. It was held by the 

august Supreme Court in Muhammad Asif VS State (2017 

SCMR  486)  that  in  face  of  unnatural  conduct  of  interested 

witness,  which  was  disbelieved  regarding  one  accused,  his 

testimony  could  also  not  be  believed  in  relation  to  the  co-

accused without corroboratory evidence. In Muhammad Arif 

VS  State  (2019  PCr.LJ  337)  the  learned  Balochistan  High 

Court  found  that  the  alleged  conduct  of  the  accused  was 

unnatural  where  the  brothers  of  the  deceased  were  let  go 

unharmed  such  that  they  could  consequently  able  to  testify 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 25 

against  the  accused.    Likewise,  in  Shahid  Amir  alias  Noor 

Kamal  VS    State  (2018  YLR  1850)  the  learned  Peshawar 

High  Court  inferred  that  a  witness  was  not  present  on  the 

spot when he claimed to have been left unharmed despite the 

ability of the culprit to hurt such witness. It is settled law that 

once  the  prosecution  witnesses  are  disbelieved  with  respect 

to an accused, they cannot be relied upon with regard to co-

accused  unless  corroborated  by 

independent  evidence 

(Reliance  is  placed  on  Qaddan  VS  State  (2018  SCMR 

787) and Haroon Shafique VS State (2018 SCMR 2118). 

21. 

It  has  been  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  that 

inconsequential recovery would not hurt the prosecution case 

in  the  presence  of  reliable  ocular  evidence  (Reliance  is 

placed  on  Mukhtar  Ahmed  State  (2004  SCMR  220)  and 

Haroon  Rasheed  VS  State  (2005  SCMR  1568).  But  we 

have already expressed our opinion in detail that recovery in 

the instant case has been inconsequential and further that the 

ocular  evidence  is  also  not  confidence-inspiring.  It  was  held 

by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Muhammad  Shah  VS 

State  (2010  SCMR  1009)  that  when  two  interpretations  of 

evidence were possible, the one favourable to the accused is 

to  be  taken  into  consideration.  It  was  further  held  in  Yasin 

alias  Ghulam  Mustafa  VS  State  (2008  SCMR  336)  that 

suspicion  however  strong  cannot  take  the  place  of  proof.  

Substitution  of  an  uninvolved  person  for  actual  culprit  is  a 

rare phenomenon as explained by the august Supreme Court 

in  Muhammad  Iqbal  VS  State  (PLD  2001  SC  222).  But 

the  tendency  of  casting  a  wider  net  is  fairly  common  in  our 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 26 

socio-legal culture. In the instance case, the prosecution story 

revolves around Zahid Hussain as the mastermind responsible 

for  the  Deceased’s  murder.  Habib  Akhtar’s  actions  are  then 

explained as being  the nephew through whom Zahid Hussain 

executed  his  plot  against  the  Deceased.  The  learned  trial 

court  has  found  Zahid  Hussain  not  guilty  on  the  basis  that 

motive was not proved. Consequently, the testimony provided 

by  the  Complainant  (PW-1)  cannot  be  accepted  not  just  in 

relation  to  Zahid  Hussain,  as  his  evidence  regarding  motive 

has  been  disbelieved,  but  also  in  relation  to  the  other  co-

accused  as  his  testimony  has  been  found  to  be  false  in 

material  respects.  In  the  instant  case  the  learned  trial  court 

has disbelieved the ocular account of the Complainant (PW-1) 

in  regard  to  Sharafat.  The  testimony  of  the  same  witness  in 

relation  to  Habib  Akhtar  could  not  therefore  be  accepted 

unless  corroborated  from  independent  sources  or  evidence 

that had intrinsic worth. And in face of the record, there is no 

independent  witness  to  corroborate  the  actions  of  the 

Complainant  (PW-1).  The  principle  of  falsus  in  uno,  falsus  in 

omnibus  was  endorsed  and  upheld  by  the  august  Supreme 

Court  in  Notice  to  Police  Constable  Khizar  Hayat  Son  of 

Hadait Ullah (PLD 2019 SC 527) wherein the following was 

held: 

20…A court of law cannot grant a license to a witness 

to  tell  lies  or  to  mix  truth  with  falsehood  and  then 

take  it  upon  itself  to  sift  grain  from  chaff  when  the 

law  makes  perjury  or  testifying  falsely  culpable 

offence. A court also has no jurisdiction to lay down 

a  principle  of  law  when  even  the  Parliament  is 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 27 

expressly 

forbidden  by 

the  Constitution 

from 

enacting  such  a  principle  as  law.  The  inapplicability 

of  this  rule  in  Pakistan  was  introduced  by  Chief 

Justice  Muhammad  Munir  in  the  year  1951  at  the 

time when Article 227 of the Constitution was not in 

the 

filed  but  after 

introduction  of 

the  said 

constitutional prohibition of the enunciation of law by 

his lordship in this field, like the infamous doctrine of 

necessity 

introduced  by  his 

lordship 

in 

the 

constitutional field, may not hold its ground now…    

21.  We  may  observe  in  the  end  that  a  judicial 

system  which  permits  deliberate 

falsehood 

is 

doomed  to  fail  and  a  society  which  tolerates  it  is 

destined  to  self-destruct.  Truth  is  foundation  of 

justice  and  justice  is  core  and  bedrock  of  a  civilized 

society and, thus, any compromise on truth amounts 

to a compromise on a society’s future  as a just, fair 

and civilized society. Our judicial system has suffered 

a  lot  as  a  consequence  of  the  above  mentitoned 

permissible  deviation  from  the  truth  and  it  is  about 

time  that  such  a  colossal  wrong  may  be  rectified  in 

all  earnestness.  Therefore,  in  light  of  the  discussion 

made  above,  we  declare  that  the  rule  falsus  in  uno, 

falsus in omnibus shall henceforth be an integral part 

of  our  jurisprudence  in  criminal  cases  and  the  same 

shall  be  given  effect  to,  followed  and  applied  by  all 

the courts in the country in its letter and spirit. It is 

also directed that a witness found by a court to have 

resorted  to  a  deliberate  falsehood  on  a  material 

aspect  shall,  without  any  latitude  invariably  be 

proceeded against the committing perjury.   

22. 

We are cognizant that it doubtful that the occurrence 

was  unseen.  The  incident  transpired  in  broad  daylight  in  the 

middle  of  the  day,  at  a  time  close  to  Jumma  prayers  in  a 

place which had houses and shops nearby. In our society and 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 28 

culture  witnesses  have  an  aversion  to  being  embroiled  in  a 

criminal  matter  and  often  refuse  to  testify  especially  when 

they  are  witnesses  to  a  horrific  crime.  The  possibility  cannot 

therefore  be dismissed that an actual eyewitness might have 

shared his account with the Deceased’s family, while refusing 

to  become  a  witness  himself,  and  thereafter  false  witnesses 

were  planted  in  order  to  state  and  affirm  the  anonymous 

witness account narrated to them. Even in such circumstance, 

a court cannot affix guilt on the basis that while the witnesses 

may  not  be  truthful  or  eyewitnesses  to  a  crime  at  all,  their 

account  of  the  events  that  transpired  and  claimed  the  life  of 

the  deceased  seems  plausible.  It  was  held  by  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  State  VS  Ahmed  Omar  Sheikh  (2021 

SCMR  873)  that  even  if  a  single  circumstance  created  a 

reasonable  doubt  in  a  prudent  mind  regarding  guilt  of  the 

accused, benefit of the doubt must be granted to the accused. 

“The accused is entitled to the benefit of such doubt not as a 

matter of grace, but as matter a matter of right,” it was held. 

It  has  been  emphasized  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Naveed  Asghar  VS  State  (PLD  2021  SC  600)  that  no 

matter  how  heinousness  of  the  crime  in  question  should  not 

influence  the  mind  of  the  Judge  as  the  court  is  under  a  duty 

“to  assess  the  probative  value  of  every  piece  of  evidence  in 

dispassionate,  systematic  and  structured  manner  without 

being  influenced  by  the  nature  of  allegations.“  In  the  said 

case  before  the  august  Supreme  Court  the  prosecution  story 

of interrogation of the accused at the place of arrest and the 

accused  leading  the  police  from  place  of  arrest  to  recovery 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 29 

was  found  to  be  doubtful  as  it  did  not  fit  ordinary  human 

conduct.  The  august  Supreme  Court  emphasized  that 

conjecture and probability were not substitutes of proof and if 

courts  were  to  decide  criminal  matters  on  high  probabilities 

“the  golden  rule  of  granting  benefit  of  doubt  to  the  accused 

person,  which  was  a  dominant  feature  of  the  criminal  justice 

system would be reduced to a naught.” 

23. 

It  is  the  obligation  of  the  court  to  punish  the  guilty 

once  the  guilt  is  proved  in  accordance  with  law  and  not  to 

punish someone suspected of having committed a crime. This 

definition  is  essential  to  ensure  the  safety  of  the  criminal 

justice  system,  as  at  stake  on  the  one  hand  is  the  ability  of 

criminal  justice  to  bring  the  offender  to  justice  and  on  the 

other  hand  what  is  at  stake  is  human  life  and  liberty, 

guaranteed by Article 9 of the Constitution.  

24. 

In view of the reasoning above together with the law 

as  settled  by  the  Supreme  Court,  we  have  found  the  ocular 

evidence  unreliable  for  being  untruthful  in  material  respects, 

and  the  recovery  inconsequential,  and  have  consequently 

concluded  that  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  beyond 

reasonable  doubt  that  Habib  Akhtar  is  guilty  of  an  offence 

under  section  302(b)  of  PPC.  We  therefore  allow  Criminal 

Appeal  No.  170/2019  filed  by  Habib  Akhtar,  and  answer  the 

Murder  Reference  in  the  negative  and  set  aside  the 

impugned  judgment  dated  23.05.2019  to  the  extent  of 

conviction  of  Habib  Akhtar.  The  appellant,  Habib  Akhtar 

stands  acquitted  from  the  charge  framed  against  him  by  the 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 30 

learned  trial  court  by  order  dated  24.08.2013  and  shall  be 

released  forthwith  if  not  required  in  any  other  case.  Criminal 

Revision  No.  68/2019  for  enhancement  of  compensation 

amount  awarded  to  Habib  Akhtar  is  also  dismissed.  We 

support  the  impugned  judgment  to  the  extent  that  it  found 

Sharafat  and  Zahid  Hussain  not  guilty  and  acquitted  them  of 

the  offences  that  they  were  charged  with  and  consequently 

Criminal Appeal No. 194/2020 also stands dismissed. 

25. 

We  are  dismayed  by  the  manner  in  which  the 

investigation  was  conducted,  recoveries  were  affected  and 

withheld  by  the  police,  including  the  empty  of  the  cartridge 

allegedly used in the offence, the murder weapon, the pallets 

recovered  from  the  body  of  the  Deceased  and  the  failure  of 

the  I.O.  to  send  recoveries  for  forensic  analysis  in  a  timely 

manner  in  order  to  transform  recoveries  into  material 

evidence that could be used against the accused during trial. 

The conduct of the police  could be explained by one of three 

reasons:  due  to  extreme  incompetence  of  everyone  involved 

in  the  investigation,  especially  the  I.O.;  or  their  complicity 

with  the  offender  with  the  aim  of  destroying  valuable 

evidence  that  would  otherwise  enable  the  court  to  bring  to 

justice  those  responsible  for  the  heinous  act  of  murder;  or 

their  complicity  with  the  prosecution  to  pin  false  evidence 

upon  accused  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  offense.  We 

therefore  direct  the  Inspector  General  of  Police,  ICT,  to 

initiate proceedings under the relevant laws to investigate the 

matter  to  determine  whether  Abdul  Waheed,  Sub-Inspector, 

I.O., and other police witnesses in the instant case are liable 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 31 

for incompetence and determine whether or not they are fit to 

serve. In the event that the departmental proceedings  under 

the  relevant  laws  find  that  Abdul  Waheed,  S.I.,  and  other 

police  witnesses  are  liable  for  incompetence,  the  Inspector 

General  of  Police  will  ensure  that  appropriate  action  is  taken 

against  them  in  accordance  with  law.  In  the  event  that  the 

departmental  proceedings  find  that  Abdul  Waheed  S.I.  and 

other police witnesses were not incompetent and were aware 

of  their  obligations  and  capable  of  preserving  the  recovered 

items  and  sending  them  for  forensic  evaluation  in  order  to 

transform  such  recoveries  into  useable  evidence,  they  would 

be liable for presenting false evidence before the learned trial 

court  and  ought  to  be  proceeded  against  under  section  194 

PPC for perjury. In such case, the Inspector General of Police 

shall  refer  the  matter  to  the  learned  Sessions  Judge  for 

proceedings  against  Abdul  Waheed  S.I.  and  other  police 

witnesses in the instant case in accordance with law.  

26. 

We are also unable to comprehend as  to why in  the 

21st  century  while  conducting  investigation  the  police  is 

unable  to  cordon  off  crime  scenes,  collect  evidence  in  real 

time and create photographic and video evidence of the crime 

scene  and  the  recoveries  affected,  in  order  to  ensure  that 

such  evidence  can  be  used  by  the  trial  court  to  bring  the 

guilty  to  justice  and  limit  the  possibility  of  concoction  of 

evidence  or  planting  of  false  evidence  that  embroils  the 

innocent in a criminal trial and enables the guilty to go Scott-

free. We expect the Inspector General of Police ICT to put in 

place  Standard  Operating  Procedures  (i)  for  purposes  of 

 
 
Cr. Appeal No. 170/2019.                                           P a g e  | 32 

creating photographic and video evidence at the investigation 

stage,  and  (ii)  for  the  manner  in  which  evidence  is  to  be 

subjected  to  forensic  evaluation  and  timelines  within  which 

such  evidence  is  to  be  dispatched  for  evaluation  while 

preserving  the  safety  and  reliability  of  such  evidence.  The 

Inspector  General  of  Police  ICT  may  also  consider  creating  a 

mechanism that throws-up red-flags whenever such SOPs are 

not abided by during investigation and automatically results in 

disciplinary  and  penal  proceedings  against  the  investigators 

and  police  officials  found  delinquent.  In  order  to  ensure  that 

our criminal justice system is able to bring criminals to justice 

in  an  efficient  manner,  without  compromising  the  safety  of 

the system, it is essential to address the problems that afflict 

investigations  and  prosecution,  which 

form  essential 

components of our criminal justice system.   

27. 

The office is directed to send a copy of this judgment 

to the Inspector General of Police, ICT, for compliance.       

                   (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)       (BABAR SATTAR) 

                     JUDGE 

     JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 14.10.2021. 

              JUDGE  

                   JUDGE 

Saeed*888888 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
