JUDGMENT 

Before Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, J 

STATE through Advocate-General of Islamabad---Petitioner 

VS

MATI ULLAH JAN and 4 others---Respondents 

Criminal Original No. 40 of 2018, decided on 21st February, 2018. 

SHAUKAT  AZIZ  SIDDIQUI,  J.---Proceedings  under  this  contempt  petition  has  been 
initiated against the Respondents for hosting/telecasting a program in which code of conduct as 
well as restrictions of the Constitution especially under Article 19 of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Constitution') have been violated. 

Brief facts relevant for disposal of titled petition are that on 05.02.2018, Respondent No.1 
2. 
hosted a program "Apna Apna Gareban" attended by Mr. Riasat Ali Azad, President District Bar 
Association,  Islamabad  and  Mr.  Abdul  Qayyum  Siddiqui,  Senior  Correspondent,  Geo  TV,  in 
which name of undersigned was repeated time and again with mala fide intention, ulterior motive 
and in order to mislead the viewers. A unilateral opinion without verification was expressed and 
an attempt to malign the superior Courts of the country was made. 

3. 
On  07.02.2018,  notices  were  issued  to  the  Respondents  with  the  direction  to  appear  in 
person before the Court to explain that why contempt of Court proceedings may not be initiated 
against them for hosting malicious program with stinking approach and why PEMRA may not be 
directed to initiate proceedings for the cancellation of the license of "Waqt News". In response 
thereto Respondents Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5 appeared along with their counsel Mr. Safeer Hussain Shah, 
Advocate, on 12.02.2018, but matter was adjourned to 16.02.2018, as Respondent No.2, owner of 
the news channel, failed to put appearance. On the later date C.D. of the above said program was 
played in open Court, in presence of all the Respondents. On completion Respondents were asked 
to  comment  about  the program,  to  which Respondents  Nos. 2 to  5, admitting that the program 
included  contemptuous  remarks  against  the  judiciary,  showed  their  intention  to  submit 
unconditional apology in writing and sought an opportunity in this regard, whereas. Respondent 
No.1 asked for few days time in order to consult his lawyer to make any statement as to whether 
he intends to contest the proceedings or to tender unconditional apology, hence, on his request 
matter was adjourned to 19.02.2018. On the said date Respondents submitted their written stance 
through which an attempt to justify the proceedings of the above referred talk show was made and 
ingredient  of unconditional  apology  was shady,  hence, on  court's concern, Respondents  sought 
time to rephrase the same which request was allowed. On 21.02.2018 an unconditional apology 
was submitted by the Respondents which for ready reference is reproduced hereunder:- 

"Undertaking Submitted On Behalf of the Respondents Nos.2 to 5. 

Humbly Submitted: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In lieu of the humble undertaking given before this August Court, meticulously recorded 
vide order dated 16-02-2018 in the case titled The State v. Matiullah Jan and others bearing 
Criminal Original No. 40 of 2018, the undersigned (Respondents Nos. 2 to 5, namely (i) 
Mrs.  Rameeza  Majeed  Nizami,  Owner/CEO,  Waqt  News,  (ii)  Muhammad  Ali  Javed, 
Producer  Talk  Show  Programme  "Apna  Apna  Gareeban",  Waqt  News,  (iii)  Sardar 
Hameed, Bureau Chief, Waqt News and (iv) Zeeshan Mehmood, Associate Producer Talk 
Show Programme "Apna Apna Gareeban", Waqt News), hereby submit that for the kind 
perusal of this Honorable Court, the following with utmost humility; 

1. 
That  the  Undersigned  regrettably  admit  that  proper,  thorough  and  detailed 
investigation should have ensued before airing of the programme in order to present a true 
and  accurate  picture  and  lament  that  certain  material  factors  were  overlooked, 
consequences whereof unforeseen, and not duly comprehended, as such the Undersigned 
rue the omission. 

That the Undersigned tender an unconditional apology before this August Court for 
2. 
the  contents  of  the  programme  relating  to  the  August  Courts,  which  was  entirely 
unintentional, and a deeply regrettable lapse. It was never the intention of the Undersigned 
in any manner, to bring the dignity and supremacy of the August Courts into question and 
any perception to this effect is regretted, repentantly. 

3. 
That the Undersigned solemnly undertake to be extremely cautious in future with 
respect to any Programme to be aired on the Waqt News Channel and to ensure that it does 
not fall within the fold of the contempt of the August Courts. 

4. 
That the Undersigned hold strong beliefs that the Sanctuaries of Justice (Courts) 
are a creation of the Constitution and their mainstay rests in the public confidence and it is 
contritely  contended that the Undersigned assuredly will never  commit to  anything that 
would surmount to or be calculated as a deliberate or mala fide attack on such confidence. 

That the Undersigned categorically and unambiguously undertake to ensure proper 
5. 
conduct for future, in the same profess manner that has been inherited from the respected 
and admired founders of this prestigious channel and newspaper. 

6. 
That the Undersigned have nothing but the utmost respect and regard for the August 
Courts and the orders, directions and observations passed by the Honorable Courts during 
the  course  of  hearings  or  with  respect  to  final  judgments  or  orders  and  can  never  even 
imagine committing contempt of the honourable Courts, in any manner, whatsoever; 

7. 
That  the influential  print and electronic media  group has long  been  cited  as one 
having critical appearance and importance in the media houses of the country. The news 
correspondent  network  of  the  channel  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the  country.  The 
sensationalism and rating-oriented approach has always been a journalistic taboo for the 
flag bearers of Waqt and Nawa-i-Waqt: 

8. 
That  the  Undersigned  most  submissively  present  that  the  entire  purpose  of 
discussing the issue of illegal encroachments was to highlight the plight of those affected 
by actions of a few and was never meant to target or offend any profession in general or 

 
 
vague terms and any perception to such an effect is lamented. since the Undersigned would 
never  bring  into  ridicule  the  noble  profession  of  law  and  the  esteemed  members  of  the 
Islamabad Bar Association and for this very reason the admirable President of the Bar was 
called upon to present and clarify the issue. 

9. 
That the Undersigned hold the Islamabad Bar Association in high esteem and do 
believe  that  the  actions  of  few  shall  not  be  an  admonishing  factor  for  the  entire  Bar 
Association  and  assure  most  humbly  that  any  perception  to  the  contrary,  was  not 
intentional. 

10. 
That the group has been gaining acceptance nationwide as a flag-bearer of Ideology 
of Pakistan as well as a highly credible newspaper that always tries to report in an impartial 
and honest manner. 

11. 
That the Nawa-i-Waqt Group enjoys a leading position as an opinion maker within 
Pakistan's independent national media, both in news as well as in views, on account of its 
forthright and bold approach to objective journalism and the tenets of Islam, the ideology 
of  Pakistan,  and  the  'pre-1947  two-nation  theory  of  the  Indian  subcontinent'.  This 
newspaper had supported the Pakistan Movement for the creation of Pakistan. Since 1940, 
it has attained high credibility among the public. 

12. 
That its core mission is to empower its readers and viewers through its content. The 
newspaper and television channels of the Nawa-i-Waqt group provide a unique perspective 
to the news. 

13. 
The Nawa-i-Waqt Group always promoted national unity, integration and truthful 
reporting  of  the  news  in  the  supreme  interest  of  Pakistan.  It  firmly  believes  in  the 
independence of press and media, both in print and electronic forms. 

14. 
That  the  August  Courts  are  a  symbol  of  magnanimity  and  good  grace  and  are 
admired,  across  the  board,  without  distinction  for  they  are  saddled  with  the  onerous 
responsibility and task of imparting justice to all without any fear, favor or ill will. 

That the August Court is humbly requested to view the present proceedings on the 
15. 
golden principles of forgiveness/remission and pardon, enshrined in Islam, which are the 
hallmarks of the Islamic system of dispensation of justice. 

Statement on Behalf of the Respondent No. 1. 

Humbly Submitted; 

Respectfully sheweth, 

In lieu of the order by this Honorable Court dated 19-02-2018 in the case titled The State 
v. Matiullah Jan and others bearing Criminal Original No. 40 of 2018, the Undersigned 
submit for the kind perusal of this Honorable Court, the following statement with utmost 
humility; 

 
 
 
 
That  I  have  been  a  journalist  for  the  last  over  22  years  with  over  20  years  of 
1. 
experience  in  covering  Supreme  Court  proceedings.  I  have  the  honour  of  being  a 
Chevening  Scholar  with  Masters  in  International  Journalism  (Broadcast)  from  City 
University, London. Before that I also did my Masters in Defense and Strategic Studies 
from  Quaid-e-Azam  University,  Islamabad.  During  my  journalistic  career  I  have  also 
worked for Dawn  News, REUTERS and prepared and read news dispatches from  BBC 
World Radio (Urdu) while at London. I also anchored English News for ARY London. I 
also  had  the  honour  of  getting  National  Award  for  being  the  best  news  reporter 
correspondent  for  Pakistan  Television.  I  also  worked  for  prestigious  think  tanks  and 
research institutes like the  Institute of Strategic  Studies  Islamabad (ISSI) as  a Research 
Fellow and with international media development organization Inter News as a Media Law 
Advisor working on PEMRA laws. Apart from my journalistic work I have the honour of 
being  a  visiting  faculty  for  Pakistani  universities  and  journalism  schools  apart  from 
representing Pakistan on international foras in Europe and East Asia. During my over years 
of association with the prestigious Nawa-i -Waqat group I have anchored television shows 
and  contributed  regularly  for  op-ed  pages  on  national  and  international  issues  both  for 
English and Urdu dailies. 

I belong to a respectable family of lawyers, teachers and army officers. My father 
2. 
Lt. Colonel (retired) Abdurrazzaq Khan Abbasi who was a double gold Medalist in MA 
Philosophy  and  MA  Political  Science  from  Peshawar  University  and  was  also  a  law 
graduate of Punjab University. Moreover he also did his Masters in Chinese language with 
distinction from Peking (now Beijing) University China for which he remained head of 
China desk in the ISSI for 8 years. 

3. 
That the Undersigned regrettably admit that further investigation should have been 
conducted  before  airing  the  programme  on  the  important  issue  of  illegal  occupation  of 
football  ground  by  lawyers  to  present  complete  picture  and  also  actions  taken  by  this 
honorable Court on the subject mater. Moreover, someone more informed than President 
of  Islamabad  District  Bar  Association  could  have  been  invited  to  the  live  show  for  the 
complete  picture.  This  oversight  was  unintentional  and  consequence  thereof  being 
unforeseen is regrettable. 

That I have firm belief and faith in the judicial system of Pakistan and always keep 
4. 
the judiciary in the highest esteem. I can never ever imagine or do any act to be little or 
lower the esteem  of the  honourable Courts and its judges.  I have all the respect  for the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan Justice Saqib Nisar and Honourable Justice of Islamabad High 
Court Justice Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui. 

5. 
That  the  purpose  of  airing  the  Programme  "Apna  Apna  Gareeban"  dated  05-02-
2018, with respect to the issue of encroachment on the F-8 Football ground, was entirely 
bona fide and was not meant in any manner as a disrespect or an attempt to malign the 
August Superior Courts or the Learned Sessions Courts but to only highlight the issue of 
illegal encroachment, in pursuance to the Suo Motu taken by the August Apex Court and 
was meant to remain within the fold and dictates of fair reporting; 

6. 

That  no  ill  will  or  mala  fide/malicious  intent  was  involved  in  airing  of  the 

 
 
programme in question and the same was only meant to set out the facts and to present a 
true depiction of the factual aspects surrounding the controversy, in sheer bid to lay the 
requisite information in the public domain in as responsible a manner, as possible. 

That the Undersigned solemnly undertakes to be cautious in future with respect to 
7. 
any Programme to be aired on the Waqt News Channel and to ensure that each and every 
single programme to  be  aired will be seen with  a critical eye in  order to unequivocally 
ensure as far as possible, that nothing is aired, which may even be perceived in any manner 
to fall within the fold of the Contempt of the August Courts. 

8. 
That the Undersigned has conducted the programme dated 05-02-2018 Apna Apna 
Gareeban without having any mala-fide, malice, ill will or ulterior motive. The undersigned 
humbly states that he has news ever tried or has done anything to mislead the viewers or 
violate the norms of decency and morality. The undersigned has always been observing the 
code of conduct and the constitutional requirements. With a long career and journalistic 
struggle  behind  the  undersigned  cannot  ever  imagine  maligning  or  blackmailing 
institutions with any motivation through professional work. The undersigned enjoys great 
respect dignity and honour among his fellow colleagues for struggle against the menace 
and evils of society. 

9. 
That  the  Undersigned  most  submissively  present  that  the  entire  purpose  of 
discussing the issue of illegal encroachments was to highlight the plight of those affected 
actions of a few and was never meant to target or offend any profession in general or vague 
terms and any perception to such an effect is lamented, since the Undersigned would never 
bring into ridicule the noble profession of law and the esteemed members of the Islamabad 
Bar Association and for this very reason the admirable President of the Bar was called upon 
to present and clarify the issue. The Undersigned hold the Islamabad Bar Association in 
high esteem and do believe that the actions of few shall not be an admonishing factor for 
the entire bar association and assure most humbly that it was not intentional. 

10. 
That my organization has been gaining acceptance nationwide as a flag-bearer of 
Ideology of Pakistan as well as a highly credible newspaper that always tries to report in 
an impartial and honest manner. 

11. 
That the August Court is humbly requested to view the present proceedings on the 
touchstone  of  fundamental  rights  and  principles  of  justice  enshrined  in  Islam  and  the 
constitution of Pakistan. The undersigned is at the mercy of the court for magnanimous 
view of the averments made above with the humble prayer to discharge the notice for which 
the undersigned will be highly grateful." 

Normally, the contemnors would have been proceeded against, on account of the aforesaid acts 
had they not placed themselves at the mercy of the Court by submitting unconditional apology, 
but since they have admitted the allegations and tendered unconditional apology, by stating that 
they would remain careful in future, therefore, following the ratio decidendi of the cases reported 
has Zulfiqar Ali v. The State (1999 SCMR 2810) and Raja Munawwar and others v. The State 
(1990 SCMR 215), this Court by showing grace and kindness discharged notice dated 07.02.2018, 
and dropped the contempt proceedings initiated against the Respondents. 

 
 
However, moot question in the instant case is as to whether the tendering of unconditional 
4. 
written apology by the contemnors and placing themselves at the mercy of the Court and letting 
them go would be sufficient to curb the practice of intentional efforts to malign the institution of 
Judiciary  by  the  electronic  media,  while  making  the  cases  pending  before  the  Courts  and  its 
decisions, topic of their discussion, absolutely it is not, thus it would be worth observing that to 
avoid such practice first of all it is the prime responsibility of PEMRA to play its role while keeping 
a watchful eye on the programmes, especially the talk shows, which are being telecast on the news 
channels  on  daily  basis,  and  instead  of  being  awaken  by  the  Courts  or  any  other  institute  they 
themselves are required to act in accordance with their rules and regulations to avoid violation of 
terms  and  conditions  contained  in  the  PEMRA  Ordinance,  2002  and  Electronic  Media 
(Programmes and Advertisement), Code of Conduct,  2015 so as to  make sure that violation of 
provisions of Article 19 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan has not been made by 
any of the news channels. 

5. 
It is also not out of place to observe that now a days in the name of freedom of speech 
guaranteed by the Constitution, certain violations of the restrictions imposed by the organic law of 
the country itself are violated which in no way can be termed to be authorized by the Article 19 of 
the Constitution. For convenience, sale Article 19 is reproduced hereunder:- 

"19. Freedom of speech, etc. Every citizen shall have the right to freedom of speech and 
expression and there shall be freedom of the press, subject to any reasonable restrictions 
imposed by law in the interest of the cry of Islam or the integrity, security or defence of 
Pakistan or any part thereof, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency 
or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, commission of or incitement to an offence." 

Perusal of the Article above shows that so far the constitutional protection with regard to liberty 
of speech is concerned, suffice it to say that no doubt, Article 19 of the Constitution guaranteed 
the freedom of speech, but it also imposes certain limitations. The Article ibid does not provide 
license to any person to make personal attempt on an individual or an institution to disgrace his 
dignity and reputation. The Print and Electronic Media are in no way vested with unfettered liberty 
and impunity to publish and telecast any material which is prejudicial to the interest of any person 
or institute or harm or cause damage to reputation, honour and prestige of a person or an institution. 
Any  broadcasting  Agency  is  not  free  to  telecast  anything  for  promotion  of  the  company  or 
corporation  or  on  the  instruction  of  some  quarter  or  according  to  its  desire,  but  its  freedom  is 
subject to a moral code of conduct and such reasonable restrictions as may be legitimately imposed 
under the law in public interest and glory of Islam. Reference may usefully be made to the case 
law  reported  as  "Sheikh  Muhammad  Rashid  v.  Majid  Nizami  Editor  in  Chief,  the  Nation  and 
Nawa-e-Waqat,  Lahore  and  another"  (PLD  2002  Supreme  Court  514).  Even  in  case  of  fair 
comments,  the  TV  channels  must  make  sure  that  the  comments  are  based  upon  facts,  true  and 
certified. 

6. 
In  addition  to  that  role  of  the  State  through  their  relevant  institutions,  to  control  such 
practices,  is  also  of  vital  importance  as  State  is  not  supposed  to  remain  oblivious  of  such 
violation/invasions and could not detract from its obligation to regulate the right to speech when 
it came in conflict with the right and dignity of the others. Constitution, though secured the right 
to free speech, but had not left the same unchecked and had provided for reasonable restriction as 
postulated under Article 19 ibid. State had a compelling interest in regulating the right to speech 

 
 
when it came in conflict with the rights of other individuals, or other societal interest. In a civilized 
and democratic society, restrictions and duties co -existed in order to protect and preserve the right 
to speech. It was inevitable to maintain equilibrium by placing reasonable restriction on freedom 
of expression. Unless the restriction struck a proper balance between the freedom of expression 
guaranteed by Article 19 of the Constitution and the social control permitted thereby, it must be 
held  to  lack  the  attributes  of  reasonableness.  Government  should,  therefore,  strike  a  just  and 
reasonable  balance  between  the  need  for  ensuring  the  people's  right  of  freedom  of  speech  and 
expression on the one hand and the need to impose social control on the business of publication 
and broadcasting. This Court in the case of Faiz Ahmed Cheema v. Federation of Pakistan, through 
M/o Interior and others reported as (PLJ 2017 Islamabad 162) has already held that freedom of 
assembly, movement and expression is right of every citizen guaranteed by the organic law of the 
country  i.e.  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  as  enshrined  under  Part-II,  Chapter  I 
thereof, but these rights are not unbridled and are subject to such reasonable restrictions as may be 
legitimately imposed under the law. 

In view of above, it can safely be concluded that term freedom of speech is not so free that 
7. 
any  person  is  entitled  for  freedom  of  speech  by  compromising  the  dignity  and  respect  of  the 
Constitutional Institutions of the country. 

These  are  the  reasons  for  my  short  order  dated  21.02.2018,  which  is  reproduced 

8. 
hereinbelow:- 

"For  detailed  reasons  to  be  recorded  later  on,  unconditional  apology  tendered  by  the 
respondents hereby accepted, consequently, by showing grace and kindness, notice dated 
07.02.2018 is discharged and contempt proceedings initiated against the respondents are 
hereby dropped. 

2.  It  is  expected that  as  per undertaking  rendered by the  respondents,  they shall remain 
within the limits prescribed by the organic law of the country i.e. Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan and other laws of the land." 

Disclaimer: The content available In this document are just for Information. Users are advised not to depend 
on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High Court, Islamabad is not responsible for 
any damages arising in contract from the use of the content of this documen 

Uploaded by IT department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
