ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.3018/2021

Mst. Abda Tabassum

VS

Learned Additional Sessions Judge/Justice of Peace, Islamabad, etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedings

Date of
order/
Proceedings
20.09.2021. Mr. 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or
counsel where necessary.

Jameel  Hussain  Qureshi,  Advocate 

for

petitioner.

Through this writ petition the petitioner has

assailed  the  order  dated 28.06.2021,  passed  by

learned Ex-Officio  Justice  of  Peace,

Islamabad,

whereby application  u/s  22-A  &  B  Cr.P.C.  filed  by

petitioner  for  registration  of  FIR  against  proposed

accused has been turned down.

2.

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner inter-alia

contends  that learned  Justice  of  Peace,  Islamabad

has  not  considered  the  alleged cognizable offence

referred  in  the  application  u/s  22-A  &  B  Cr.P.C.,

whereby  personal  property  and  belongings have

been removed after  breaking  the lock of  the house;

that  proposed  accused  has  got  lodged  the  FIR

No.288,  dated  20.04.2021,  u/s  450/506-ii/34  PPC,

P.S.  Ramna,  Islamabad  against  the  brother  of

petitioner  though  the  same  is  counter  blast  to  the

present application but this aspect has not properly

W.P. No.3018/2021

2

been appreciated in any manner.

3.

4.

Arguments heard, record perused.

Perusal of record reveals that petitioner was

married to one Sarfraz Nawaz but the marriage did

not last and parties have dissolved the marriage by

way  of Tallaq due  to  acute  disparity.  Family  cases

have  already  been  filed,  which  are  pending  before

the  District  Courts  at  Bannu,  however,  petitioner

claims  that  she  filed  an  application  for  registration

of  FIR  with  the  allegations  that  father  of  her  ex-

husband  has  gifted  house  at  the  time  of  marriage

and  as  such  proposed accused  removed  all  the

house  hold  articles  including  dowry  articles  after

breaking the locks and as such application was filed

for registration of FIR but the same was not lodged,

even  learned  Justice  of  Peace,  Islamabad  has  not

passed the order.

5.

The  impugned  order  reveals  that  proposed

accused  has  already  got  lodged  the  FIR  No.288,

dated  20.04.2021,  u/s  450/506-ii/34  PPC,  P.S.

Ramna,  Islamabad  and  as  such  similar  allegations

have  been  referred  in the  said  FIR.  This  aspect

clearly  demonstrates  that  parties  are  locked  in

family  dispute  qua  the  gifted  property  as  well  as

dowry articles, such aspect could not be resolved by

registration  of  FIR.  Even  otherwise,  it  is  not

W.P. No.3018/2021

3

obligatory for High Court to issue writ in each case

irrespective of facts and circumstances, which could

call  for  exercise  of  judicial  restraint,  especially

where  parties have  already  raised  their  concerns

before the competent court in family jurisdiction or

earlier  FIR  has  been  lodged, therefore,  petitioner

can  initiate  criminal  proceedings  by  filing  private

complaint. Reliance is placed upon 2005 SCMR 951

(Habibullah  VS  Political  Assistant,  Dera  Ghazi

Khan).  Even  otherwise  functions  performed  by

Justice  of  Peace,  Islamabad  were  quasi-judicial

functions and the order impugned has been passed

after  due  application  of  mind  and  no  illegality  has

been  observed  in  this  case,  especially  when  the

counter  FIR  has  already  been  lodged  on  somehow

similar  grounds,  therefore,  instant  writ  petition  is

dismissed 

in 

limine with  observations 

that

petitioner  can  approach 

the  competent  court

through  alternate 

remedy  by 

filing private

complaint, if so advised.

Zahid

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)

JUDGE

