1 

W,P. NO. 2L6 OF 2OLT

FORM NO:HCJD/C

o RDER SH

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT,

ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

w.P. NO. 216 ()F 2011

SYED SAIF-UR-REHMAN  VERSUS THE FEDERATION  OF PAKISTAN  ETC.

s.No. oF oRDER/

DATE  OF ORDER/
EDIN

Order with signatu re of judge and that of parties or counsel  where

13-03-201  1 Mr. Rafiq R. Sanjrani Advocate,  for the
petitioner.
Mr. Tariq Mahmood Jahangiri,  Deputy Attorney-
General.

IOBAL HAMEED-UR-RAHMAN.  C.J.: Through

the instant constitutional petition under Article-

199 read with Article 203 of the Constitution  of
the Islamic Republic of pakistan, 1973, the

petitioner has made the following  prayer:-

"It is therefore, respectfutty prayed that:

(I)  The writ of  Mandamus, or  any other
appropriate  writ, order or direction be issued to the
respondents  to release and to make payment  of
compensation to  deprived and affected  187
persons/families  of  Earthquake  disaster_200g,
inhabitants  of village  Road Mulazai and Dilsora,

District  Pishin, Tehsil Karezat U/C (Batochistan)
without discrimination  out of the relevant  fund
reserved, as per announced  by the Government

outstanding against claim worth Rupees  93.SO

Million.

2

w.P. NO. 216 0F 2011

(II)  To pass appropriate  directions to Auditor
General  of Pakistan  to carry out necessary  audit of

the account under the title of p.M. & C.M. RELIEF

AND REHABILITATION F|JNDS,  maintained by the

commercial  Bank of the countries, in particutar Bank

A/C No. Fund-G12160  and Fund  G t27, maintained

by NBP, Civil Secretariat  Branch  euetta and other

treasury offices in Balochistan.
([il)  Any other relief to which  this Honorable

Court deems fit and proper may  also  be awarded  in

favour  of the petitioner  .

2. 
Precisely,  the petitioner has alleged
that petitioner  and other LB7 families are

resident of P.O. Khanozai  village Road Mullazi,

District Pishin (Balochistan)  and are affectees  of

28th October,  2OO8 earthquake.  The prime

Minister  of Pakistan  announced financial aid to

the tune of Rs. 350,000/-  for each affected family

as compensation.  Respondent  No.4 i.e. provincial

Disaster  Management Authority (pDMA)  under

took a short  survey of the area on urgent  basis,

however, nothing was paid to the petitioner  and

other 187 families  who had lost their every  thing

during the earthquake. Resultanfly  the petitioner

and other affected  families protested against  the

injustice and discriminatory  treatment of the

authorities concerned,  whereupon, the Chief

Minister of Balochistan reiterated  through media
to undeftake fresh survey,  however, with the

3 

W.P. NO. 216 0F 20Lt

passage of time nothing was paid to  the
petitioner and similarly  affected other lB7
families. The petitioner has alleged  that
Government of  Pakistan had  received
approximate donations of Rs. 2,620.64  Million
while PDMA declared that around 2000.40

Millions have been distributed in the affected
persons/families,  as such, a huge amount of

donations is still lying with the Government for its

distribution  among the earthquake affectees but

despite that nothing is paid to the petitioner and

other L87 earthquake  affected families, hence,

the instant  writ petition.

3

Para-wise comments have been filed

by the respondents.

4. 

Learned counsel for the Petitioner

argued that a huge amount was donated by the

individuals/institutions  /organizations  and by the

donor agencies/countries  for the rehabilitation of

earthquake affectees of 2008 earthquake  but

despite  that the petitioner alongwith other L87

families who had lost their everything in the

earthquake had not been paid even a single

penny by the respondents  although they had

staged  demonstration in this regard;  that the

Provincial  Disaster Management  Authority

4 

w.P. NO. 216 0F 2011

(PDMA) had undertaken a very short survey of
the area and even a fake survey  report was
prepared by the survey team; that even after the
statement of chief Minister  of Barochistan  that a
fresh survey wiil be conducted in the area of the
petitioner and others in order to find out the rear
affectees,  but no such survey has yet been
conducted,  as such, the petitioner and others
have been subjected to  a  discriminatory
treatment by the respondents. Learned  counsel
for the petitioner has retied upon pLD 1961

5. 

Conversely, learned  Deputy Attorney-

General argued that the instant  writ petition  is
not maintainable; the petitioner in the writ
petition has mentioned himself to be resident of
Khanozai, District  pishin (Barochistan)  as weil as
chairman Action committee for Earthquake
affectees  of the region but no document in this
regard is available on the file; that the claims  of
petitioner and other 187 famiries are fake; that
the whole  relief is sought against Government  of
Balochistan  and all the transactions were carried
out in the province of Balochistan,  as such, the
writ petition is not maintainable  before this
court; that no relief is sought against the Federar

Government  and it is a matter of factual  inquiry

5 

w.P. NO. 216 0F zoLL

that whether the petitioner and other  alleged

affectees are genuine affectees or not? ;that the
earthquake had taken place in the year 2OOg

whereas,  the compensation  was delivered in the
year-2009, as such, the writ petition suffers from
laches. Learned  Deputy Attorney-General  has
relied upon

644.

6. 
I have heard  the learned  counsel for
the petitioner as well as learned  Deputy
Attorney-General and perused  the documents

appended  with the writ petition.

7. 
petitioner has alleged  that he and
other L87 families  are affectees of  2OOg
earthquake  but despite the announcement  of the
Prime  Minister  of pakistan regarding payment of
compensation to the affectees of earthquake-

2008 nothing has been paid to them, whereas,

the respondents  have taken the stance  that the

petitioner and other affectees have not submitted
any documentary  evidence that they were

owners and bonafide residents of the earthquake

affected area.
B. 

No doubt the petitioner and other

187 affectees  of earthquake-200g  are the citizens
of this country and under Article-25 of the

6 

w.P. NO. 216 0F 2011

constitution  of the Isramic  Repubric  of pakistan
they are entitled  for equal protection  of law. No
body can be penalized  by the inaction of the
pubric  functionaries. It is the duty of the State
functionaries  to act in quasi judiciar  manner  and
it is also the primary  obligation  of the State
functionaries  to protect the rights of the citizens
but unfortunately, the petitioner who alleges
himself to be an affectee of earthquake-2008  is
knocking the  doors of  the  Government
functionaries  for a compensation  which was
announced by the prime authority of the country
but no serious effort  was made by the authorities
concerned to determine the genuine-ness  of his
claim. For the sake of arguments,  if  it  is
presumed that the petitioner  has a fake  claim
and is asking for something for which he is not
entitled,  then too, it was the primary duty of the
concerned  authorities to come forward with a
clear reply that they have already reached to a
conclusion,  after thorough inquiry  and probe,  that
the petitioner  is not an earthquake  affectee but in
the instant case the respondents  have faired  to
bring on record  even a single document  to show
that the petitioner who alleges  himself to be
resident of  viilage Muilazi, District pishin  is
neither  resident of the said viilage  nor is an
affectee of earthquake-2008.  The petitioner

7 

W.P. NO. 216 0F 2011

cannot be knocked out on the basis of
technicalities because  the Court has to do
substantial justice and to meet the ends of
justice, I  direct the respondent  No.1 to get
conducted a  fresh survey with the help of
residents of the locality  as well as with the

assistance  of the concerned  revenue authorities

and thereafter,  reach to a just conclusion  that

whether  the petitioner and other LB7 families  are

genuine affectees  of earthquake-2008  or not?
Furthermore, if the petitioner  and other  LB7

affectees are found to be genuine affectees of

earthquake-20O8,  the respondents  shall proceed
in  the matter as per the policy of  the

Government. The needful  shall be done by the
respondents within a  period of six months

positively  from the date of announcement  of this

Order.

9.  With the above direction, the instant  writ

petition  stands  disposed of.

M. ABID  KHAN

