JUDGMENTSHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMARAp't  11GM1  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.3830 /2019 

Saifoor Khan 
VS 
The Additional Sessions Judge (East) and others 

Petitioner By: 

In  person. 

State By: 

Hafiz MazharJaved, State Counsel 
along withQaiser Zia, Sub-Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

09.03.2020 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANI.  J.:- Through  the  instant 

petition,  the  petitioner  has  assailed  order,  dated  20.09.2019  passed  by 

respondent No.1,  whereby application under Section 22-A Cr.P.C., filed by 

the petitioner was dismissed. 

2. 

Briefly stated facts as per contents of the petition are that the 

petitioner  has  alleged  that  the  proposed  accused  namely,  Hidayat  Ullah 

Sikandari/respondent  No.4,  a  resident  of  Peshawar,  came  to  his  House 

No.916,  Phase-IV,  Bharia  Town,  Islamabad,  in  his  absence  and  stolen 

following articles on 08.12.2018. 

i.  Gold approximately 50 To/as, 
ii. 

School,  Colleges  and  University  Degrees/ 
certificates, 
iii.  Nikahnama, 
iv. 
v. 

Property papers, 
Honda  Civic  Car 
(registration  No.BD-3040), 
Original  Honda  Company  file  papers  and  spare 
key. 
Four Passports of the petitioner. 

vi. 

The  petitioner  filed  applications  twice  to  the  Prime  Minster  Citizen  Portal 

but in vain due to the reasons that it was a family dispute. 

3. 

Being  aggrieved  from  inaction  on  part  of  the  police,  the  petitioner 

filed  petition  under Section 22-A Cr.P.C before the  Ex-Officio, the  learned 

2 

W.P No.3830  /ZOJ 9 

Justice  of  Peace/  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (West)  Islamabad,  for 

registration of a  criminal case against the  proposed accused.  Pursuant to 

it,  comments  were  called  from  respondents  No.2  &  3.  However,  the 

application  was  dismissed  vide  the  impugned  order,  dated  20.09.2019, 

hence the instant petition. 

4. 

The  petitioner  appeared  in  person  and  has,  inter  alia,  contended 

that  respondent  No.1 /  learned Additional  Sessions Judge while  relying on 

the  report  of  police  failed  to  apply  its  judicial  mind  and  straightway 

dismissed  his application; the  learned Additional  Sessions Judge also did 

not appreciate  that from  the  contents of the  petition  a  cognizable  offence 

was made out and refused to direct the police for registration of F.l.R. 

5. 

The  learned  State  Counsel  vehemently  opposed  the  arguments 

raised  by  the  petitioner  and  supported  the  order  passed  by  the  learned 

Addi.  Sessions Judge and submitted that the  proposed accused is  father  

in-law of the petitioner; there is  a family dispute between the petitioner and 

his wife  and  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower  and  maintenance  allowance of 

wife of the petitioner and minor children is  pending adjudication before the 

learned  trial  Court;  nowadays,  wife  of  the  petitioner  is  residing  with  her 

parents; the  police  has investigated matter and has rightly reached to the 

conclusion  that  the  allegations  leveled against the  proposed  accused are 

based  on  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  and,  therefore,  urged for 

dismissal of the petition. 

6. 

Heard arguments and perused the available record. 

7. 

For  better  understanding  Section  154  of  Cr.P.C  is  reproduced 

herein below.- 

"154. 

Information 

in  cognizable  cases:  information 

relating  to  the,  commission  of a  cognizable  offence  if given 

orally to an officer incharge of a police station, shall reduced 

3 

W.P No. 3830 /2019 

to writing by him or under his direction and then read over to 

the  informant  and  every such  information,  whether  given  in 

writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid,  shall be signed by 

the  person  giving  it,  and  the  substance  thereof  shall  be 

entered in a  book to be kept by such officer in such form as 

the Provincial Government may prescribe in this behalf:" 

8. 

The  provisions  of  Section  154 Cr.P.C  are  mandatory  in  nature,  in 

case  a  cognizable  offence  is  made  out  from  the  facts  given  by  the 

complainant.  The  procedure  which  is  to  be  followed  on  receipt  of 

complaint by the officer incharge of police station  and also the scope and 

powers of the Justice of Peace under Section 22-A and 22-8  Cr.P.C have 

been  laid  down  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case 

titled  as  'Syed Saeed  Muhammad  Shah and  another  v.  The State'  [1993 

SCMR 5501  and observed and held as under.- 

"In  Part  V of the Criminal Procedure  Code there is 
Chapter XIV containing sections  154  to  176 which 
relate  to information to the police and their powers 
to  investigate.  These provisions  cover information 
in  cognizable  cases  as  well  as  in  non-cognizable 
cases.  Under  Section  154,  Cr.  P.  C. 
is 
mandatorily  bounden  duty  of the  police  officer  to 
register  F. I. R.  of  a  cognizable  offence.  Under 
section  157,  Cr. P. C.  he  has  to  send  his  report  to 
the  Magistrate  and  if  he  does  not  want  to 
investigate  a  case 
for  reason  of  insufficient 
grounds  then also he has to send his report to the 
Magistrate with reasons for his such conclusion." 

it 

9. 

In  the case of  'Muhammad Bashir  VS  Station House  Officer, Okara 

Gantt  and  others'  [PLO  2007  SC  5391  the  august  Supreme  Court,  after 

thoroughly  examining  the  scope  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code, 1898, 

elucidated  the  law and the  principles  relating to  the  nature  of  obligations 

under  Section  154 of the  Cr.P.C, and the  scope  of the  powers conferred 

on  the  Justice  of  the  Peace  under  Section  22-A  of  the  Cr.  P.  C.  It  has 

been  held that  upon receiving the  information, the  incharge of the  police- 

station  must  first  determine  whether  the  offence  disclosed 

in 

the 

information  received  falls  in  the  category  of  a  cognizable  or  non- 

4 

W.P No.383012019 

cognizable  offence.  After  having determined  the  category  of  the  offence, 

as disclosed from the bare perusal of the information received, it  becomes 

a  mandatory  obligation  to  reduce  the  said  information  to  writing  in  the 

prescribed  register.  In  the  event  that  the  determination  leads  to  the 

conclusion  that  a  non-cognizable  offence  has  been  committed,  then  it  is 

mandatory  to  follow  the  procedure  prescribed  under  Section  155  of  the 

Cr.P.C.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  emphasised 

the  use  of  the 

expression  'shall'  by the  legislature  in  Section  154  of the  Cr.P.C.  It  is 

to 

be  noted  further  that  the  question  whether  the  officer  concerned  is 

conferred  with  the  power  to  hold  an  inquiry  so  as  to  assess  the 

correctness or falsity of information, was answered as follows.- 

"It  may  be  reiterated  and  even  emphasized  that 
there  was  no  provision  in  any  law,  including  the 
said  section  154  or  155  of  the  Cr.  P.  C.  which 
authorized  an  Officer lncharge  of a  Police  Station 
to  hold  any  enquiry  to  assess  the  correctness  or 
the  falsity  of  the  information  received  by  him 
before  complying  with  the  command  of  the  said 
provision  which  obliged  him  to  reduce  the  same 
into writing irrespective of the fact whether such an 
information was true or otherwise." 

10. 

The august Supreme Court succinctly explained the rationale of the 

legislative  intent  behind  the  procedure  prescribed  under  section  154  of 

Cr.P.C. The  rationale was explained as to ensure that the officer incharge 

of  the  police  station  does  not  assume  the  authority  to  adjudicate  or 

determine the truthfulness or falsehood of the  information received. It was 

observed  that  if  such  a  power  was  to  be  assumed  as  having  been 

conferred  on  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  police  station,  then  it  would 

tantamount  to bestowing the power to decide  the guilt or innocence of an 

accused  person,  which  otherwise  is  within  the  exclusive  domain  of  the 

courts  of 

law.  The  august  Supreme  Court 

in 

the  said  judgment 

summarized 

the  conclusions 

in  paragraph-27  and 

the  same  are 

reproduced as follows.- 

5 

W.P No.383012019 

"The  conclusions  that  we  draw  from  the  above, 
rather  lengthy  discussion,  on  the  subject  of F.l.R. 
are as under:--- 

(a)  no  authority  vested  with  an  Officer 
lncharge  of  a  Police  Station  or  with 
anyone else to refuse to record an F.l.R. 
where 
conveyed, 
commtsston  of  a 
disclosed 
cognizable offence- 

information 

the 

the 

(b)  no  authority  vested  with  an  Officer 
lncharge  of a Police  Station or  with any 
one  else  to  hold  any  inquiry  into  the 
correctness  or  otnetwise 
the 
information  which  is  conveyed  to  the 
S.H. 0.  for  the purposes  of  recording  of 
an F.l.R. 

of 

(c)  any  F.l.R.  registered  after  such  an 
exercise i.e.  determination of the truth or 
falsity of the information conveyed to the 
S.H.O. would get hit by the provisions  of 
section  162,  Cr.P.C. 

(d)  existence  of  an  F.l.R.  is  no  condition 
precedent for holding of an investigation 
nor  is  the  same  a  prerequisite  for  the 
arrest  of  a  person  concerned  with  the 
commission of a cognizable offence; 

(e)  nor  does  the  recording  of  an  F.l.R. 
mean  that  the  S.H.O. or a police  officer 
deputed  by  him  was  obliged 
to 
investigate the case or to go through the 
whole length of investigation of the case 
mentioned  therein  or  that  any  accused 
person  nominated 
therein  must  be 
arrested; and finally that, 

(f) 

lodging  of 

but  punishment 

the  check  against 
false 
F. I. Rs.  was  not  refusal  to  record  such 
such 
F.l.Rs, 
informants  under  S.182,  P.P.C.  etc. 
if  enforced,  a  fairly 
which  should  be, 
the 
deterrent  against  misuse  of 
provision of S.  154,  Cr.  P. C." 

of 

11. 

It  is  obvious  from  the  above  that  upon  receiving  an  information 

regarding  an  offence,  the  officer  incharge  of  the  police  station  has  to 

determine  at  the  first  instance  regarding  the  nature  of  the  offence  i.e. 

whether  it falls  in  the category of a  cognizable or non-cognizable offence. 

6 

W.P No.383012019 

After  such  a  determination  has  been  made,  it  places  a  mandatory 

obligation to strictly comply with the  requirements of Section  154  or 155 of 

the  Cr.P.C,  as  the  case  may  be.  Conducting  an  inquiry  or  investigation 

prior to carrying out the mandatory obligations under Section 154 or 155  of 

the Cr.P.C  is  neither envisaged nor is  such a  power  conferred  under the 

scheme  of the  Cr.P.C. As  a  corollary, an  inquiry to  be  conducted  by any 

other  authority  is  also neither provided, nor can the  incharge of the police 

station  refuse  compliance  with  the  procedure  prescribed  under  Section 

154 of  the  Cr.P.C  on  such  ground.  In  the  case  in  hand,  the  respondent 

No.1  totally relied upon the report submitted by the respondents No.2 &  3. 

12. 

The august Supreme Court further laid down as under:- 

"It  must,  therefore,  be  kept  in  mind  that  mere 
registration  of an  F.l.R.  could  bring  no  harm  to  a 
person  against  whom  it  had  been  recorded.  No 
one,  consequently, need  fear  a  false  F. I. R.  And  if 
a police officer an-ested a person in the absence of 
the requisite  material justifying  the same  and  only 
one the pretext  of such a  person being mentioned 
in  an  F.l.R.,  then  such  would  be  an  abuse  of 
power by him and the remedy for such a misuse of 
power  would not be to permit another abuse of law 
by  allowing  an  unlawful  exercise  of collection  of 
evidence  to  assess  the  veracity  of  allegations 
levelled  through  the  information  conveyed  to  a 
S.H.O.  before  recording  of an  F.l.R.  The  remedy 
lies elsewhere." 

13. 

The  scope of the  powers and functions  of the  Justice of the 

Peace  under Section 22 of the  Cr.P.C  have also  been examined and the 

principles  relating  thereto  were  eloquently  elaborated  by  the  august 

Supreme Court in  the case of Muhammad Bashir (supra). The same have 

been summed  up in  paragraph-40 of the judgment  and are reproduced as 

follows.- 

the  only  jurisdiction 
"Therefore,  in  our  opmton, 
which  could  be  exercised  by  an  Ex-officio  Justice 
of the  Peace  under  section  22-A(6),  Cr.P.C.  was 
to  examine  whether  the  information  disclosed  by 
the applicant did or did not constitute a cognizable 
offence  and  if it  did  then  to  direct  the  concerned 

7 

W.P No.383012019 

S.H.O.  to  record  an  F.l.R.  without  going  into  the 
veracity  of  the  information  in  question,  and  no 
more.  Offering  any  other  interpretation  to  the 
provisions  in  question  would be  doing  violence  to 
the entire scheme of the Cr.  P.  C.  which could not 
be permitted." 

14. 

From bare perusal of the contents of the application,  prima facie, a 

cognizable offence is  made out. The petitioner in  his first complaint lodged 

to  the  Prime  Minister  Citizen  Portal  Ref  Code  No.KP171218-0628200 

dated  17.12.2018, did  not nominate any of the  accuse, the  S.H.O  had to 

lodge  the  F.l.R  against  the  unknown  accuse  person  and  during  the 

investigation  if  it  was  found  that  a  false  information  has been given, then 

proceedings  under  Section  182  P.P.C  should  be  initiated  for  misuse  of 

taking into motion the law. 

15. 

In 

the  instant  case  the  respondent  No.1 

failed  to  take  into 

consideration  the  relevant  principles  laid  down  by  the  superior  Courts 

while dismissing the application under Section 22-A &  B  Cr.P.C in  arbitrary 

manner, filed be the petitioner. 

16. 

In  view  of  above,  instant  petition  is  sllowsd  and  the  impugned 

order,  dated  20.09.2019  passed  by  respondent  No.1 

is  set-aside. 

Respondent No.3 is  directed to register F.l.R on the first complaint  lodged 

to  the  Prime  Minister  Citizen  Portal  Ref  Code  No.KP171218-0628200 

dated  17.12.2018  by the  petitioner  and take  action  strictly  in  accordance 

with law. 

{trHULAM AZAM .§aA~RANI) 

JUDGE 

Announced  In  Open Court, On 

/ ~  -  3 

12020 

*Rana.  M.  /ft* 

