Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Crl. Appeal No. 65 of 2019 

Sami Ullah 

VS 

The State and another 

Appellant by 

: 

Raja Rizwan Abbasi Advocate. 

Respondents by 

: 

Mr Ansar Mehmood Kiani Advocate,  
for the complainant. 

Mr Majid Rashid Khan, State Counsel. 

Date of Hearing 

:  03.02.2021. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  C.J.-  Sami  Ullah,  son  of  Zulfiqar 

Khan, [hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”], has preferred the 

title appeal assailing his conviction and sentence handed down by the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-1,  East-Islamabad,  vide  judgment 

dated  13.03.2019. The  Appellant  had  also  preferred  another  i.e.  Jail 

Appeal  no.  76/2019,  titled  “Sami  Ullah  v  the  State”.  The  learned 

Sessions  Court  has  submitted  Murder  Reference  no.  03/2019,  titled 

“The State v. Sami Ullah,” under section 374 of the Code of Criminal 

Procedure,  1898  [hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Cr.P.C.”],  for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page - 2 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

confirmation  of  the  sentence  by  the  High  Court.  Through  a 

consolidated  judgment  we  will  decide  the  appeals  and  answer  the 

Reference.  

2. 

Pursuant  to  the  complaint  (Exh.PA)  of  Muhammad 

Zakriya,  son  of  Iftikhar  Ahmed  [hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

“Complainant”],  FIR  NO.  188/2017,  dated  09.09.2017  (Exh.PP), 

was  registered  at  Police  Station  Shahzad  Town,  Islamabad 

[hereinafter referred to as the “FIR”]. The Appellant was nominated 

in the FIR for the alleged murder of Ms. Bushra, daughter of Iftikhar 

Ahmed [hereinafter referred to as the “Deceased”], thus committing 

the  offence  under  section  302  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860 

[hereinafter referred to as the “PPC”]. The Deceased was the wife of 

the  Appellant  and  sister  of  the  Complainant. The  latter  had  asserted 

in  the  complaint  that  on  09.09.2017,  at  about  5.30  am,  he  had 

received  a  telephonic  call  from  the  Appellant’s  brother,  namely, 

Nasrullah, son of Zulfiqar Khan (DW-1). The latter had informed him 

regarding the commission of the offence. The Complainant rushed to 

the house of the Appellant where he found the body of the Deceased, 

which was soaked in blood. The police officials, led by Ahmed Kamal, 

Inspector  [hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Investigating  Officer”] 

(PW-5)  reached  the  crime  scene.  The  latter  received  the  written 

complaint  from  the  Complainant.  The  Investigating  Officer  prepared 

the  inquest  report  (Exh.PL)  and  took  various  items  into  his 

possession through respective recovery memos i.e. blood collected on 

cotton (Exh.PD), mattress and blood stained bed sheet (Exh.PE), etc. 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 3 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

He  sent  the  dead  body  of  the  Deceased  to  the  Federal  Government 

Services Polyclinic Hospital, Islamabad for conducting autopsy and an 

application  (Exh.PM)  was  submitted  for  this  purpose.  A  rough  site 

plan  (Exh.PN)  of  the  crime  scene  was prepared  by  the  Investigating 

Officer.  The  autopsy  was  conducted  by  Dr  Durdana  Kazmi,  Medico 

Legal Officer (PW-2). The injuries described in the postmortem report 

(Exh.PQ) were as follows:  

1.  Incised  wound  4  cm  app.  In  right  posterior 

auricular region muscle deep. 

2.  Two incised wounds 2 cm in length communicated 

with  each  other  in  right  Supra  clavicular  region 

communicating with each other. 

3.  Two incised  wounds  skin  deep  on  left  shoulder  in 

Supra clacvicular region communicating with each 

other. 

4.  Multiple lacerations at the back of neck. 

5.  Incised  wound  on  back  at  level  of  C1-C2,  2  cm 

lateral to posterior midline  towards left. It is 3 to 

4-cm in length and muscle deep. 

6.   Incised wound on post midline at back at level of 

T1-T2,  (2cm  in  length)  penetrating  the  chest 

wound  posteriorly  and  entering  the  right  plural 

cavity. 

 
 
 Page - 4 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

7.  Incised wound at the level of T5-T6 2 cm in length 

and  10  to  12  cm  deep  and  penetrating  thorax’s 

cavity and entering right lung. 

OPINION: 

Young female appearing full term pregnant to naked eyes 

with  multiple  stab  wounds  injuries  as  mentioned  in 

external  post  mortem.  Injury  no.  5,  6  and  7  are  deep  in 

nature  causing damage  to vital organs. Injury at level of 

C1-C2 caused damage to spinal cord. Whereas injury no. 

6  and  7  at  level  of  T1-T2  and  T5-T6  thoracic  vertebrae 

are  penetrating  in  nature  and  caused  damage  to  right 

lung.  Resulting  in  tension  pneumothorax  and  leading  to 

death of patient. 

3. 

The  blood  collected  on  cotton  and  other  items  were  sent 

to the Punjab Forensic Science Agency [hereinafter referred to as the 

“Laboratory”].  The  latter,  vide  reports  dated  03.10.2017  and 

30.11.2017,  (Exh.PR)  and  (Exh.PS)  respectively,  confirmed  that  the 

blood  on  the  items  was  that  of  a  human.  Charge  against  the 

Appellant  was  framed  on  09.04.2018.  The  Appellant  pleaded  guilty 

but  took  a  plea  that  he  was  of  ‘unsound  mind’  at  the  time  of 

commission of the act/offence. It is noted that the autopsy report had 

confirmed  that  the  Deceased  was  pregnant  at  the  time  the  offence 

was  committed.  At  the  trial,  the  prosecution  produced  eleven 

witnesses. The Appellant recorded his statement under section 342 of 

the Cr.P.C. and, in response to a question, he stated that he would be 

 
 
 
 Page - 5 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

producing  evidence  in  his  defense.  DW-1,  namely  Nasrullah,  son  of 

Zulfiqar  Khan,  who  is  the  Appellant’s  brother,  entered  the  witness 

box in his defense. The learned trial court, after recording of evidence 

and affording an opportunity of hearing to the parties, convicted and 

sentenced  the  Appellant  vide  the  impugned  judgment,  dated 

13.03.2019, in the following terms: 

“Accused  Sami  Ullah  is,  therefore,  convicted 

302 (b) Pakistan Penal Code and is sentenced to death by 

way  of  Ta’zir.  He  be  hanged  by  his  neck  till  his  death. 

However,  the  execution  of  his  sentence  shall  be  subject 

to  its  confirmation  by  Hon’ble  Islamabad  High  Court, 

Islamabad  u/s  374  Cr.P.C.  In  addition  thereto,  he  shall 

also pay a sum of PKR.100,000/- (PKR. One lac only) by 

way  of  compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  the  deceased 

as envisaged u/s 544-A Cr.PC and in default of payment 

whereof,  he  shall  undergo  six  months  S.I.  The  said 

amount of compensation shall be recovered from him as 

arrears of Land Revenue Act. A copy of this judgment be 

delivered  to  the  accused  Sami  Ullah  free  of  cost  under 

section  371  Cr.PC.  The  accused  Sami  Ullah  has  been 

apprised  that  he  may  file  appeal  against  his  conviction 

within  seven  days  before  the  Hon’ble  Islamabad  High 

Court,  Islamabad  from  hereof.  Accused  Sami  Ullah 

further  punished 

for  offence  u/s  338-C  PPC  and 

sentenced  to  1/20th  of  Diyat  and  Simple  Imprisonment 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 6 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

for  three  (3)  years.  Benefit  of  Section  382-B  Cr.PC  is 

extended in favor of accused Sami Ullah.” 

4. 

Raja  Rizwan  Abbasi,  ASC,  has  argued  on  behalf  of  the 

Appellant that a crucial question regarding insanity and unsoundness 

of  mind  had arisen  and,  therefore, it was  mandatory  for  the  learned 

trial  court  to  have  observed  the  requirements  prescribed  under 

section  265  of  the  Cr.P.C;  the  statement  of  the  Appellant  under 

section  342  of  the  Cr.P.C.  could  either  have  been  rejected  or 

accepted in its entirety; reliance has been placed on the  cases titled 

“Abdul  Wahid  alias  Wahdi  v.  The  State”  [1994  SCMR  1517], 

“Sirajuddin v. Afzal Khan and another” [PLD 1997 SC 847], “Fauqual 

Bashir  v.  The  State”  [1997  SCMR  239],  “Nasir  Mehmood  v.  The 

State” [2017 P Cr. L J 255], “Inayatullah v. The State” [2005 P Cr. L J 

33],  “Naseebullah  v.  Special  Judge,  Anti-Terrorism  Court-II,  Quetta 

and  another”  [PLD  2017  Balochistan  37];  the  prosecution  was  not 

able  to  establish  its  case  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt;  the  statement 

of  the  Complainant  was  hearsay;  the  blood  contained  on  items 

recovered from the crime scene was not sent for forensic blood group 

identification; it was an unseen crime and no eye witness was present 

at  the  time  of  the  offence;  the  mere  fact  that  the  Deceased  was 

found murdered  in  the  house  of  the  Appellant  i.e.  her  husband,  was 

not  sufficient  for  conclusively  establishing  the  latter’s  guilt;  reliance 

has  been  placed  on  the  cases  titled  “Abdul  Majeed  v.  The  State” 

[2011  SCMR  941]  and  “Nasrullah  alias  Nasro  v.  The  State”[2017 

SCMR  724;  the  statement  of  the  Appellant  was  not  confessional  in 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 7 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

nature;  motive  could  not  be  proved  by  the  prosecution;  the  learned 

trial court had not taken into consideration the plea of insanity raised 

by  the  Appellant;  the  past  medical  history  of  the  accused  was 

sufficient to extend the benefit under section 84 of the PPC. 

5. 

Mr.  Ansar  Mehmood  Kiani,  AHC,  has  appeared  on  behalf 

of  the  Complainant  and  has  contended  that  the  FIR  was  registered  

promptly  and  that  the  Appellant  was  the  only  accused  nominated 

therein;  recoveries  made  during  the  course  of  investigation  stood 

established during the trial; the Appellant  had admitted his guilt but 

could not establish the plea of ‘unsoundness of mind’; it is implicit in 

the statement of the Appellant that he was not insane; to the extent 

of  conviction  the  appeals  are  not  competent  in  the  light  of  section 

412 of the Cr.P.C; Article 121 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 

[hereinafter referred to as the “Order of 1984”] provides that if an 

accused  takes  the  plea  under  one  of  the  exceptions  provided  under 

the  PPC,  then  the  onus  of  proving  the  same  would  be  on  the  latter; 

the  Appellant  had  failed  to  prove  that  at  the  time  of  commission  of 

the offence he was of ‘unsound mind’; during the trial the conduct of 

the Appellant had established that he was not incapable of giving his 

defense  and,  therefore,  section  464  was  not  attracted;  reliance  has 

been placed on the cases titled “Muhammad Uzair Jamal v. The State 

and another” [202 SCMR 1862], Iftikhar Ahmad v. The State” [2005 

SCMR 272], “Muhammad Taj and another v. The State” [1980 SCMR 

348], “Abdul Haque v. The State and another” [PLD 1996 SC 1]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Page - 8 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

6. 

The  learned  State  Counsel  has  adopted  the  arguments 

advanced by the learned counsel for the Complainant and has further 

placed  reliance  on  the  cases  titled  “Said  Rasool  v.  Muhammad  Fazil 

and another” [1990 P Cr. L J 210], “Abdul Hamid v. The State” [PLD 

1962  (Quetta)  111],  “Ata  Muhammad  v.  The  State”  [PLD  1960 

(Lahore) 111]. 

7. 

The learned counsels and the learned State Counsel have 

been heard and we have carefully perused the record with their able 

assistance.  

8. 

The  crime  scene  and  the  loss  of  an  innocent  life  at  the 

hands of the Appellant are not disputed. The latter had unequivocally 

admitted  killing  the  Deceased  who  was  his  wife  and  mother  of  four 

siblings born out of the wedlock. The Deceased had a developed fetus 

in  her  womb  when  she  was  killed  by  her  husband  in  a  gruesome 

manner. The Appellant, after the commission of the offence, had left 

the  crime  scene  along  with  his  father  and  brother  but  preferred  to 

become  a  fugitive  from  law  instead  of  surrendering  himself.  He  was 

arrested  two  days  after  the  occurrence.  The  Deceased  was  killed  in 

her house while the minor children were present in the house. When 

the charge was read on 09.04.2018, the Appellant had pleaded guilty 

by taking  the  plea  that  because  of  unsoundness  of  mind,  he  did  not 

know  what  he  was  doing.  On  21.06.2018  an  application  was  filed 

under sections 464 and 465 of the Cr.P.C, read with section 84 of the 

PPC,  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  asserting  that  the  latter  was  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page - 9 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

unsound  mind.  The  learned  trial  court  directed  the  constitution  of  a 

Medical  Board,  and  pursuant  thereto,  the  Appellant  was  examined. 

The  Medical  Board  included  the  senior  Professor  and  head  of  the 

Psychiatry  Department.  The  Medical  Board,  after  examining  the 

Appellant,  recorded  its  opinion  to  the  effect  that  the  latter  had  a 

history  of  “psychosis”,  which  was  most  likely  drug  induced  and  for 

which he had been treated. The Board was of the opinion that at the 

time of his examination the Appellant was 'found to be mentally fit to 

stand trial'. The Appellant was also examined on numerous occasions 

by visiting psychiatrists and medical practitioners in the prison where 

he remained incarcerated during the trial. At no stage did the medical 

experts  report  signs  of  unsoundness  of  mind  or  any  other  mental 

disease  rendering  the  Appellant  incapable  of  making  his  defence 

during  the  trial.  In  his  statement,  recorded  under  section  342  of 

Cr.P.C,  the  Appellant  had  reiterated  the  plea  of  suffering  from 

“hallucinations” and that he had also remained admitted in a medical 

facility for treatment. He stated that he had gone to sleep and when 

he  woke  up  he  found  that  he  had  killed  the  Deceased  in  a  state  of 

unsoundness of mind. Despite taking the specific defence  of insanity 

under section 84 of the PPC, the Appellant could not produce cogent 

and reliable evidence to prove cognitive impairment at the time of the 

commission  of  the  offence.  In  order  to  discharge  the  onus,  the 

brother  of  the  Appellant,  namely  Nasrullah,  entered  the  witness  box 

as  DW-1.  The  testimony  of  the  latter,  besides  contradicting  the  plea 

taken  by the  Appellant,  was  of  no  help  in  establishing  the  factum  of 

‘unsoundness of mind’ at the  time of the  commission of the offence. 

 
 Page - 10 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

His  testimony  confirmed  the  existence  of  marital  disputes.  The 

defence  witness  had  deposed  that  the  Appellant  was  engaged  in 

business  and  was  financially  supporting  his  family.  There  is  nothing 

on record to even remotely suggest that during the trial the Appellant 

may  have  suffered  from  mental  disease  or  cognitive  impairment, 

rendering him incapable to put up a defence. As already noted above, 

the Medical Board constituted pursuant to the direction of the learned 

trial court had confirmed that the Appellant was mentally capable and 

fit  to  stand  trial.  The  medical  practitioners,  including  psychiatrists, 

who had regularly examined the Appellant during his incarceration in 

prison,  had  not  reported  at  any  stage  of  the  trial  that  he  suffered 

from  unsoundness  of  mind  or  may  have  shown  signs  required  for 

attracting the provisions of sections 464 and 465 of the Cr.P.C.   

9. 

The emphasis of the learned counsel for the Appellant in 

the context of failure on the part of the learned trial court to observe 

the procedure prescribed under sections 464 and 465 of the Cr.P.C is 

misconceived.  Moreover,  the  argument  of  the  learned  counsel  that 

the  said  provisions  have  nexus  with  section  84  of  the  PPC  is  not 

legally  sustainable.  Section  84 of  the  PPC  and  sections  464  and  465 

of the Cr.P.C are distinct. The object and circumstances in which they 

are  attracted  are  entirely  different.  Section  84  is  one  of  the 

exceptions or defence under Chapter IV of the PPC and if an accused 

is  able  to  prove  it  then  the  latter  can  avoid  liability  for  the 

commission of a crime. The accused has to prove  that he or she, as 

the  case  may  be,  'did  not  appreciate  the  nature  or  quality  of 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 11 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

wrongfulness  of  the  acts'.  The  expressions  used  by  the  legislature 

describe the conditions for establishing a legally sufficient excuse for 

the  actions  which  otherwise  would  expose  the  accused  to  criminal 

liability. An accused has to prove that, at the time of committing the 

acts, he/she was 'incapable of knowing the nature of the act' or that 

when  the  act  was  done,  the  latter  was  incapacitated  to  appreciate 

that  it  was  either  wrong  or  contrary  to  the  law.  The  reason  for  the 

incapacity  is  'unsoundness  of  mind'.  The  plea  is  thus  relatable  to 

cognitive  insanity  i.e.  the  mental  state  and  mental  process  at  the 

time  of  committing  the  act.  It  must  be  so  impaired  due  to  a  mental 

disease  or  defect  that  that  the  person  is  incapable  of  knowing  the 

nature  or  quality of the act  and  its consequences. The 'unsoundness 

of mind'  is in  the context of cognitive  impairment; when  the doer of 

the  act  becomes  oblivious  of  the  nature  of  the  act  or  becomes 

incapable  of  appreciating  that  what  he  or  she  is  doing  is  wrong  or 

contrary  to  law.  Any  act  committed  or  done  by  reason  of 

‘unsoundness  of  mind’  is  immune  from  being  exposed  to  criminal 

liability  because  of  want  of  criminal intent. In  other  words,  the  onus 

required to be discharged by the accused is to prove that at the time 

of doing the act the crucial factor of mens rea did not exist. The mere 

existence of actus reus is not sufficient for attracting criminal liability. 

The  existence  of  both  actus  reus  and  means  rea  are  essential  for 

establishing the guilt of an accused and to hand down the prescribed 

punishment.  It  is  noted  that  Article  121  of  the  Order  of  1984 

explicitly  provides  that  the  burden  of  proving  that  the  case  of  an 

 
 Page - 12 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

accused  comes  within  the  ambit  of  one  of  the  exceptions  described 

under the PPC is on the person or the accused who takes such a plea.  

10. 

It  is  obvious  from  the  observations  made  by  the  august 

Supreme Court in the case titled “Jamshaid Beg v. Muhammad Iqbal 

and  another”  [1988  SCMR  855]  that  onus  is  on  the  accused  to 

successfully  discharge  the  burden  contemplated  under  section  84  of 

the  PPC  and  that  the  testimony  of  experts  is  essential  for  the 

purposes  thereof.    In  the  case  titled  “Mehrban  alias  MUNNA  v.  The 

State”  [PLD  2002  SC  92]  the  august  Supreme  Court  has  observed 

and  held  that  the  test  for  discharging  the  onus  in  the  context  of 

section 84 of the PPC is whether the accused was capable enough to 

know the nature of the act committed by him or her, as the case may be, 

and  whether  the  latter  was  permanently  incapable  in  view  of  the 

antecedents, subsequent and past conduct and family history and opinions 

of  Medical  Experts,  or  was  incapable  during  certain  intervals  to  know  the 

consequences  of  an  act  committed.  The  crucial  point  of  time  for  testing 

whether  the  benefit  of  section  84  ought  to  be  given  or  not  is  the  material 

time  when  the  act  was  done  i.e.  when  the  offence  was  committed.  The 

august Supreme Court,  in the said judgment, has explained the distinction 

between  ‘medical  insanity’  and  ‘legal  insanity’.  It  has  been  held  that  the 

existence of the former would furnish a ground for exemption from criminal 

liability. ‘Legal insanity’ has been held to exist when the cognitive faculties 

of  the  accused  are  completely  impaired  as  a  result  of  ‘unsoundness  of 

mind’. ‘Unsoundness of mind’, in order to constitute ‘legal insanity,’ must be 

such  as  should  make  the  offender  incapable  of  knowing  the  nature  of  the 

act  or  what  he/she  is  doing  at  the  time  of  the  commission  of  the  offence 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 13 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

was  wrong  or  contrary  to  law.  It  has  been  held  that  mere  inadequacy  of 

motive would not be sufficient proof of insanity and that when a plea under 

section  84  of  the  PPC  is  taken,  then  the  burden  of  proving  it  so  as  to 

exempt  the  accused  from  criminal  liability  would  be  on  the  latter.  In  the 

case  titled  “Khizar  Hayat  v.  The  State”  [2006  SCMR  1755]  the  august 

Supreme Court has quoted with approval the observations made in the case 

titled “The State v. Balahar Das” [PLD 1962 Dacca 467] and the principles 

are reproduced as follows:  

"(i)  If  the  accused  raises  any  special  plea  or  claims 

exoneration  on  the  basis  of  any  special  or  general 

exception  he  must  prove  his  special  plea  or  the 

existence  of  conditions  entitling  him  to  claim  the 

exoneration. 

(ii)  Irrespective  of  the  success  or  failure  of  the  special 

plea  raised  by  the  defence  or  its  claim  to  exoneration 

the  prosecution  must  prove  its  case  beyond  any 

reasonable doubt. 

(iii)  If  after  an  examination  of  the  entire  evidence  the 

Court is of opinion that there is a reasonable possibility 

that  the  defence  put  forward  by  the  accused  may  be 

true  or  that  the  evidence  casts  a  doubt  on  the 

existence of the requisite intention of mens rea which is 

a  necessary  ingredient  of  a  particular  offence,  this  will 

react  on  the  whole  prosecution  case  entitling  the 

accused to the benefit of doubt. 

(iv) Legal insanity as contemplated in section 84, P.P.C. 

 
 
 Page - 14 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

is  different  from  medical  insanity.  If  the  cognitive 

faculty  is  not  impaired  and  the  accused  knows  that 

what he  is doing either  wrong or  contrary to  law  he  is 

not  insane.  Merely  being  subjected  to  uncontrollable 

impulses  or 

insane  delusions  or  even  partial 

derangement of mind will not do, nor mere eccentricity 

or singularity of manner. 

(v) If there is evidence of premeditation and design or 

evidence  that  the  accused  after  the  act  in  question 

tried  to  resist  arrest  the  plea  of  insanity  may  be 

negatived. 

(vi)  If  the  facts  are  clear  so  far  as  the  act  complained 

of is concerned motive is irrelevant. 

"This  decision  was  arrived  at  after  a  comprehensive 

review  of  the  relevant  law  on  the  point  before  their 

Lordships.  The  aforesaid  proposition  of  law  is  also 

supported  by 

the  AIR  1960  Mad.  316 

in  re: 

KantasamiMudali." 

The august Supreme Court has further held in the Khizar Hayat case 

supra  that  it  is  a  settled  principle  of  law  that  until  the  contrary  is 

proved  every  person  is  presumed  to  be  sane  and  possessed  of  a 

sufficient degree of cognitive faculties so as to be responsible for his 

or her actions, as the case may be. It has been further held that it is 

also  settled law that a medical expert would, at the most, furnish the 

existence,  character  and  the  extent  of  the  mental  disease  and 

thereafter it would be for the court to form an opinion whether ‘legal 

 
 
 Page - 15 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

insanity’  existed  at  the  time  of  the  commission  of  the  crime.  It  has, 

therefore,  been  held  that  the  benefit  of  section  84  of  the  PPC  could 

only  be  given  when  an  accused  has  been  found  to  be  insane  at  the 

time of the commission of the offence. In the case titled “Muhammad 

Uzair Jamal v. The State and another” [2020 SCMR 1862] the august 

Supreme  Court  did  not  accept  ‘depressive  illness’  to  be  a  disease  or 

incapacity  recognized  by  law  as  justification  for  avoiding  criminal 

liability.  The  august  Supreme  Court  has  observed  that  an  offender 

can claim immunity from being punished on the basis of unsoundness 

of  mind if,  at the time of the commission of the offence, the latter 

was  incapable  of  knowing  the  nature  of  the  act  or  lacked  

knowledge about it being wrong or contrary to the law. It has been 

further held that the plea has to be taken in a clear and categorical 

manner and if it is so raised then the accused would be taking upon 

himself the responsibility to discharge the onus while, in the event 

of failure, the court would draw a contra presumption.  

11. 

Chapter XXXIV of the Cr.P.C, titled “Lunatics,” is attracted 

at  the  stage  of  an  inquiry  or  trial  of  an  offence.  Section  464  of  the 

Cr.P.C.  is  relevant  when  an  inquiry  or  a  trial  is  being  held  by  a 

Magistrate. In case of trial by a Court of Sessions, section 465 of the 

Cr.P.C.  becomes  relevant  and  applicable.  The  provisions  of  section 

465  are  attracted  if  the  conditions  described  therein  are  fulfilled  i.e. 

(i)  the  presence  of  the  person  before  the  court  of  sessions;  (ii)  the 

latter appears to the court at the trial to be of unsound mind; (iii) the 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 16 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

person by reason of unsoundness of mind is incapable of making his 

or her defence. If these three conditions are fulfilled then it becomes 

mandatory  for  the  trial  court  in  the  first  instance  to  try  the  fact  of 

such  unsoundness  of  mind  or  incapacity  of  the  accused  to  make  his 

or  her  defence. In the  eventuality  of  being satisfied  of  the  existence 

of such a fact, it becomes mandatory for the  trial court to record its 

findings to  that effect and postpone further  proceedings  in the case. 

Sub  section  (2)  of  section  465  declares  that  the  trial  of  the  fact  of 

unsoundness of mind and incapacity of the accused shall be deemed 

as  part  of  the  trial  pending  before  the  court.  The  other  sections  of 

Chapter-XXXIV describe the consequences and procedure required to 

be  adopted  in  different  eventualities.  A  plain  reading  of  Chapter-

XXXIX  of  the  Cr.P.C.  as  a  whole,  unambiguously  shows  that  the 

procedure  prescribed  therein  is  confined  to  the  stage  of  inquiry  or 

trial, as the case may be, and not to the unsoundness of mind at the 

time when the act was committed resulting in the inquiry or trial.  

12. 

A 

learned  Division  Bench  in  the  case  titled  “Ata 

Muhammad  v.  The  State”  [PLD  1960  Lahore  111]  has  elaborately 

interpreted the provisions of sections 464 and 465 of the Cr.P.C and 

the relevant portions are reproduced as follows:  

“In  a  trial  in  the  Sessions  Court,  an  accused 

person  may  feign  insanity,  but  if  it  appears  to  the 

Court,  unable  to  detect  the  simulation  that  the 

accused may be of unsound mind, the question has to 

be  tried  as  a  fact  and  medical  evidence  on  the  point 

 
   
 
 
 
 Page - 17 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

would,  of  course,  be  an  indispensable  necessity.  But 

where the Court sees that insanity is a feigned one, it 

has simply to ignore it. And where it does not appear 

to  the  Court  at  all  from  its  own  observations  or  any 

other 

factor 

that 

the  accused 

is  because  of 

unsoundness  of mind incapable  to  make  his defence, 

the Court is under no obligation to investigate the fact 

of unsoundness of mind.”    

“In  dealing  with  cases  of  insanity  arising  in 

Courts,  the  first  thing  to  be  considered  is  that  the 

issue of insanity at the time of the commission of an 

offence  is  in  the  nature  of  a  defence  raised  by  an 

accused  person,  or  on  his  behalf,  to  criminal 

responsibility  and,  therefore,  it  has  to  be  proved 

either from the prosecution evidence or independently 

by  the  defence.  In  law,  until  the  contrary  is  proved, 

every man is  presumed to  be sane  and  possessed of 

a sufficient degree of reason to be responsible for his 

actions.” 

In  the  case  titled  “Mobarak  Ali  v.  Muhammad  HachiMiah”  [PLD  1967 

Dacca  701]  it  has  been  observed  and  held  that  a  Magistrate  under 

section  464  or  a  Court  under  section  465  of  the  Cr.P.C,  as  the  case 

may be, is not bound on the mere raising of a plea by an accused to 

hold  an  inquiry  and  decide  the  factum  of  insanity.  The  Magistrate, 

under section 464 must have reasons to believe, while under section 

465  it  should  appear  to  a  Court  there  was  existence  of  conditions 

contemplated  ibid.  In  the  case  titled  “Abdul  Wahid  alias  WAHDI  v. 

 
 
 Page - 18 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

The  State”  [1994  SCMR  1517]  it  has  been  held  and  observed  as 

follows:  

“Chapter  XXXIV  of  the  Criminal  Procedure 

Code  which  contains  sections  464  to  475  deals 

with  the  trial  of  a 

lunatic  person.  These 

provisions  make  it  obligatory  on  the  Court 

holding  an  inquiry  or  a  trial,  if  it  has  reasons  to 

believe  that  the  accused  in  the  case  is  of 

unsound mind and in consequence is incapable of 

making  his  defence,  to  first  hold  an  inquiry  into 

the  facts  of  such  unsoundness  of  mind  of  the 

accused and for  that purpose  to get the  accused 

examined  by  the  Civil  Surgeon  of  the  district  or 

by  such  other  Medical  Officer  as  the  Provincial 

Government  may  direct  and  then  record  the 

result  of  such  examination  in  writing.  Pending 

inquiry  into  the  unsoundness  of  mind  of  the 

accused  the  trial  before  the  Court  is  to  remain 

suspended.  If  as  a  result  of  the  inquiry  into  the 

unsoundness  of  mind  of  the  accused,  it  is  found 

that  the  accused  is  of  unsound  mind  and 

consequently incapable of making his defence the 

trial  or  inquiry  has  to  be  adjourned  until  such 

time the accused regains from his mental illness. 

While  adjourning  the  trial  or  inquiry  the  Court 

has  discretion  either  to  enlarge  him  on  bail  or 

 
 
 
 Page - 19 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

commit him in the safe custody as in the opinion 

of  the  Court  may  be  necessary  and  report  the 

matter  to  Provincial  Government.  The  trial  or 

inquiry  so  postponed  could  be  resumed  at  any 

time by the Court if it is found that the accused is 

now  in  a  position  to  make  his  defence  in  the 

case. However, if upon resumption of inquiry the 

accused  once  again  is  found  to  be  incapable  of 

making his defence, the inquiry and trial is again 

to  be  adjourned  for  such  period  the  accused 

again  recovers  from  his  illness.  Apart  from  the 

obligation of the Court to hold an inquiry into the 

fact  of  unsoundness  of  the  mind  of  the  accused 

in the above-stated circumstances, the combined 

effect of sections 469 and 470, Cr.P.C. is that the 

Court shall also hold an inquiry, if it appears from 

the  evidence  produced  before  it,  or  if  it  has 

reasons 

to  believe 

that 

the  accused  was 

incapable of understanding the nature of offence 

at  the  time  he  committed  it  for  reasons  of 

unsoundness  of  mind, 

into 

the 

fact  of 

unsoundness  of  the  mind  of  the  accused  at  the 

time  he  committed  the  offence.  If  the  Court 

reaches the conclusion after holding such inquiry, 

that the accused was incapable of understanding 

the  nature  of  act  constituting  the  offence  for 

 
 Page - 20 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

reasons of unsoundness of mind, the accused will 

be  acquitted,  but  the  Court  shall  give  a  specific 

finding whether he committed the act or not.” 

In the case titled “Fauqual Bashir v. The State” [1997 SCMR 239], the 

august Supreme Court, while interpreting sections 464 and 465 of the 

Cr.P.C, has observed and held that when a court is confronted with the 

question  during  an  inquiry  or  trial  as  to  whether  or  not  an  accused  is  of 

unsound mind and incapable of understanding the proceedings against him, 

then  it  has  to  take  action  in  accordance  with  the  scheme  contemplated 

therein.  However,  it  has  been  held  that  the  court  is  under  no  obligation  to 

investigate the fact of unsoundness of mind of an accused where it does not 

appear so on the basis of its observations or any other factor. Nonetheless, 

if the conditions are fulfilled then the provisions of section 465 of the Cr.P.C 

are  to  be  treated  as  compulsory  and  mandatory  in  nature  and  omission  to 

observe  the  procedure  would  vitiate  the  conclusion  made  and  the  result 

reached.  

13. 

The  above  discussed  precedent  law  clearly  draws  a 

distinction  between  section  84  of  the  PPC  and  the  provisions  of 

Chapter XXXIV of the Cr.P.C. The former pertains to a plea of defence 

taken by an accused in order to avoid liability for the commission of a 

criminal act or offence. Its relevance and nexus is with the time when 

the act constituting an offence was done. On the other hand, Chapter 

XXXIV of the Cr.P.C is attracted at the stage of inquiry or trial before 

a Magistrate or a Court of Sessions, as the case may be. It becomes 

applicable when the cognitive impairment of an accused renders him 

 
 
 
 
 
 Page - 21 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

or  her  incapable  of  making  a  defence.  Such  a  condition  has  obvious 

consequences  in  the  context  of  the  principles  of  a  fair  trial.  The 

obligation  of  the  court  under  section  465  of  the  Cr.P.C  is  to  ensure 

that  the  principles  of  a  fair  trial  are  met  and  has  no  relevance  with 

the moment or time when the act which is the cause of the inquiry or 

trial  was  done.  The  trial  court  is  not  bound  to  determine  the  fact  of 

'unsoundness  of  mind'  merely  because  the  accused  feigns  insanity, 

but if it appears to the court that the accused may not be capable of 

putting up a defence  then it becomes mandatory to try the  question 

of unsoundness of mind as a fact and resort to medical evidence. It, 

therefore, has no nexus with proving or disproving the plea taken by 

an accused under section 84 of the PPC because that is in the context 

of  existence  of  mens  rea  at  the  time  of  the  commission  of  the 

offence. In the case of a plea taken under section 84 of the PPC, the 

onus  has  to  be  successfully  discharged  by  the  accused  and  that  too 

on the basis of cogent and reliable medical evidence and testimony of 

experts. In case of Chapter XXXIV of the Cr.P.C there is no obligation 

on the Magistrate or the Sessions Court, as the case may be, to give 

any  finding  of  fact  in  relation  to  the  cognitive  impairment  of  an 

accused  at  the  time  when  the  act  constituting  the  offence  was 

committed or done.  

14 

In  the  case  in  hand,  the  Appellant  had  admitted  the 

brutal  killing  of  his  wife  and  mother  of  his  four  minor  children. 

However,  during  the  trial  he  took  the  plea  of  unsoundness  of  mind. 

He  feigned  insanity  though  it  did  not  appear  so  to  the  learned  trial 

 
 
 
 
 Page - 22 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

court. Nonetheless, the court ordered the examination of the accused 

by  a  medical  board.  The  medical  board  was  duly  constituted  and  it 

consisted  the  relevant  medical  experts.  After  examining  the 

Appellant, the medical board found him capable of standing the trial. 

The  Appellant  had  also  been  examined  regularly  by  medical  experts 

throughout  his  incarceration  during  the  trial  proceedings.  It  was 

never  reported  that  the  Appellant  had  any  signs  of  unsoundness  of 

mind  rendering  him  incapable  of  putting  up  his  defence.  The 

Appellant had been engaged in business and had been supporting his 

family.  His  brother  had  entered  the  witness  box  as  DW-1.  His 

testimony shows that at the time of committing the act, the Appellant 

was  not  unaware  of  what  he  was  doing.  Though  he  appeared  in 

defence  of  the  Appellant  but  his  version  contradicted  the  plea  taken 

by  the  Appellant  while  recording  his  statement  under  section  342  of 

Cr.P.C.  The  Appellant  had  engaged  a  counsel  and  had  not  displayed 

any signs that  may  have  appeared to  the  learned  trial  court  that  he 

was  incapable  of  giving  his  defence.  It  is  settled  law  that  until  the 

contrary  is  proved,  a  person  is  presumed  to  be  sane  and  that  the 

latter  possessed  sufficient  degree  of  awareness  to  know  the 

consequences  of  his  or  her  actions.  The  Appellant  had  taken  the  life 

of  his  wife  as  well  as  destroying  a  fully  grown  fetus  in  her  womb  in 

the  most  painful,  gruesome  and  inhumane  manner.  The  multiple 

stabbing  of  the  Deceased  had  taken  place  while  four  minor  children 

were  present  at  the  crime  scene.  It  was  a  cold  blooded  murder 

because  it was  deliberate,  cruel  and  savage.  The  Appellant  admitted 

killing the Deceased but absolutely failed in discharging the burden of 

 
 Page - 23 
Crl. Appeal No.65/2019. 

proving  the  plea  of  insanity.  The  prosecution  has  brought  on  record 

cogent  and  reliable  evidence  to  corroborate  the  admission  made  by 

the  Appellant.  What  the  latter  did  was  evil  and  thus  he  does  not 

deserve any leniency.      

15. 

For  the  above  reasons,  we  have  no  hesitation  in 

concluding  that  the  prosecution  had  established  its  case  beyond  a 

reasonable  doubt  while  the  Appellant  had  absolutely  failed  in 

discharging the burden to prove the plea taken by him under section 

84 of the PPC. The appeals filed by the Appellant i.e. Crl. Appeal no. 

65/2019, titled “Sami Ullah v. The State and Jail Appeal no. 76/2019, 

titled  “Sami  Ullah  v.  the  State”,  therefore,  do  not  succeed  and  are 

accordingly  dismissed.  Consequently,  we  uphold  the  sentence 

handed down by the learned trial Court and answer the Reference i.e. 

Murder Reference no. 03/2019, titled “The State v. Sami Ullah” in the 

‘affirmative’.  

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

Announced, in open Court, on 29-04-2021. 

JUDGE 

   CHIEF JUSTICE 

Approved for reporting.  

Tanveer Ahmed/* 

 
                   
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
