_s

e

ORDER SHEET
ISLATABAD HIGH COURT. I$ITABAD
(JUDrCrAt  DEPARTM  El{Tl

Criminal Misc. No.1 35-B l2O2O

Nadir  Khan
VS
The State  and another

S.No.  of
order/
proceedinq

Date  of
order/
proceedings

27.02.2020

Order  with signature  of Judge and that of parties  or counsel
where necessary.

Raja Rizwan  Abbasi and Gulfam Advocate  for the
petitioner.
Muhammad Azmat  Khan,  Assistant Director  F.l.A GW
/F.l.A /HQs, lslamabad.
Syed Tayyab Shah, Deputy Attorney General (D.A.G).

GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI.  J.:- The

petitioner  namely, Nadir  Khan s/o Nasir Ahmad seeks

his post arrest bail in case F.l.R No.24, dated

16.07.2019  registered under Sections 101 131 151 201

211 24 Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act, 2016,

read with Sections 109, 120-B,201,500,506,  165-4,

450, 468,471,34  of Pakistan Penal Code,  1860 and
Section 7 Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997  (hereinafter
referred to as the UATA'), registered at Police

Station F.l.A / Cyber  Crime  Circle, lslamabad.

2.  Briefly stated facts of the prosecution  case  as

narrated in the F.l.R are that one Muhammad  Arshad

Malik,  the learned District and Sessions  Judge  on

15.07.2019,  forwarded an application addressed to

the Director  General F.l.A through Secretary, Ministry

-#su8

2

Crl. Misc.  No. I 35-8/2020

of Law & Justice,  lslamabad,  wath the averments

that.-

l.

ii

It is humbly stated  that I was posfed  as
Additional District  and Sessions Judge
Multan frcm  2000 to 2003. Duing  the
period one Mian Tariq (who had a
second  hand TV Shop near Fawara
Chowk, Multan) trapped me through
intoxication/sedation  for secretly  making
a compromising  video and manipulated
it into an immoralvideo to blackmail  me.

Several years passed  rn silence  and
now I leamed  that about  4/5 months ago
that Mian Taiq and his accomplices  had
sold that video to a  Lahore  based
Pakistan Muslim League leader  namely
Mian  Raza.

iii.  I was shocked  when basing on that
video, a group  of people  including Nasir
Janjua, Naslr Butt, Khunam  Yousaf  and
Mehr Ghulam Jilani stafted  to prcssurize
and blackmail  me to help Mian Nawaz
Shaif, who had earlier been  convicted
by me in the N.A.B  references.

iv.  As I had already handed down the
judgments in 
references, the
blackmailers  wanted me to somehow
scandalize the whole prccess  of
accountabiltty by falsely stating  that I
had passed my judgments under
pressure  from ceftain quafters, in order
to get some benefit to Mian  Nawaz
Sharif. The blackmailers also forced me
to meet Mian Nawaz Sharif at Jati Umra
Lahore  during April 2017 and Hussain
Nawaz Sharif at Madina during the
month  of Ramzan.

v.

vt.

It has now transpired  that duing fhese
meetings the blackmailers had been
secrctly  recording  several audios  and
videos and through blackmailing  they
even forced  me to say words which
could have fudhered  their nefarious
desrgns.

On 06.07.2019,  I was shocked  fo see
Ms. Maiam Nawaz along with the
senior leadership of PML-N  including
Mian Shahbaz Sharif,  Shahid Khaqan
Ababsi, Ahsan lqbal, Khawaja Asif,
Peruaiz Rasheed, Rana  Tanvir and
Uzma Bukhai  and otherc  holding a

3

CrL Misc.  No. I 35-8/2020

press conference at Lahore wherein a
secrctly and illegally  recorded and
manipulated video was played thereby
un leasing a malicious propaganda
against  not only my perconal dignity  of
my family but also against  the institution
of judiciary and the process of
accountability.

vii.  The above mentioned  actions by all
individuals involved and  their
accompliceVassocrafes  have not only
tamished  my dignity and honor of my
family and social  life but have a/so
attempted to adversely  affect  my seruice
carcer while  endangeing the life of my
complete  family.

viii.

tx.

Even  the alleged  video displayed  in the
press conference by Ms Maryam Nawaz
and others who were  sitting with her, is
materially tampered  and has exposed all
of them to elecfionic  forgery,  electronic
fraud, tampeing  an unauthorized  used
and misuse. The culpits are also  guilty
of offences touching  upon the modesty
of a natural percon. The impugned
actions arc malicious and those
colluding, aiding  and abetting are also
gui@  of the same offences.

It is thereforc, rcquested that immediate
action  be taken against  all above named
individuals  and their accomplices  and
rcgister a ciminal case for illegally
recoding audio and video images
without permission with intent of
blackmailing  and using the same for
criminal intimidation  and subverting  the
course of  justice, and further
dissemination  with intent to malign  my
perconal respecf and dignity of Sfafe
institutions."

3.  The learned  counsel for the petitioner has

contended that the petitioner is not nominated in the

F.l.R; the alleged occurrence  is stated to have  been

committed  in the year 2000-2003  while F.l.R has

been registered  after unexplained delay of more than

16 years; no incriminating material/  evidence  is

1

4 

Crl. Mi*. No.l35-B/2020

available on record to connect the petitioner with the

commission of the alleged offences; allegations

against  the petitioner are that he was an employee  of

one of the co-accused  and he pushed the button of

video camera, concealed  at a particular  place for

recording  the activity,  however regarding the same

fact, there is no evidence with the prosecution; that it

is hearsay  evidence;  statement of the petitioner

recorded under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. will not be

helpful to the prosecution; that the investigation  qua

the petitioner has been completed and he is no more

required for the purposes thereof; the petitioner  has
been incarcerated  since his arrest; further

incarceration  of the petitioner wil! not serve an)l
useful purpose; recovery if  any is fake and

concocted;  the petitioner has no criminal  history;

there is no chance  of abscondance  of the petitioner

or tampering with the prosecution evidence; the case

against the petitioner is based on malafide  and

ulterior motives  of the complainant;  the offences  do

not fall within the ambit of prohibitory clause  of

section 497 of Cr.P.C.; the offences are not attracted

against the petitioner; report under Section 173 ot

Cr.P.C. has been submitted before  the learned  trial

Court;  the case against  the petitioner is that of further

inquiry; story as narrated in the FIR is false, frivolous

(

I 

Crl. Misc.  No.l35-B/2020

and baseless;  hence the learned counsel urges  the

petitioner  to be released  on bai!.
4.  Conversely, the learned  Deputy  Attorney

General has vehemently  opposed  the bail petition

and contended  that the petitioner  was an employee

of the co-accused namely,  Mian Tariq and is fully

involved in the commission  of the offences; the

petitioner  has deliberately  switched  on the hidden

camera  for recording video; the said act of the

petitioner  has destroyed  the honour  and modesty of

the complainant not only in family but also in the

community; investigation qua the petitioner has been

completed and report under section 173 of Cr.P.C.

has been  submitted before the learned  trial Court; the

trial of the case wil! be concluded  shortly; hence

urges for dismissal  of bai! petition.

5.  We have heard the learned counsels for the

parties  and have perused record with their able

assistance.

6.  The allegation against the present  petitioner is
that he facilitated the main accused in the

commission of the alleged offences. There  is nothing

on record  to show that the present petitioner  has

switched  on the hidden camera for recording  the

objectionable video of the complainant.  Furthermore,

6

CrL Misc.  No. I 35-8/2020

the petitioner  is not the main accused. lnvestigation

qua the petitioner has been completed and further

incarceration  of the latter will not serve any useful

purpose. Report under Section '173 of Cr.P.C.  has

been submitted  before the learned trial Gourt.  There

is no specific  allegation  and evidence on record  for

allegedly blackmailing the complainant by the

petitioner, which makes a case  of further inquiry into

the guilt of petitioner.  Whether  or not the offences

mentioned  in the FIR are attracted to the extent  of the

present  petitioner,  also needs  further probe.  The

other co-accused of the petitioner  have been

enlarged  on bail and keeping in view the rule of

consistency,  the petitioner is also entitled to the
concession  of  same relief. Moreover, deeper

appreciation  of the evidence at bail stage is not

permissible. The petitioner  does not have a criminal

record. His continued custody is not likely to serve

any beneficial  purpose  at this stage. Nothing  has

been  placed on record to indicate that the petitioner

may abscond if he is released on bai!. We are,

therefore,  of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled

to be released  on bail by extending the concession  of

bail.

7. 

It has been aptly observed by the Hon'ble

Supreme  Court of Pakistan  in the case reported  as

7

Crl. Mi*.  No. I 35-8/2020

"Manzoor and 4-others VS The Sfafe" IPLD 1972

Supreme  Court  811, as follows:-

'lt is important to remember that bail is not to be
withheld  as a punishment.  There is no legal or
moral compulsion  to keep  people in jail merely
on the allegation that they have committed
offences  punishable  with  death or
transpoftation, unless reasonable  grounds
appear  to exist  to disclose  their complicity.  The
ultimate  conviction  and incarceration  of a guilty
person can repair  the wrong caused by a
mistaken relief of interim  bail granted to him, but
no satisfactory reparation  can be offered to an
innocent man for his unjustified  incarceration  at
any stage  of the case albeit  his acquittal  in the
long run."

8.  For what has been discussed above, we allow

the petition and directed the petitioner to be released

on bail, subject to furnishing  bail bonds in the sum of

Rs.3,00,000/-  (three lac) and PR of the like amount

with one surety  in the like amount to the satisfaction

of the learned trial Court

9. 

It is needless to mention  here that the

observations made  hereinabove are tentative  in

nature  and shall  not design  to influence  the trial.

10. The petitioner  shall be at liberty to deposit  cash

surety  as per policy  of this Court.

(AAMER  FAROOQ)

JUDGE

(GHULAM  AZAM
JUDGE

xrllrtx,iftr.'

