ORDER SHEET 
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl. Misc. No.936-B/2020 

MUHAMMAD  IQBAL  ALIAS  BALA  GUJJAR. 
VS
THE STATE  AND  ANOTHER. 

Petitioner  by: 

Malik Qamar Afzal, Advocate. 

Complainant  by: 

Raja Rizwan Abbasi, Advocate for Complainant. 

State  by: 

M/s  Ruqia Sarni, AAG. 
Mr. Ishfaq Warraich, ASI with record. 
28. 08.2020. 

Date  of Hearing: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ; J: 
Through  instant  petition,  the  petitioner 

Muhammad  Iqbal  alias  Bala  Gujjar  son  of Mian Ali Haider  seeks  post  arrest 

bail  in  case  FIR No.248/2020,  dated  22.06.2020,  for offences under  section 

365 / 392 / 452 / 506(11) / 34 PPC, registered  at  Police Station  Ramna,  Islamabad. 

2. 

The Petitioner/ accused  earlier  applied  for bail after  arrest  before Judicial 

Magistrate  Sec. 30  (West), Islamabad  which  was  dismissed,  vide order  dated 

02.07.2020.  Thereafter  his  similar  request  was  also  declined  by  the  learned 

Additional Sessions  Judge  (West), Islamabad,  vide  order  dated  13.07.2020; 

hence,  this  petition  for bail after arrest. 

3.  As  per  contents  of  FIR, facts  in  brief  are  that  the  Complainant  and 

petitioner  are  property  dealers;  that  the  petitioner  had  been  extending  threats 

of abducting  him; that  previously  the  accused  abducted  the  complainant  and 

demanded  Rs. 50,000,000 /-  (rupees fifty million) as  ransom  but  he managed  to 

escape;  that  on  22.06.2020  accused  persons  kidnapped  Arshad,  the  driver  of 

the  complainant  and  his  two friends  namely  Anwar Zeb and  Tariq  Amin by 

intercepting  them  in  two vehicles (Prado black  colored and  Toyota GLI white 

colored) at  G-10 roundabout  and  were taken  to PHA Flat; that  the  driver was 

beaten  by the  accused  persons  and  then  brought  him  to  complainant  house 

and  kept  on  asking  about  complainant  from  his  family members;  that  the 

accused  gave beating  to  complainant's  children  and  extended  threats  to  her 

wife; that  they  left the  complainant's  house  but  after  a  while returned  along 

with  the  driver  and  above said  friends  of the  Complainant  and  again  harassed 

and  extended  threats  to his  family members;  that  in  the  meantime  the  police 

party  arrived and  arrested  the  accused. 

2 

Crl.Misc.No.936-B/2020 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted 

that 

the  petitioner  is 

innocent  who has  falsely been  involved in  the  present  case  as  the  petitioner 

and  other  accused  were  called  by  the  complainant  to  settle  disputes  over 

amount  of sale  and  purchase  of immovable property;  that  the  offence reported 

in  FIR is a  self concocted  story  of complainant;  that  the  offences mentioned  in 

the  FIR are  not  attracted  at  all as  the  business  relation  between  the  petitioner 

and  complainant  of the  case  is  admitted;  that  registration  of FIR is  aimed  at 

frustrating  the  transaction  of a  plaza  and  to extend  the  date  of payment;  that 

neither  there  is anything  available  on record  against  the  petitioner  nor  there  is 

any  direct  or  indirect  witness  against  the  petitioner;  that  there  is no report  of 

the  incident  on  15,  therefore,  presence  of  Police party  at  the  spot  is  also 

suspicious;  that  the  complainant  is not  an  eye witness  is only narrating  what 

he  has  heard  from the  persons  allegedly tortured  and  beatn  by petitioner  on 

gun  point; that,  therefore,  the  report  of the  FIR is nothing  but  'heresay';  that  it 

has  been  alleged in the  FIR that  the  Petitioner  has  earlier  also  kidnapped  the 

complainant  for ransom  of Rs. 50,000,000 /-  but  he  managed  to  escape  from 

the window but  no  FIR was  lodged of the  heinous  crime of kidnapping  only the 

complaint  of the  incident  was  registered  on the  web portal  of Pakistan  Citizen's 

Portal, Police Department,  Islamabad;  that  case  of the  petitioner  is  of further 

inquiry  falling within  the  ambit  of Section 497(2) Cr.P.C; that  the  investigation 

to the  extent  of petitioner  has  been  completed  and  he  is no  more  required  by 

the  police;  that  challan  has  been  submitted  and  the  charge  against  the 

petitioner/ accused  has  been  framed;  that  there  is  no likelihood of petitioner's 

abscondance  and  tampering  with  the  prosecution  evidence. Learned  counsel 

contended  that  petitioner  is  behind  the  bars  since  his  arrest  and  is  ready  to 

furnish  surety  bonds  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  court  if  enlarged  on  bail. 

Learned counsel  lastly contended  that  co-accused  of the  petitioner  have already 

been  granted  bail  vide order  dated  30.07.2020  and  according  to  the  rule  of 

consistency  he is also entitled  for concession  of bail. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  complainant/Respondent  No.2,  submitted 

that 

petitioner  is  the  principal  accused  nominated  in  the  FIR who is  involved in 

numerous  cases  of abducting,  kidnapping  for ransom  and  has  been  convicted 

in  many  cases.  He operates  his  criminal  activities  with  other  offenders  as  a 

gang  and  the  present  accused/petitioner 

is  his  accomplice.  He referred  a  Suo 

Moto case  of  Hon'ble Peshawar  High Court,  whereby,  perpetual  warrant  of 

arrest  of the  petitioner  has  been  issued  as  he  remained  absconder  in  that  case 

and  submitted  that  the  petitioner  in  that  case  has  also  been  convicted and 

sentenced.  The  learned  counsel  while  referring  the  provisions  of  sections 

mentioned  in the  FIR submitted  that  all the  ingredients  of sections  are  satisfied 

,  as  the  complainant's  driver  namely  Arshad  and  his  two friends  namely  Anwar 

3 

Crl.Misc.No.936~8/2020 

Zeb  and  Tariq  Ameen  were  intercepted  on  the  road  with  the  intention  of 

kidnapping  and  were taken  to  a  PHA flat  apparently  belonging to  one  of the 

co-accused  where  they  were kept  illegally. Learned  counsel  further  contended 

that  all  the  three  persons  who  were  intentionally  kidnapped  and  violently 

beaten  by the  accused  persons  to obtain  information  about  the  whereabouts  of 

the  complainant;  that  abductees  were brought  to the  house  of the  complainant 

where the  petitioner  harassed  and  assaulted  the  wife and  minor  daughter  of 

the  complainant;  that  on  arrival  of the  police, all  the  accused  persons  were 

caught  red-handed  and  were taken  to the  police station  where  the  complainant 

arrived and  identified all the  accused  along with petitioner  as  they were known 

to  him;  that  thereafter  the  complainant  got  registered  FIR  against  all  the 

accused.  He submitted  that  the  CCTV Footages are  available  on  record  where 

intercepting  and  snatching  vehicle of the  complainant  by the  accused  is clearly 

visible which  also  makes  a  case  of robbery  and  dacoity. Learned  Counsel  for 

the  Complainant  referred  to the  bail order  dated  30.07.2020,  whereby,  the  bail 

has  been  granted  to the  co-accused  persons  nominated  in the  present  FIR and 

submitted  that  the  grant  of bail to them  has  been  considered  in the  light of the 

judgment  of  Hon 'ble  supreme  court  passed  in  Tariq  Bashir's  case  wherein 

exceptions has  been  laid down for declining bail and  submitted  that  the  case  of 

the  present  petitioner  falls within  these  exceptions  as  the  present  petitioner 

has  been  convicted  by the  Hon'ble Peshawar  High Court  in FIR No. 274/2004 

dated  16.02.2004  and  perpetual  warrants  has  also been  issued  against  him on 

22.09.2014,  in which  case  he  is an  absconder.  He thus  submitted  that  rule  of 

consistency  for grant  of bail to the  petitioner,  as  per  terms  of the  co-accused  is 

not applicable. The arguments  of the  learned  Counsel  has  been  considered  and 

the  case  of  the  Petitioner  would  be  examined  according  to  its  own  merits. 

Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  petitioner  is  the  main  accused  in  the 

case  and  role of the  other  co-accused  who have been  granted  bail by this  Court 

is entirely different from him, therefore,  rule  of consistency  would not  apply in 

his  case.  Learned  counsel,  in  view of the  above submissions,  submitted  that 

the  petitioner  is not  entitled  for concession  of bail as  he  is involved in heinous 

criminal activities. 

6. 

Learned  State  counsel  along  with  the  1.0.  of  the  case,  furnished  the 

police record  and  while endorsing  the  arguments  of the  learned  counsel  for 

Complainant  submitted 

that 

the  accused  petitioner  along  with  other  co  

accused  are  involved in  heinous  offences of abduction  for ransom  and  house 

trespass  and  sufficient  incriminating  material  is  available  against  him  on 

record  and  in  view of the  facts  and  circumstances,  the  petitioner/  accused  is 

.. not entitled  for concession  of bail. 

4 

Crl.Misc.No.936-B/2020 

7. 

Regarding  suo  moto notice  taken  by the  Peshawar  High Court,  learned 

counsel  for Petitioner  submitted  that  the  case  pertains  to  the  year  2004  for 

which a  compromise  has  been  effected between  the  petitioner  and  other  party 

which was  produced  before the  high  Court  in  light whereof the  case  has  been 

dismissed;  however, any  legal proceeding  against  the  petitioner  according  to 

the  orders  of Peshawar  High Court  will take  its  own course.  In the jurisdiction 

of  this  Court  there  exists  no  previous  record  of  any  offence against  the 

petitioner as  alleged by the  complainant. 

8. 

Heard  arguments  of learned  Counsel  for the  petitioner,  learned  counsel 

for complainant  as  well as  learned  State  Counsel  and  have  also  perused  the 

police record submitted  during  the  hearing  of the  case. 

9. 

Perusal  of the  record  submitted  by the  Investigating  officer shows  that 

FIR was  registered  by  the  complainant  mainly  for  abduction  for  ransom, 

tress-passing  the  house  of the  complainant  as  well as  violently beating  the 

complainant's  driver,  friends  and  family members.  Apart  from that  it  has  also 

been  mentioned  in  the  opening  sentences  of the  FIR that  the  complainant  was 

earlier  abducted  by  the  petitioner  for  ransom  but  he  anyhow  managed  to 

escape  but  that  the  complainant  opted  not  to register  a  criminal  case  against 

the  petitioner,  however, the  incident  was  part  of  the  present  FIR. I  have 

carefully perused  the  contents  of the  FIR and  the  police record  produced  by the 

1.0. The Petitioner  as  per  FIR, has  been  assigned  the  lead  role of kidnapping 

and  abduction  of  three  persons  i.e.  Arshad  the  driver,  Tariq  Ameen  and 

Anwarzeb the  friends  of the  compliant,  who after  forcible abduction  from G/ 10 

round  about  were kept  in  PHA flats,  G / 10 Markaz and  their  cell phones  were 

also snatched.  It  has  been  mentioned  in  the  FIR that  the  accused  were asking 

about  the  whereabouts  of the  Complainant.  The  sketched  map  in  the  police 

record  shows that  the  house  of the  complainant  and  PHA Flat  owned by one of 

the  co-accused  are  on opposite  side of each  other,  but  to reach  the  house  of the 

complainant,  petitioner  had  to  badly  torture  the  abductees.  Arshad  in  his 

statement  has  recorded  that  the  accused  took him  to the  complainant's  house 

but  he was  left in  the  vehicle by all the  accused  when  they  illegally entered  the 

complainant's  house  and  tortured  the  family to  know  about  the  complainant 

but  returned  unsuccessful.  However, the  police arrested  the  accused  persons 

including  petitioner  red  handed  on  the  second  attempt.  There  is  nothing  on 

record  as  to  how  the  Police  reached  the  scene  of  alleged  incident.  The 

statement  of  the  Anwarzeb, one  of  the  abductees  has  also  been  perused, 

according  to  which,  while abducting,  the  car  keys  was  snatched  from him 

which  means  he  was  driving the  car,  (statement  of Arshad  shows  that  he  was 

driving the  car). After some conversation  the  alleged accused  persons  returned 

his phone  and  he was  allowed to go. He then  called 15 and  reported  the  matter; 

5 

Crl.Misc.No.936-B/2020 

when  he  noticed  chasing  by  accused,  he  entered  the  nearby  SP  office then 

police arrested  all the  accused  red  handed  in  the  SP office. It  has  been  noticed 

that  the  address  of place  of arrest  has  not  been  mentioned  neither  in  the  FIR 

nor in the  statements  recorded  u/ s  161 Cr. P. C. The statement  of the wife of the 

compliant  has  also  been  perused  (written in  black  ink) according  to which  4 

persons  barged  in  her  house  with  Kalashnikov,  she  recognized the  petitioner 

who tortured  and  threatened  her  and  children,  however due  to  their  hue  and 

cry all the  accused  ran  away; she  informed the  complainant  who informed the 

police who  arrested  the  accused.  It  is  noteworthy  that  ending  line  in  her 

statement  u/s  161 Cr.P.C has  been  written  in  blue  ink  which  says  that  marks 

of scratches  are  still visible on face and  neck. It  has  been consistently  stated  by 

the  abductees  and  the  wife of the  complainant  that  they were badly tortured  by 

the  petitioner  and  co-accused,  however no  medical  examination  has  been 

conducted  by the  prosecution  as  not found in record. 

10.  Perusal  of the  record  further  revealed that  admittedly  the  complainant  as 

well as  all the  accused  in  the  case  are  property  dealers,  duly  known  to  each 

other,  having  dispute  over certain  deals  of  sale  and  purchase  of properties 

involving huge  amount,  as  per  agreements  placed  on  record  between  the 

complainant  and  co-accused.  Keeping the  business  relations  between  the 

parties  the  above  stated  facts,  borne  out  of  the  prosecution  record  are 

analyzed,  and  found  that  contradictions  between  material  on  prosecution 

record  and  statement  of parties,  required  in-depth  scrutiny  of circumstances 

which exercise can  be made  during  the  trial,  hence,  further  inquiry  is required 

in the case. 

11. 

It  has  also  been  noted  that  the  accused  is  nominated  in  the  case  of 

abduction  for ransom  and  trespassing,  whereas,  offence of robbery  has  also 

been  included  later  on  but  recovery of any  weapon  has  not  been  effected from 

the  petitioner.  Apart from that  it is also surprising  that  allegations  of abduction 

of complainant's  driver and  friends have been leveled against  petitioner  but  it is 

also  mentioned  in  the  FIR that  the  accused  brought  the  alleged abductees  to 

the  house  of  complainant  with  them.  Moreover, medical  report  of  the 

complainant's  driver  and  his  friends  or  family members  who were allegedly 

beaten  by  the  accused,  has  also  not  been  obtained.  The  said  facts  create 

serious  doubts  about  the  prosecution  story  and  it is settled  law that  even for 

purposes  of bail, law is not  to be stretched  in favour  of the  prosecution  and  if 

any  benefit  of doubt  arises,  it  must  go to  the  accused.  The cases  relied upon 

are  "Amir  VS  The  State"  (PLD 1972  SC  277),  "Shabbiran  Bibi  VS  The 

State"  (2018  P  Cr. L  J  788} and  "Syed  Hassan  Ali  Shah  VS  The  State" 

(2019  P  Cr.  L  J  Note  159} 

then  it  has  been  held  in  case  reported  as 

"Zaigham  Ashraf  VS  The  State"  (2016  SCMR 2018}  that  "for  getting  the 

6 

Crl.Misc.No.936-B/2020 

relief of  bail accused  only  had  to show  that  the  evidence/ material  collected by 

the  prosecution  and/ or  the  defence  plea  taken  by  him  crated  reasonable 

doubt/ suspicion  in the prosecution  case  then  he was  entitled  to avail the  benefits 

of it". 

12.  During  his  arguments  learned  counsel  for the  complainant  submitted 

that  the  alleged accused/petitioners  after  their  arrest  from the  spot  were taken 

to the  Police Station  where  the  complainant  later  arrived  and  identified them  as 

he  knew  them.  It  is  not  understandable  when  he  knew  all  the  accused  then 

why he  did not  nominate  the  petitioner  with  specific role in the  commission  of 

offence at  the  time of registration  of FIR. Moreover, there  is  nothing  available 

on  record  regarding  commission  of offence except  photographs  in  which  two 

vehicle can  been  seen  intercepting  one  vigo jeep  but  same  required  to  be 

corroborated  with  the  direct  and  circumstantial  evidence and  its  veracity  can 

be determined  through  proper  trial  after  recording  of evidence  as  at  the  time 

of bail  as  deeper  appreciation  of record  is  not  permissible  at  bail  stage  rather 

only tentative  assessment 

is  to  be made.  Thus,  in  light  of said  observations, 

case  of  the  accused  becomes  one  of  further  inquiry  under  Section  497(2) 

Cr.P.C. Reliance in  this  regard  is  placed  on  the  case  law reported  as  Khiyal 

Saba  and  another  VS  The  State  and  another  (2020  SCMR 340)  and 

Muhammad  Junaid  ur  Rehman  VS the  State  and  another  (2020  PCr.LJ 

310).  Further,  challan  has  already  been  submitted  and  charge  has  been 

framed, whereas,  petitioner  is  incarcerated  since,  his  arrest  on  22.06.2020.  It 

has  been  observed  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  of Pakistan  in  the  case  of 

"Manzoor and  4  others v. the  State"  (PLD 1972  SC Bl)  that:- 

"the ultimate  conviction and  incarceration of a guilty person  can  repair the 
wrong  caused  by  a  mistaken  relief of interim bail granted  to him,  but  no 
satisfactory  reparation  can  be  offered  to  an  innocent  man  for  his 
unjustified  incarceration at any stage  of the case  albeit his acquittal in the 
long run" 

13.  As regards  the  fact  that  the  petitioner  has  been  convicted  in  an  FIR 

lodged in  2004  and  issuance  of perpetual  warrant  by Hon'ble Peshawar  High 

Court,  the  record  revealed  that  proceedings  of  his  transfer  are  in  process, 

however, it  is  also  settled  law  that  each  and  every case  should  have  been 

judged  on its  own merits  and  in the  present  case  there  exist  sufficient  doubts 

in  the  prosecution  story  to  make  petitioner's  case  of further  inquiry  falling 

within  the  ambit  of Section  497(2) Cr.P.C. Guidance  in  this  regard  has  been 

sought  from the  case  law reported  as  Muhammad  Faiz  alias  Bhoora  VS The 

State  (2015  SC.MR 655)  and  Shakeel  Ahmed  VS The  State  (2009  SC.MR 

174). 

14.  Since, the  challan  in the  present  case  has  already  been  submitted  and  the 

charge  has  been  framed,  therefore,  there  is no  likelihood of tempering  with the 

7 

Crl.Misc.No.936-B/2020 

record  by  the  petitioner/  accused.  Further  there  is  no  apprehension  of  the 

petitioner/ accused  for abscondence. 

15.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  petition  is  accepted  and 

petitioner  is admitted  to post  arrest  bail, subject  to his  furnishing  bail bonds  in 

the  sum  of Rs. 5,00,000 /-  (Rupees Five Lac) with one surety  in the  like amount 

to the  satisfaction  of learned  Trial Court. 

16.  All the  observations  made  hereinabove  are  tentative  in  nature  and  shall 

have no  bearing  on  the  final determination  of guilt  or  innocence  by the  trial 

Court. 

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

