JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

Civil Revision  No. 78/2013. 

Muhammad  Riaz 

VS

Muhammad  Iqbal  Noori 

Petitioner  by: 

Barrister  Talha Ilyas Sheikh, Advocate. 

Respondent  by: 

Mr.  Rafaqat  Islam Awan, Advocate. 

Date of Decision: 

19.02.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  l{AYANI. J:-  Through  this  Civil  Revision,  the  petitioner 

has  assailed  the  order  dated  17.03.2010,  passed  by  learned  Civil  Judge,  1st  Class 

(West),  Islamabad,  whereby  plaint  of the  suit  for possession  through  pre-emption  & 

permanent 

injunction  filed  by  petitioner  was  rejected  U/O  VIJ  Rule  11  CPC.  The 

petitioner  has  also  assailed  the  judgment  &  decree  dated  04.03.2013,  passed  by 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  appeal  filed  by  the 

petitioner  against  the  order  dated  17.03.2010,  was  also  dismissed. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  question  for  application  of 

the  correct  law  has  not  been  adjudicated  by  the  trial  Court,  nor  the  same  was 

considered  by  the  Appellate  Court,  even  matter  was  adjudicated  upon  in  haste 

under  the  garb  of  Muslim  Personal  Law,  although  the  question  of  application  of 

correct  law is the  primary  consideration  by the  Courts  which  is missing  in this  case; 

that  judgment  dated  04.12.2019,  passed  in  Civil Revision  No.122/2019  titled  Bllb. 

Nawaz and  others  VS  Rusmat  Ali has  declared  the  application  of  Punjab  Pre- 

emption  Act,  1913, therefore,  jurisdiction  exercised  by the  Courts below  on the  basis 

of  Muslim  Personal  Law  is  incorrect  view  which  requires  correction  at  this 

revisional  stage. 

3. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  contends 

that  both  the 

Courts  below  have  rightly  appreciated  the  legal controversy  and  rejected  the  plaint 

C.R  No.78/2013 

2 

in terms  of Order  VII  Rule  11 CPC  as petitioner  has  no  cause  of action  to  agitate  the 

matter. 

4. 

5. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  has  filed  a  suit  for  possession 

through  pre-emption  & permanent  injunction  against  the  respondent,  plaint  of said 

suit was rejected  U/O VII  Rule 11 CPC  with  the  following observations:- 

After  hearing  the  arguments  and perusal  of record, I have  come  to  the 

conclusion  that  plaintiff  himself  sold  this  land  to  one  Zahid  Hussain. 

Registered sale deed No.2670 dated  28.09.2000  is available  on file.  Now 

said Zahid Hussain has further  sold out  the same  land  to defendant  vide 

registered  sale  deed  No.1911  dated  22.08.2006  on  which  plaintiff  has 

filed  instant  suit for  pre-emption.  In  these  circumstances,  plaintiff  has 

no right  to pre-empt  the suit  property.  By alienating  the  land  in favour 

of Zahid Hussain plaintiff  has  becomes  disentitled  to  claim  any  right  of 

pre-emption  over  the  suit  property.  According  to  the  law  laid  down  in 

PLD 2006 Supreme  Court 594, Urban property  has immunity  against  the 

law of pre-emption.  In these circumstances  application  in  hand is hereby 

accepted  and  the  plaint  is  hereby  rejected  plaintiff 

is  entitled 

to 

withdraw  one  third  amount  deposited  by  him.  Parties  are  left  to  bear 

their  own  cost.  File  be  consigned  to  the  record  room  after  due 

completion. 

6. 

The above  mentioned  order  has been  assailed  by the  petitioner  in RFA before 

the  Court  of Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  who  also  dismissed  the 

same vide judgment  & decree  dated  04.03.2013  with  the  following  observations:- 

I  have  given  my  anxious  and  jade  considerations 

to  respective 

arguments  and  with  the  able  assistance  of  both  law  officer  gone 

through 

the  record  as  well  as  splendid  precedents  adduced 

microscopically. The following  issues require determination= 

a. 

It  is  admitted  that  appellant  had  himself  sold  out  the  subject 

matter  (land)  to one Zahid Hussain voluntarily.  Thereafter  when 

the  land  was  further  sold  out  by  said  Zahid  Hussain  to  the 

present  respondent,  then  he  became  claimant  of his  previously 

owned 

land 

sold  out  against  allegedly 

received 

sale 

consideration.  This factum  creates  suspicions  even for  a  person 

of ordinary  prudence  that  as  to  why  he  had  become  claimant 

C.R  No.78/2013 

3 

when  the land had previously been sold out  to one Zahid Hussain. 

This  somehow  depicts  that 

. 

instituted. 

the  suit  had  maliciously  been 

~,....,_"~, 

:::-  ' 

b.  With  regard  to application  of pre-emption  laws over J.C. T.  I have 

statistically  gone  through  magnificent  precedents  adduced from 

both  sides.  But  eL.D.  2006  S.C.  594  is  much  relevant  and 

persuasive,  reason  being  that  Urban property  of J.C. T.  is directly 

controlled  by  Capital  Development  Authority  just  in  order  to 

curb 

long  standing  pre-emptive 

litigations. 

It 

is  further 

submitted  that  there  are  02 Registrars  one for  Urban Area  and 

other for Rural Area. The title deed possessed  by respondent  was 

copied  and  got  issued  by  Registrar  Urban  Area,  which  also 

depicts  that  the subject  matter  (land) comes within  the sphere  of 

Urban territory.  Few areas which  initially  remained  ousted from 

Urban Area had subsequently  been regulated  as Urban territory. 

Therefore,  in  my  humble  view  Urban territory  is  exempted  from 

pre-emption. 

c.  With  regard  to the application  of pre-emption  laws in  Islamabad 

it  is  humbly  submitted  that  the  same  do  not  apply  over  J.C. T. 

having  super  scheme  attached  herewith 

to  curb  prolonged 

litigation  of pre-emption. 

d.  With  regard  to  the  application  of  Islamic  Shufa  in  J.C. T.  it  is 

submitted 

tnat  for  that  purposes  the  ingredients  of  Zarar  & 

Zarurat  must  be fulfilled  prior  to resorting  to such  litigation.  As 

per  record  no  such  ingredients  has  had  been  relied  upon. 

Therefore,  application  of  Islamic  Shu/a 

is  also  very  much 

restricted  in  Urban Area of J.C. T. 

Nutshell  of  my  humble  and  delinquent  submissions  are  that 

the 

impugned  order dated  17.03.2010 had rightly  been passed, by declarinq 

that  Urban property  of J.C. T.  is immuued  from  the  clutches  of snail  law 

of pre-emption. 

Therefore,  by  maintaining  the  impugned  order  dated  17.03.2010  the 

instant  appeal  is hereby  regretftilly  dismissed,  without  any  order as to 

costs. Decree sheet  be prepared. 

7. 

In  order  to  resolve  the  controversy  as  to  whether  the  question  of  pre- 

emption  within  ICT  has  ! o  be  regulated  under  Muslim  Personal  Law or  under  any 

other  law  for  the  time  being  enforced,  the  matter  has  already  been  dealt  by  this 

C.R  No.78/2013 

4 

Court  in  Civil Revision No.12912019 titled  Rab Nawaz  and  others  VS Rusmat  Ali 

through  reported  judgment  (not yet published)  in the  following  manner:- 

Jt is not  disputed  that  the 1913 Act was in force  in  the J.C. T.  prior  to the 

passing  of the  President's  Order No.1 of 1970. By virtue  of Article  19 of 

the  President's  Order of 1970,  the  1913  Act  continued  to  apply  to  the 

J.C. T.  The  President,  in  exercise  of  powers  under  Article  6  of  the 

President's Order No.1of1970,  could have amended  the  1913 Act  to the 

extent  that  it  applied  to  the  J.C. T.  or  could  have  passed  an  Order with 

respect  to  the  laws  of  pre-emption.  This,  the  President  did  not  do. 

However,  in  exercise  of the  powers  conferred  under  Article  89  of the 

Constitution,  the  President  promulgated  the  1997  Ordinance  dealing 

with  the laws of pre-emption  applicable to the J.C.T.  Therefore, upon the 

repeal  of  the  1997  Ordinance  by  efflux  of  time,  the  1913  Act  stood 

revived  to  the  extent  of its application  to the  J.C.T.  Until the  1913 Act  is 

not  repealed  or  amended  by  the  competent  legislature,  its  provisions 

(other  than  the  ones  that  were  declared  unJslamic  in  the  case  of 

Government  of N.-WF.P. VS  Said Kamal  Shah  (supra))  would  continue 

to apply  in the I. C. T.  Even though  the  1991 Act had repealed  the Punjab 

Pre-emption  Ordinance, 1991  and  other  Ordinances  which  in  turn  had 

repealed  the  1913  Ac~  the  application  of  the  1991  Act  would  be 

confined  to  the  Province  of the  Punjab  and  cannot  by  implication  be 

extended  to the  J.C. T.  The enactment  of the  1991 Act  would  not  operate 

as a  repeal  of the  1913 Act  to  the  extent  of its  application  to  the  J.C. T. 

This is because  the provisions of the  1913 Act  continued  to apply  to the 

J.C. T.  by virtue  of Article 19 of the President's Order No.1 of 1970. 

8. 

Keeping  in view  the  above  ratio,  proposition  in hand  has  been  answered  in a 

proper  manner.  Even  otherwise,  learned  trial  Court  as  well  as  learned  Appellate 

Court  have  travelled  beyond  their  jurisdiction  and  mandate  of law  while  deciding 

different  question  of  disputed  facts  U /0  VII  Rule  11  CPC,  therefore,  concurrent 

findings  of Courts  below  have  been  set  aside  as  the  Courts  are  bound  to  apply  the 

pre-emption  Act, 1913  in its true  perspective,  which  has  not  been  considered  by the 

Courts  below  in  this  matter,  therefore,  instant  Civil  Revision  is  allowed.  both  the 

orders/judgments  are  hereby  set aside and  matter  is remanded  to  the  learned  trial 

C.R  No. 78/2013 

5 

Court to  decide  the  same  afresh  in the  light  of judgment  of this  Court  passed  in  C.R 

No.129/2019. 

9. 

Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  that  instant 

matter  pertains  to year  2006, therefore,  learned  trial  Court seized  with  the  matter  is 

directed  to  concluded  the  same  within  period  of four  (04)  months  under  intimation 

to this  Court. 

Zabid 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYAN1) 
JUDGE 

