ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 138/2021 

Mohabbat Ali  
VS    
Additional District Judge, Islamabad-West and others 

Petitioner by       : 

Mr. Muhammad Aslam Choudhary, Advocate. 

Respondents by  : 

Mr. Tariq Mehmood Mughal, Advocate. 

Date of hearing     : 

17.01.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.   Through the instant writ petition, the  Petitioner 

(Mohabat  Ali)  has  assailed  the  Judgments  dated  11.09.2020  &  23.07.2019 

(“Impugned  Judgments”)  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  West-

Islamabad  and  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge-Civil  Judge-III/Guardian  Judge,  West-

Islamabad, respectively.  

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  marriage  of  the  Petitioner  and  the 

Respondent  No.  3  was  solemnized  on  06.06.2013  and  from  this  wedlock 

Respondent No. 4 was born on 28.05.2014.  On 15-09-2017, Respondent No. 3 and 

4 filed suit for recovery of maintenance for Respondent No. 3 for past three years 

till marriage bond remained intact and for Respondent No. 4 from the date of her 

birth till her marriage with annual increase at the rate of 25 % along with recovery 

of delivery expenses of Respondent No. 4 and gold ornaments.   

3. 

The  Petitioner  filed  suit  for  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  on  01.11.2017. 

During  pendency  of  the  proceedings,  the  Petitioner  appeared  before  the  learned 

Family  Court  on  29.07.2018  and  stated  that  he  has  given  divorce  to  Respondent 

No.3.  Resultantly,  the  suit  was  dismissed  as  having  become  infructuous  on  the 

same date. Thereafter, the  Petitioner filed  application  for  custody of minor  under 

Section 25 of the Guardian and Wads Act, 1890 on 26.07.2018.  

4. 

The  above  said  suit  filed  by  the  Respondents  No.  3  &  4  for  recovery  of 

maintenance was decreed in  their favor through an ex-parte judgment and decree 

dated  06.01.2018.  The  Petitioner  filed  application  under  Section  12(2)  CPC  for 

setting aside ex-parte judgment and decree on 20.03.2018, which was allowed vide 

order  dated  22.10.2018.  Later,  the  learned  Family  Court/Guardian  Judge  through 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2| W.P No. 138/2021 

consolidated Judgment and Decree dated 23.07.2019 decreed the suit in favour of 

Respondent  No.  3  and  4  while  Petitioner’s  application  under  Section  25  of  the 

Guardian  and  Wards  Act,  1890  seeking  custody  of  minor/Respondent  No.  4  was 

dismissed. Being aggrieved of such judgment and decree, Petitioner filed an appeal 

which  also  met  the  same  fate,  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment  dated  11.09.2020, 

hence, the instant petition praying for setting aside of the Impugned Judgments and 

Decree and fixing the maintenance of minor according to the economic condition 

of a poor laborer.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  inter alia, submitted that  the  Impugned 

Judgments & Decree have been passed in a slipshod manner without adopting legal 

process;  that  learned  Trial  Court  ignored  his  own  findings  regarding  failure  of 

Plaintiff  No.1/Respondent  No.3  to  produce  any  evidence  regarding  exact  date  of 

her desertion 2from the house of Petitioner/Defendant; that learned appellate Court 

has also ignored the contradictions in the judgment of the learned Trial Court; that 

the  learned  Trial  Court  fixed  the  maintenance  of  the  Respondent  No.  4  from  the 

date of her birth despite its own finding that no evidence regarding the exact date 

of the ousting of the Respondent No. 3 and 4 by the Petitioner could be brought on 

record; that Respondent No. 4 was born in the house of the Petitioner; that the said 

Respondents  were  living  with  the  Petitioner  till  institution  of  suit  dated  16-09-

2017,therefore,  maintenance  should  be  from  such  date,  and  that  the  rate  of 

maintenance is too high as the Petitioner is a labourer, hence the instant petition is 

liable to be allowed.     

6. 

Learned counsel for the Respondents opposed the arguments of the  learned 

counsel  for  the  Petitioner  and  submitted  that  the  Impugned  Judgment  does  not 

suffer  from  any  illegality  as  the  Petitioner  himself  admitted  about  the  sale  of his 

land and receiving sale consideration thereof for Rs. 7.4 million; that it is admitted 

in the proceedings before the learned Trial Court that Respondent No. 3 lived with 

the Petitioner only for three months, after the solemnization of marriage; that the 

Petitioner did not even take the Respondent No. 3 to the hospital for the delivery of 

the Respondent No. 4 and admitted in cross-examination that he visited her after 

two  days  which  would  not  have  been  the  case  if  the  said  Respondents  had  been 

residing with the Petitioner as claimed.  

 
 
 
 
3| W.P No. 138/2021 

7. 

Arguments advanced on behalf of learned counsel for the parties have been 

heard and record perused with their assistance.  

8. 

The  record  reflects  that  the  Petitioner  categorically  admitted  in  his  cross 

examination that it is correct that the Respondent No. 3 went back to her parents’ 

house after three months of their marriage till date, which is why he does not have 

any more children. This statement shows that the Respondent No. 4 has admittedly 

not lived with the Petitioner since her birth.  Present stance of the Petitioner before 

this Court that the Respondents No. 3 and 4 lived with him till the institution of the 

suit  by  the  said  Respondents  is  the  antithesis  of  his  aforementioned  statement 

before  the  learned  Trial  Court  in  cross-examination.  No  evidence  was  brought 

forth by the Petitioner to establish that he has been providing for the maintenance 

of the Respondent No. 4 since her birth.  As such, this Court does not find that the 

Impugned Judgments and Decree suffer from any infirmity.   

9. 

Insofar  as  the  quantum  of  maintenance  is  concerned  with  reference  to  the 

Petitioner’s  income,  it  is  settled  law  that  the  Court  cannot  decide  factual 

controversies in the exercise of its Constitutional jurisdiction.  The assessment and 

appraisal  of  evidence  is  the  function  of  the  trial  court.    There  are  concurrent 

judgments  against  the  Petitioner.    No  non-reading  or  misreading  of  evidence  has 

been  pointed  out  by  the  Petitioner  in  the  concurrent  findings  recorded  by  two 

courts  below.    In  the  absence  of  any  illegality  or  irregularity  warranting 

interference,  this  Court  cannot  substitute  findings  of  fact  recorded  by  the  courts 

below. 

10. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  writ  petition,  being  devoid  of  merit,  is  hereby 

dismissed.  

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on __________________. 

Sherazi 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
