HOD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl.  Misc.  No.  751-B of 2020. 

Sheraz Ali. 
VERSUS 
The State, etc 

S.No. of order/  Date of 
hearin 
Proceedin 

Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or 
. 
counsel, where necess 

25.06.2020.  Sardar Nisar Ahmed Khan, Advocate for the  petitioner. 

Kh.  Manzoor Ahmed, Advocate for the complainant. 
Mr Hasnain Haider Thaheem, State Counsel. 
Mr Yaseen Ali Khan, SI and Mr. M.  Shabbir ASI, with  record. 

The  petitioner  Sheraz Ali  son of  Muhammad Arif  Awan  has 

sought post arrest  bail in  case F.I.R. No.  07, dated 05.01.2020,  registered 

under  sections  324,452,337-F(iii),337-F(v),337-F(vi),506,109,34  of  the 

Pakistan Penal  Code  1860  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  ''PPC''  at  Police 

Station Nilore, Islamabad. 

2. 

The  brief  facts,  as alleged in the  FIR are that  the  petitioner 

alongwith  other  co-accused  while  armed  with 

fire  arm  weapons 

trespassed the  house of the  complainant and injured  him,  her mother and 

his cousin. Hence the  instant FIR. 

'3. 

The  learned  counsel for  the  petitioner  has contended  that; 

story  as narrated  in the  FIR is  false, frivolous  and vexatious;  offences do 

1ot  come  within  the  ambit  of  prohibitory  clause;  the  petitioner  has  no 

:riminal  record;  there 

is  no  direct  or  indirect  evidence  against  the 

petitioner; the  petitioner  has  been falsely involved in the  instant case with 

/ 

-2- 

Crl. Misc. No. 751-B of 2020. 

malafide intention  just  to  harass and  humiliate  him;  the  complainant  has 

converted  family  dispute  into  criminal  litigation;  infact  the  complainant's 

family had assaulted upon the  petitioner's brother and co-accused namely, 

Danial Arif and caused them  injuries, therefore  a  case  FIR no.  562 of 2020 

was registered against them;  the  instant case is  a  result of  conspiracy; no 

incriminating  material  was  recovered from  the  petitioner;  recovery  if any 

is  fake and  planted;  the  co-accused has  been enlarged on  bail, therefore, 

the  petitioner  is  also entitled  to the same relief, keeping in  view the  rule of 

consistency; offence  under section 324 of  PPC  is  not attracted  against the 

petitioner  because the  injuries  attributed  to  the  present  petitioner  are on 

non vital  parts of  the  body;  due to  pandemic situation  in  the  country  and 

deteriorating  conditions  in  jail,  the  health of  the  petitioner  is  at  stake, so 

the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  the  relief  of  bail;  investigations  qua  the 

petitioner  have been completed and  he  is  no  more  required for  purposes 

thereof;  the  petitioner  has been incarcerated for  more than three  months; 

there  is  no chance of  abscondance of the  petitioner  or tampering  with  the 

prosecution  evidence;  ingredients  of  alleged  sections  are  not  attracted 

against the  petitioner;  the  petitioner  is  innocent  and  has  not  committed 

the  alleged  offences;  report  under  section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has  been 

submitted  before the  learned trial  Court;  no motive has been attributed  to 

the  present  petitioner;  the  case against the  petitioner  is  that  of  further 

probe; hence urged for the  release of the  petitioner on bail. 

4. 

The  learned  State  Counsel assisted by  the  learned  counsel 

for  the  complainant  appeared  alongwith  Yaseen  Ali  Khan,  SI  and  M. 

Shabbir ASL  They  have  argued  that;  the  petitioner  alongwith  his  co  

accused had  attacked  the  complainant,  his  mother  and  cousin;  report 

under section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has  been submitted  before the  learned trail 

-3- 

Crl. Misc. No. 751-B of 2020. 

Court;  the  petitioner  is  nominated  in  the  FIR;  specific  role  has  been 

attributed  to  the  petitioner;  incriminating  material  has  been  recovered 

from  him;  hence prayed for  dismissal of the  instant petition. 

5. 

The  learned  counsels for  the  parties  have  been  heard  and 

record perused with  their  able assistance. 

6. 

Admittedly,  the  parties are closely related to  each  other  and 

it  appears that  there  is  a  dispute  between them  regarding  dissolution of 

marriage.  Furthermore,  the  alleged  occurrence  had  taken  place  on 

20.02.2020,  whereas  the  instant  FIR  was  registered  on  24.02.2020  i.e. 

after  a  delay of  four  days. Whether or  not  section 324 of  PPC  is  attracted 

in 

this  case  needs  further  probe  because  this  factor  can  only  be 

established  during  the  trial.  Since the  parties  are  known  to  each  other 

therefore,  whether  the  petitioner  had  forcibly  entered  the  house  also 

requires further  probe. The  role  of  the  petitioner  and  his  involvement  in 

the  instant  case  definitely  needs  further  probe.  It  is  settled  law  that 

deeper appreciation of  evidence is  not  undertaken while  deciding matters 

relating  to  grant  of  bail. The  co-accused has  been enlarged  on  bail. The 

investigations qua the  petitioner  have been completed and, therefore,  his 

further  incarceration would  not serve any useful purpose. There is  nothing 

on  record to  show that  the  petitioner  has  a  criminal record or that  there  is 

an  apprehension that  he  may abscond if  released on bail. In  the  facts and 

circumstances of  the  case  this  Court is  satisfied on  the  basis  of  tentative 

assessment that  a  case  for  releasing the  petitioner on bail is  made out. 

-4- 

Crl. Misc. No. 751-B of 2020. 

7. 

It  has  been  aptly  observed by the  august Supreme Court in 

the  case  of  ''Manzoor and 04 others  VS  The State"reported  as  [PLO  1972 

S.C.  81]  as  follows: 

"The ultimate  conviction and  incarceration  of a guilty 

person  can repair  the  wrong  caused by  a  mistaken  relief  of 

interim  bail  granted  to  him,  but  no  satisfactory  reparation 

can  be  offered  to  an  innocent  man  for  his  unjustified 

incarceration  at any stage of the  case albeit  his acquittal  in 

the long nm": 

In  the  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances of  the  present 

case,  refusal of  bail  will tantamount  to  punishing the  petitioner. 

8. 

In  the  circumstances as  mentioned  above,  this  petition  is 

allowed and  the  petitioner  is  admitted  to  bail,  subject  to  furnishing  bail 

bonds in  the  sum  of  Rs.5.00.0001- (Rupees five  hundred  thousand  only) 

with  one  surety  in  the  like amount  to  the  satisfaction of  the  learned trial 

Court. 

Asad!(/* 

Needless  to  mention  that  the  observati:arecorded 
instant  petition  are  based  on  tentative 
will  obviously  not  prejudice  the  proc 
learned trial  Court. 

in  the 
essment,  which 
ngs  before  the 

CHl~F JUSTICE 

