ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLATIABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTi'ENT
W.P. No.302/2018
Asif Pervez
Vensus
Family Judge,  lslamabad (East) and another

S. No. oforder
/ proceedlnqs

Date  of order/
Proceedinos
01.07.2019 Ms. Sumlya Shakeel RaJa, Advocate for the

Order with slgnature of Judge  and that  of parties or counsel
where necessarv.

petltioner.
Malik Salfad Halder and Ms. Naheed  lqbal,
Advocates for respondent  No.2

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner, Asif Pervez,  impugns the order dated
09.01 .2018, passed  by the learned  Judge,  Family
Court, lslamabad, whereby his right to cross-
examine respondent No.2's witnesses,  was
closed.
2.  Learned counsel for  the  petitioner
submitted that she could not attend the Court on
09.01 .2018 because she was "out of city in
connection  with her family  engagements  and was
also suffering [fromJ  flue and fever"; and that it
was in the interests  of justice if the impugned
order dated 09.01 .2018 was set-aside. Learned
counsel for the petitioner prayed for  the
impugned order dated 09.01 .2018 to be set-aside.
3.  Learned counsel for  respondent  No.2
submitted that the instant writ petition is not
maintainable since the impugned  order is an
interlocutory  order passed by the learned Family
Court;  and that since no right of appeal was
provided against  such an interlocutory order, the
law could not be circumvented  by filing a writ
petition against  such an order. Learned counsel
for respondent  No.2 prayed for the writ petition  to

be dismissed.

2

W.P.No.30212018

4. 
I have heard  the contentions of the learned
counsel  for the contesting parties and have
perused the record with their able assistance.
5.  Since the impugned order dated 09.01 .2018
is an interlocutory order, I am not inclined to go
into the merits of the case lest it may prejudice
the case of either party before  the learned  Family

Court.

As Section 14(3) of the West Pakistan
Family Courts Act, 1964 ("the 1964 Acf')
expressly bars a right of appeal or revision
against an interim order passed  by a learned
Family  Court,  the same cannot be circumvented
by challenging such an interim  order in the
Constitutional  jurisdiction of the High Court. A
party aggrieved  by such an interim order has to
wait until a learned Family Court passes a final
order and then to challenge  it in an appeal. This is
because  an interim order merges into the final
verdict.  The purpose behind  barring an appeal or
a revision against an interim order of the learned
Family Court  is to avoid delays in disposal of the
cases  by the learned Family Court. Since the suit
instituted by respondent  No.2 was for recovery of
maintenance,  dower and dowry articles, the final
decree that may be passed by the learned Family
Court would be appealable  under Section 14 of
the1964 Act. Reference in this regard  may be
made to the following case law:

(i) 

ln the case of Syed Saghir Ahmad
Naqvi VS Province of Sindh  (1996
SCMR 1165), it  has been held as
follows:-

"The statute excluding a right of
appeal from the interlm order
cannot be passed by bringing
under attack such interim orders  in
Constitutional jurisdiction. The
pafty affected has to wait till it

J

W.P.No.302/2018

matures  into a final order and then
to attack it in the proper  exclusive
forum created  for the purpose  of
examining  such orders."
(ii)  ln the case Mumtaz Hussain a/ias
Butta VS Chief Administrator  of
Auqaf.  Punjab  (1976 SCMR  450),  it has

been held as follows:-

'As the said Ordinance has taken
away the right of petitioner  to
interim relief, learned counsel
submitted that this was a ground
which entitled the petitioner  to
prosecute a writ petition despite
the pendency of the proceedings
on the District  Court. The argument
is misconceived  because  the writ
jurisdiction of the superior  Courts
cannot be invoked in aid of
injustice and in order to defeat  the
express provisions  of the statutory
law."

(iii)  ln the case of Mst. Maham Shabbir  VS
Salman Haider  (2014  CLC 330), this

Court held as follows:-

o9. ... High Court in exercise of its
writ jurisdiction is not sitting  as a
Court of  appeal, or  court of
revision.  lts jurisdiction  to interfere
on the polnt of fact is limited,
lnterlocutory order if  does not
suffer  from any illegality, malafide
or is not in excess ofjurisdiction  or
lack of exercise of jurisdiction  or
not  based on  misreading,
misconstruing  or discarding  of the
evidence and material on record
cannot  be  challenged in
constitutional 
jurisdiction.
Nevertheless,  the facts of each
case are  to  be  considered
separately  and no uniform  principle
can be determined for exercising
the writ jurisdiction.  "

It is my view that exceptional  circumstances
6.
which could justiff invoking  the jurisdiction  of the
High Court under  Article 199 of the Constitution
would  be when the order or action assailed  was
palpably  without jurisdiction, malafide, void or
coram-non-Judice.  The order impugned  in this

4

W.P.No.302/2018

petition is clearly interlocutory  in nature  and does
not dispose  of the entire case before the learned
Family Court. The impugned order is neither
without jurisdiction,  nor malafide,  void or coram-
non-judice  so as to warrant  interference  in the
Constitutional  jurisdiction  of this Court under
Article  199 of the Constitution.
7.  The order dated  09.01 .20'18 being purely
interlocutory in nature could not be subjected to
challenge  by filing a Constitutional petition before
this Court as it would amount to defeating the
legislative intent behind  Section  14(3) of the 1964
Act. Therefore, I am not inclined  to interfere in the
said interlocutory  order passed by the learned
Judge,  Family Court.
8.  Since I do not find the pre-reguisites for
interference  in the Constitutional  jurisdiction of
this Court with the impugned order dated
09.01 .2018 to be satisfied in the case at hand, the
instant writ petition is  dismissed as  not
maintainable. The petitioner will be at liberty  to
challenge the said order dated 09.01 .2018 in an
appeal against the final order passed by the
learned Judge, Family Court, if the occasion
arises for doing so. There  shall be no order as to

costs.

Sultan*

(rur TANGU  L HASSAN  AU RANGZEB)
JUDGE

