ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P.  NO.  1666  OF  2021 

Mst.  Maham  Mehmood. 
VS 
Additional  Sessions  Judge  Islamabad  West,  etc. 

Petitioner  by 

Mr.  Wahid  Iqbal,  Advocate. 

Respondents  by 

Mr.  Mudassir  Hussain  Malik  and  Ms.  Sidra 
lshaq,  Advocates. 
(for  respondent  No.  2) 
Respondent  No.2  along  with  Syeda  Fatima 
Zohaib  Shah,  Minor. 
Mr.  Sadaqat  Ali Jahangir,  State  Counsel. 
Mr.  Talah,  A.S.I. 

Date  of  hearing 

07.05.2021. 

LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ,  J. 

Instant  writ  petition,  under  Article  199  of 

the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  has  been  moved  by  the 

petitioner  Maham  Mehmood  wife  of  Syed  Muhammad  Zohaib  Shah  for  setting 

aside  order  dated  16.04.2021,  passed  by  learned  Additional  Session  Judge-IX, 

West-Islamabad/Respondent  No.  1,  whereby  the  application  under  Section  491 

Cr.P.C  filed  by the  petitioner  for  recovery  of minor  I detenue  namely  Syeda  Fatima 

Zohaib  aged  about  2  Yi  years,  was  dismissed  on  the  ground  of  attachment  and 

inclination  of  the  minor  girl  with  her  aunt  and  grandmother  and  declared  the 

custody  of the  detune  with  Respondent  No.  2  (real  father)  being  legal  and  proper. 

2. 

Facts  as  per  petition  as  well  as  argued  by  the  counsel  for  the  petitioner  are 

that  the  Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.  2  got  married  on  09.12.2016  and  from  the 

wedlock  two  children  Syeda  Fatima  Zohaib  Shah  and  Syed  Ahmed  Shah  were 

born.  Syeda  Fatima  Zohaib  is  about  2  Yi  years  and  Syed  Ahmed  Shah  is about  02 

months.  The  Petitioner  was  allegedly  deserted  from  the  house  by Respondent  No.  2 

W.P.No.  166612021  12 

while  snatching  minor  daughter  Syeda  Fatima  Zohaib  Shah,  however,  the  infant 

Syed  Ahmed  Shah  was  remained  with  the  Petitioner. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted 

that  minor  I  detenue  Syeda 

Fatima  Zohaib  is  of  tender  age  and  is  not  safe  in  the  custody  of  her  aunt  and 

grandmother 

(Respondent  No.2  sister  and  mother); 

that  the  minor  has  been 

illegally  confined  by  father/Respondent  No.  2,  whereas  petitioner  is  not  allowed  to 

meet  the  minor  daughter;  that  the  impugned  order  dated  16.04.2021  is  against  the 

settled  principle  of law  that  the  custody  of minors  specially  the  minor  girls  should 

remain  with  mothers;  that  the  affection  and  inclination  of  the  minor  towards  her 

aunt  and  grandmother  has  been  wrongly  considered  for  custody  of  the  minor  to 

Respondent  No.  2  as  the  minor  is  only  2  Yi  years  of  age  and  too  young  and 

innocent  to  understand 

the  actual  sense  of  affection  and  inclination  as  if  she 

remains  in  the  custody  of  any  other  person  for  few  days  she  wi II  show  the  same 

affection  and  inclination  for  that  person;  that  the  reasons  recorded  in the  impugned 

order  for  dismissing  the  application  under  Section  491  Cr.PC  and  handing  over  the 

custody  of minor  girl  to  her  father  are  unjust  and  unlawful,  as  such,  the  impugned 

order  is -liable  to  be  set-aside.  Learned  counsel  prayed  that  the  custody  of  the 

minor  Syeda  Fatima  Zohaib  be  handed  over  to  the  Petitioner.  Learned  counsel  in 

support  of his  contentions  placed  reliance  on  the  case  law  reported  as  Mst.  Saima 

Bibi  VSRahee/  Butt  (2014  MLD  38)  and  Karam  Khatoon  VSSenior 

Superintendent  Of Police, District Khairpur  (2016 MLD  29). 

4. 

On  the other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.  2/Father  of the  minor 

girl  submitted  that  the  marriage  between  the  parties  is still  intact;  that  the petitioner 

has  not  been  deserted  from  the  house  by  Respondent  No.  2  and  she  left  the  house 

with  her  own  will;  that  Respondent  No.2  is  trying  his  best  to  resume  the  marital 

relations  with  the  Petitioner  as  he  for  the  sake  of his  children  does  not  want  break- 

WP.No. 

166612021 

I  3 

up  of  his  marriage;  that  the  petitioner  due  to  her  stubbornness 

is  not  responding 

positively  to  his  reconciliation  effort;  that  the  minor  girl  is  very  much  attached  to 

her  aunt  and  grandmother  and  if the  custody  of  the  minor  is  handed  over  to  the 

petitioner  it  would  impact  adversely  on  her  mental  and  physical  health.  Learned 

counsel  prayed  for dismissal  of titled  petition. 

5. 

Arguments  heard.  Record  perused. 

6. 

Admittedly, 

the  marriage  between 

the  parties 

is  still  subsisting  and 

apparently  it  seems  that  neither  of the  parties  would  opt  to  proceed  for  dissolving 

the  marriage.  It  seems  that  some  petty  domestic  dispute  has  flared-up  which 

resulted 

in  a  temporary  separation  between 

the  spouses  and  siting  in  a  writ 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution, 

it  is  not  legally  permissible  to 

dig-out  and  determine  the  facts  regarding  petitioner's  leaving  the  house  willfully 

and  deliberately  by  taking  the  infant  son  who  was  about  40  days  at  that  time  along 

with  her  or  she  was  deserted  from  the  house  while  snatching  of  minor  girl  by  the 

father  I  Respondent  No.  2.  Hence,  at  this  juncture  the  question  of  recovery  of 

minor  girl  under  Section  491  Cr.PC  is  to  be  considered  only.  It  has  been  held  in 

case  of  Muhammad Afzaal VSSessions  Judge,  Multan  (PLD  2008  Lahore 

479).  The  proceedings  under  Section  491  Cr.PC  are  held  to  be  of summary  nature 

and  confined  to  the  recovery  of minor  I detenue  who  is  allegedly  kept  in  illegal  or 

improper  custody.  That  it  is  also  well  settled  that  custody  of  the  minors  with  the 

father  is  not  illegal  since  he  is  also  a  natural  guardian  of  the  minor  children  and 

reference 

in  this  regard  can  be  made  to  judgment  passed  in  the  case  re:  Mst. 

Abida  VSS.H.O.,  Ratodero  Police  Station  (District  Larkana)  (2014  YLR 

705).  However,  under  the  principles  of  Mohammadan 

law,  and  family  laws  and 

laws  relating  to  custody  of the  children  applicable  in the  Country,  the  mother  has  a 

preferential  right  of  custody  of  the  minor  especially  when  the  minor  is  a  female 

child.  In  this  regard,  guidance  has  been  taken  from  the  judgment  of  Hon'ble 

Lahore  High  Court  in case  reported  as Hina  Jilani  VS Sohail  Butt  (PLD  1995 

Lahore  151),  wherein  it has  been  held  that:- 

WP.No. 

166612021 

J  4 

"under Muslim Law,  the mother has a right to retain the custody of 
a  minor  girl  till  she  attains  the  age  of  puberty  and  a  strong 
presumption  arise  that it is  in the welfare of the minor girl  to hand 
over  the  custody  to  the  mother  under  the  Muslim  Personal  Law. 
Indeed as has been often remarked by the Courts a lap of mother is 
God's own cradle and Almighty Allah has not created any substitute 
for  ii.  It  needs  no  gain  saying  that  a  minor  girl  and  that  too  of 
tender age  of one year  requires  care,  attention,  love  and  affection 
which  a  mother  can  alone  bestow  on  her  daughter.  We  are fully 
recognised  that  under  the Islamic  law  the father  is  a  guardian  of 
both  of the person  as  also  the property  of the  minor  but  the fact 
remains that the custody of a minor of tender age and moreso, of a 
female  vests in the mother and on the maternal side. ft  is only where 
the mother  is found to  be disqualified for  any  reason  to retain  the 
custody  of  the  minor  that  she  can  be  deprived  of  the  right  of 
Hizanat.  of course,  the paramount  consideration  is always  welfare 
of the  minor  but  there  is  a  strong presumption  arising  under  the 
Muslim Laws  that it is  in  the welfare of the minor daughter that she 
should remain in the custody of the mother.". 

7. 

Moreover, 

in  accordance  with  para  352  of  Mohammadan  Law, 

the 

entitlement  of custody  "Hizanat  "  of the  male  child  up to  the  age  of 7  years  and  of 

female  child  until  she  attains  puberty  has  been  given  to  mother  and  such  right 

continues  despite  pronouncement  of  divorce  from  the  father  of  the  child  till  she 

marries  the  second  husband  in  which  case  the  father  of  the  child  is  entitled  for 

custody  being  the  next  natural  guardian.  Para  352  of Mohammadan  Law,  for  ready 

reference  is also  reproduced  below:- 

"352. Right of mother to custody of infant children. -  The 'mother is 
entitled  to  the  custody  (hizanat)  of  her  male  child  until  he  has 
completed  the age  of seven years  and of her female  child  until she 
has attained puberty.  The right continues though she  is divorced by 
the father  of  the  child,  unless  she  marries  a  second  husband  in 
which case the custody belongs to the father.  ". 

8. 

Thus,  as  per·  above  cited  provision  of 

law  as  well  as  different 

pronouncements  of the  superior  courts  of the  country,  the  law  has  been  established 

that  the  mother  of  the  minor  children  has  preferential  right  of  custody,  until  she 

becomes  disqualified  under  the  law  from  the  custody  of  the  minor  daughter. 

w.r.s«  166612021 

I  s 

Moreover,  the  law  also  provides  appropriate  forum  for  deciding  the  entitlement  of 

custody  of  minor  after  examining  and  analyzing  facts  and  circumstances  of  each 

and  every  case  keeping  in  view  the  welfare  of the  child  in  all  aspects  on  the  basis 

of evidence  under  Guardian  and  Wards  Act,  1890. 

9. 

The  above  are  the  reasons  that  the  following  short  order  was  passed  on 

07.05.2021  :- 

to  be  recorded 

later,  instant  petition 

"For  the  reasons 
is 
allowed.  The  temporary  custody  of  the  minor  girl  namely 
Syeda  Fatima  Zohaib  Shah  aged  about  2  12  be  handed  over 
to  the petitioner,  and  the  respondent  No.  2 may  approach  the 
concerned  guardian  Court  for  the  custody  of  minor  if so 
it  is 
advised,  however,  without  prejudice 
expected 
that  the  respondent  No.  2/father  being  a  natural 
guardian  would  not  be deprived  to meet  his  children.  ". 

to  the  decision, 

However,  the  order  is  modified  to  the  extent  that  both  the  parties  are  at  liberty  to 

approach  the  Guardian  Court  for  proper  custody  of the  minor,  if so  advised. 

(LUBNA  SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

