ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 674 OF 2022 

MUHAMMAD ZULQARNAIN. 
VS    
MST. SOBIA FAZIL AND OTHER. 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

Date of Decision 

: 

: 

: 

Mr. M. Usman, Advocate. 

Mr. Afzaal Qadeer Satti, Advocate. 

20.01.2023. 

SAMAN  RAFAT  IMTIAZ,  J.:-      Through  the  instant  writ  petition  filed  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  the 

Petitioner [Muhammad Zulqarnain] seeks reduction in the maintenance allowance 

of  the  Respondents  No.  2  &  3  and  annulment  of  the  grant  of  maintenance  of 

Respondent No.1 for Iddat period.   

2. 

The facts in brief as per the Memo of Petition are that the marriage between 

the  Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.  1  was  solemnized  on  27.09.2014  in 

consideration of dower of Rs. 5,000/- which was paid at the time of Nikkah. The 

spouses  were  blessed  with  two  children  [Respondents  No.  2  &  3].    Initially  the 

relationship  between  the  spouses  was  cordial  but  later  the  attitude  of  the 

Respondent No.1 changed and she started quarrelling with the Petitioner and  with 

his  parents  on  petty  issues.    The  Petitioner  was  earning  his  livelihood  in  Saudi 

Arabia but had to leave his job and come back to Pakistan on 03.05.2017 to save 

his marriage.  He remained unemployed for a period of one year after which he got 

employed as Rigger in LCC Pakistan (Private) Limited at a monthly salary of Rs. 

21,715/-.    The  Respondent  No.1  went  to  her  parents’  house  along  with 

Respondents  No.2  and  3.  The  Petitioner  tried  to  bring  her  back  but  she  refused. 

Thereafter,  he  pronounced  talaq  upon  her.    The  Respondent  No.1  filed  suit  for 

Recovery  of  Dowry  Articles,  Gold  Ornaments  and  Monthly  Maintenance.    The 

learned Family Court passed the Impugned Judgment and Decree dated 14.10.2021 

(“Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I”),  whereby  the  Petitioner  was  directed  to 

pay Rs. 10,000/- as monthly maintenance to the Respondent No.1 with effect from 

August,  2019  till  completion  of  her  Iddat  period;  and  Rs.  10,000/-  for  the 

Respondents No. 2 & 3 each till their legal entitlement with 15% annual increase. 

 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 674/2020 

3. 

Aggrieved of the Impugned Judgment and Decree I, both the Petitioner and 

the  Respondents  No.  1  to  3  filed  respective  appeals  before the  learned  Appellate 

Court.    The  learned  Appellate  Court  after  hearing  the  parties,  partially  allowed 

both  the  appeals  and  modified  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I  vide 

consolidated  Judgment  &  Decree  dated  24.01.2022  (“Impugned  Judgment  and 

Decree II”) by holding the Respondent No.1 entitled to maintenance at the rate of 

Rs.  8,000/-  per  month  from  August,  2019  till  her  divorce  and  observing  that 

admittedly  she  had  already  received  the  maintenance  for  the  Iddat  period.  

Whereas, the Respondents No. 2 and 3 were allowed maintenance at the rate of Rs. 

8,000/- per month each from August, 2019 till their legal entitlement.  The learned 

Appellate Court keeping in view the financial status of the Petitioner allowed 10% 

annual increase in the maintenance of the Respondents No. 2 and 3. 

4. 

Being  aggrieved  and  dissatisfied  by  the  Impugned  Judgments  &  Decrees  I 

and  II  passed  by  the  learned  Family  Court  and  learned  Appellate  Court  the 

Petitioner has preferred the instant writ petition for partially setting aside the same. 

5. 

 The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  contended  that  the  Impugned 

Judgment and Decree I is self-contradictory as on one hand it has been noted that 

the Petitioner came back to Pakistan from Saudi Arabia  one year before filing of 

the suit i.e. 2018 but on the other hand a finding has been given that he has been 

serving  in  Saudi  Arabia  which  led  the  Family  Court  to  reach  the  erroneous 

conclusion that the  Petitioner  is  a  man  of  means.    He  referred  to  the  Petitioner’s 

employee slip for the month of June, 2019 according to which his net salary  was 

Rs. 21,715/-, however,  he conceded that the  same  was not  produced in evidence.  

The learned counsel also pleaded that the Petitioner has remarried and as such his 

financial  obligations  have  increased.    He  referred  to  C.M.No.  3423  of  2022  for 

additional  documents  whereby  the  Petitioner  has  sought  to  bring  on  record  the 

evidence that he has been employed with Gondaltrade International (Pvt.) Limited 

as  a  Driver  against  monthly  salary  of  Rs.  32,000/-  with  effect  from  31.03.2022.  

With regard to the prayer in the instant writ petition pertaining to the annulment of 

maintenance  of  the  Respondent  No.1  for  the  Iddat  period,  he  conceded  that  the 

learned  Appellate  Court  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II  has  already 

observed  that  the  Respondent  No.1  has  admittedly  received  maintenance  for  the 

Iddat period as such he does not press the instant writ petition to the extent of such 

prayer.  

 
P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 674/2020 

6. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents  on  the  other  hand  submitted  that 

regardless of the  second marriage of  the Petitioner, the Respondents No. 2  and 3 

are  the  obligations  of  the  Petitioner  and  that  the  learned  Appellate  Court  has 

already  reduced 

the  maintenance  for 

the  Respondents  No.  2  &  3 

to  

Rs. 8,000/- and as such no further reduction is required given the needs of the two 

minor children and the current high cost of living.  The learned counsel in support 

of  his  contentions  placed  reliance  on  Muhammad  Asim  and  others  VS Mst. 

Samro  Begum  and  others,  PLJ  2019  SC  41,  Naeem  Akhtar  VS Ambreen  Bibi 

and others, 2018 CLC Note 47, Ch. Muhammad Bashir VSMst. Ansarun Nisa 

and  others,  2012  MLD  1394,  and  Ijaz  Ahmed  through  Attorney  VS Judge, 

Family Court and others, 2005 CLC 1913 [Lahore]. 

7. 

8. 

Heard arguments. Record perused. 

First and foremost, it has to be borne in mind that this Court in exercise of 

Constitutional  Jurisdiction  does  not  act  like  a  Court  of  appeal.    It  neither 

reappraises  evidence  nor  does  it  substitute  the  findings  of  fact  recorded  by  the 

Family  Court  with  its  own  findings  solely  on  the  ground  that  another  view  was 

possible on the same evidence.  A party approaching the High Court under Article 

199 of the Constitution has to demonstrate that there is a gross misreading or non-

reading  of  evidence or  jurisdictional  error  or  such legal infirmity  that  has  caused 

miscarriage of justice.  

9. 

The learned counsel for the Petitioner has failed to point out any instance of 

misreading or  non-reading of  evidence  with regard to the  maintenance allowance 

granted by the learned Courts below.   It is an admitted position that the Petitioner 

was  employed  in  Saudi  Arabia  at  one  point  in  time.    Nowhere  has  the  learned 

Family Court stated that he is still employed there.  The learned Family Court has 

simply  taken  note  of  the  fact  that  the  record  reflects  that  he  has  been  serving  in 

Saudi Arabia, which does not mean that he is still employed there. Therefore, I see 

no misreading in this regard. 

10.  No reason has been cited as to why the salary slip of June, 2019, which the 

Petitioner  seeks  to  rely  upon  before  this  Court,  was  not  produced  by  him  in 

evidence  before  the  learned  Family  Court  despite  the  fact  that  such  employment 

was specifically mentioned by way of his Affidavit-in-Evidence in August, 2021.  

In  this  regard  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  judgments  rendered  by  the  Honorable 

Lahore  High  Court  in  the  cases  of  Tariq  Mehmood  VS Mst.  Farah  Shaheen, 

P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 674/2020 

2010 YLR 349 and Tanveer Salamat VSAdditional Sessions Judge and others, 

2019 YLR 1862 , whereby it was held that the onus to prove financial capability is 

upon the husband/ father.  Therefore, I find no reason to consider the photocopy of 

the  said  salary  slip  at  this  stage,  which  is  even  otherwise  unverified.  In  such 

circumstances,  when  the  husband/father  does  not  tender  any  proof  of  income 

before the learned Family Court, the learned Family Court has no choice but draw 

its own conclusions based on the facts on the record as was done in this case.  

11.  The learned Appellate Court has already shown indulgence to the Petitioner 

by  reducing  the  monthly  maintenance  allowance  of  the  Respondents  No.  2  &  3 

from Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 8,000/- and annual increment of such maintenance  from 

15 % to 10% per annum.   No reason has been shown by the Petitioner justifying 

further reduction. 

12. 

In view of the foregoing, the Petitioner has failed to point out any reasonable 

grounds for interference with the Impugned Judgments and Decrees I and II passed 

by  the  learned  Family  Court  and  the  learned  Appellate  Court  in  exercise  of 

Constitutional Jurisdiction.  As such, the instant petition being devoid of any merit 

is hereby dismissed. 

adnan 

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
