JUDGMENT  SHEET. 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Civil  Revision  No.312/2014. 

Capital  Development  Authority 

VS 

Muhammad  Akram 
etc. 

Petitioner  by: 

Syed  Masood  Hussain,  Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr.  Altaf  Hayat  Khan  and  Chaudhry 
Fayyaz  Ahmed  Padana,  Advocates. 

Date  of Decision: 

28.01.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-Through  this  civil  revision  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  called  in  question  the judgment  & decree  dated  14.05.2014,  passed  by 

learned  Additional  District  Judge-III 

(West)  Islamabad,  whereby  civil  revision 

petition  filed  by  the  petitioner  against  the  order  &  decree  dated  28.11.2012  passed 

by  learned  Civil  Judge  (West)  Islamabad,  was  dismissed. 

2. 

Brief 

facts  as  referred 

in  the 

instant  civil  revision  petition  are 

that 

respondent  No. I/Muhammad  Akram  was  allotted  plot  No.505,  Sector 

I-8/3, 

Islamabad  against 

the  reserved  quota  vide 

letter  dated  24.02.1991  being  an 

employee  of CDA  with  the  condition  that  he  or  any  of his  family  members  does  not 

own  any  house  in  Islamabad  or  in the  other  eight  major  specified  cities  of Pakistan, 

whereas  late  respondent  No.1  filed  an  affidavit  to  that  extent,  however,  during  the 

course  of  inquiry  another  house  No.134,  Sector  G- 7 /2-4,  Islamabad  was  found 

allotted  in  the  name  of respondent  No.I  till  23.02.1990.  Consequently  allotment  of 

plot  No.505  was  cancelled  vide  letter  dated  16.07.1991.  The  matter  was  agitated  by 

respondent  No.1  before  Civil  Court  and  then  up  to  the  Apex  Court  and  the  same 

was  decided  vide  judgment  dated  08.05.2006  by  the  Apex  Court,  whereby  findings 

of the  Courts  below  were  set  aside  mainly  on  the  ground  that  separate  sale  deed  was 

executed  by  the  CDA 

in  favour  of  respondent  No. l,  which  has  not  yet  been 

cancelled.  The  petitioner/CDA 

filed  suit  for  declaration  against  the  said  sale  deed 

for  its cancellation,  which  was  rejected  vide  order  & decree  dated  28.11.2012  by the 

learned  Civil  Judge  being  time  barred.  The  matter  was  assailed  before  the  Court  of 

C.R  No. 312/2014. 

2 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  in  civil  revision  petition,  which  was  also 

dismissed vide impugned judgment and decree dated  14.05.2014. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  the  petitioner's  suit  was 

dismissed  purely  on  technical  ground  without  considering  the  fact  that  limitation 

period  of  challenging  status  of  sale  deed  was  freezed  due  to  bonafide  litigation 

between  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.l,  which  was  initiated  by  respondent 

No.1  through  civil  suit  after  cancellation  of  the  plot  on  16.07.1991  and  after 

disposal  of the  matter  by  the  Apex  Court,  the  cause  of  action  had  accrued  to  the 

petitioner  and  as  such  the  suit  was  not  time  barred;  that  question  of  limitation  is 

mixed  question  of  law  and  facts, which  could  only be  resolved  after  recording  of 

evidence, which exercise has not been done in this case; that findings of the Courts 

below are contrary to law. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for the  respondents  contends that  the  suit was 

apparently  time  barred  and  as  such  Article  91  of  the  Limitation  Act,  1908  was 

applicable with effect from the date of cancellation i.e.  16.07.1991, which has been 

written  in  the  plaint  and  time  cannot  be  condoned  in  favour  of  the  petitioner  for 

seeking  cancellation  of  the  sale  deed;  that  the  petitioner  filed  revision  petition  in 

terms of section  115  CPC before learned Additional District Judge, which was not 

maintainable and even judgment  &  decree of learned Additional District Judge has 

been  assailed  before  this  Court  in  civil  revision  petition,  which  is  also  not 

maintainable. 

5. 

I  have heard  arguments of learned counsel for the parties  and gone through 

the record. 

6. 

Perusal  of the  record reveals  that plot No.505,  Sector I-8/3,  Islamabad was 

allotted  to  respondent  No.l/predecessor 

in  interest  of  respondent  No.1-A  to 

respondent No.1-F on reserved quota being CDA employee on 24.02.1991 with the 

condition that he or any of his family member does not own any house in Islamabad 

or  in the  other  eight  major  cities  of Pakistan  on  cutoff  date.  In  compliance  of the 

allotment,  the  applicant  at  that  time  filed  an  affidavit  dated  28.11.1990  and 

undertook  that  he  does  not  own  any  plot  or  house  as  required  in  terms  and 

conditions,  however,  during  the  course  of  inquiry  House  No.134,  Sector  G-7/2-4, 

C.R No. 312/2014. 

3 

Islamabad was revealed in the name of respondent No.I,  therefore, plot No.505 was 

cancelled from his name by the petitioner/CDA vide letter dated  I6.07.I99I. 

7. 

Besides allotment of the plot in favour of respondent No. I  an agreement was 

also executed on 3 l.03. I 99I  between the petitioner and respondent No.I  registered 

at  serial  No.1886  before  Joint  Sub-Registrar,  Islamabad  containing  terms  and 

conditions of sale and purchase qua the plot with specific condition that the allottee 

shall  observe  Islamabad  Building  Regulations,  relevant  Zoning  Regulations  and 

other bye  laws of CDA  for completion of the building. When  ownership of House 

No.134,  Sector  G- 7 /2-4,  Islamabad  came  to  limelight,  the  petitioner/CD A  issued 

notice of cancellation  dated  I6.07.199I,  which was challenged by respondent No.I 

through  suit  for  declaration  and  permanent  injunction,  which  was  filed  on 

20.07.199I  before  Civil  Court.  The  same  was  contested  and  dismissed  vide 

judgment  &  decree  dated  01.04.2004,  however,  appeal  filed  by  respondent  No.I 

VIS 96  CPC  was  also  dismissed  vide judgment  &  decree  dated  I6.07.2004.  The 

matter  was  agitated  in  civil  revision  petition  No.560-D/2004  before  Lahore  High 

Court, which  was also  dismissed  and the matter went up to  the Apex  Court in CP 

No. I 600/2005,  which  was  decided  in  the  following  manner  vide judgment  dated 

08.05.2006:- 

"The  cancellation  of allotment  of the  demised plot  vide  order 
dated  16.07.1991  of respondent No.2  would  not have suffered 
from  any  illegality  if there  was  only  an  allotment  order  in 
favour  of  the  petitioner.  The fact  is  that  in  pursuance  of 
allotment  order dated  24. 02.1991 respondent  CDA executed  a 
sale  deed  in favour  of the petitioner  before the Sub-Registrar, 
Islamabad. After execution and registration of the sale deed the 
petitioner  had  acquired a  vested right  and had  become owner 
of  the  demised  plot.  He  could  be  divested  of  such  vested 
right/ownership  only  if the sale  deed  was set  aside,  cancelled 
or  rescinded  in  accordance  with  law.  A  duly  registered  sale 
deed  can  only  be  cancelled  or  rescinded  in pursuance  of the 
provision  of section  39  of the Specific  Relief  Act.  Neither  the 
CDA  nor  the  Foundation  had  any Authority  in  law  to  cancel 
the  sale  deed  depriving  the  petitioner  of  his  proprietary 
rights/ownership  in respect  of the  demised plot.  It  will  not  be 
appropriate  at  this  stage  to  enter  into discussion  whether  the 
non-declaration  by  the petitioner  of earlier  allotment  of Plot 
No.134,  Sector  G-712-4,  Islamabad  would  or  would  not  be 
ground for getting  the sale deed cancelled/rescinded as during 
the  course  of  arguments  it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the 
respondents,  after  the provision  of section  39  of the  Specific 
Relief  Act  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  their  learned 
counsel/law  office,  that  they  would  have  recourse  to  the 
proceedings  under the relevant provision  of law for getting the 
sale  deed  in question  cancelled/rescinded. Any  observation  or 

C.R No. 312/2014. 

4 

expressing  an  opinion  will  be  likely  to  adversely  affect,  the 
case  of one  of the parties  during  the  course  of proceedings, 
which may be initiated by the respondents for getting the lease 
deed rescinded/cancelled. 
8.  For  the foregoing  facts,  reason and discussion  the petition 
is  converted  into  an  appeal  and  allowed.  The judgment  of all 
the three courts are set aside. Parties are left to bear their own 
costs." 

8. 

In the  light  of  above  referred judgment  of the  Apex  Court,  findings of the 

Courts  below  were  set  aside  with  the  observation  that  the  agreement  executed 

between  the  petitioner/CDA  and  respondent  No.I/Muhammad  Akram  was  not 

cancelled, therefore, the petitioner/CDA filed suit for declaration with the following 

prayer:- 

"Jn  the  above  mentioned  circumstances,  it  is,  most  humbly 
prayed  that a decree for declaration to the effect by cancelling 
the  suit  agreement  may  kindly  be  passed  in favour  of  the 
Plaintiff and against the Defendant throughout with cost. " 

9. 

The  matter  was  contested  by  respondent  No.I  and  learned  Civil  Judge 

rejected the plaint  while observing Article 91  of the Limitation Act,  I 908, wherein 

the  time  of  limitation  starts  from  the  date  of  knowledge,  which  was  admittedly 

accrued  in  the  year  199 I  when  allotment  in  favour  of  respondent  No. I  was 

cancelled. Even otherwise, the petitioner being plaintiff in the  suit referred this fact 

in Para 4 and Para 6  of the plaint, which gives rise to legal presumption that it was 

in their knowledge that the plot has been cancelled but the agreement has not been 

cancelled and no effort was made to seek cancellation of registered instrument. It is 

trite law that suit for declaration is only maintained when pre-requisite of section 42 

of Specific Relief Act,  1877 are visible i.e. legal right or character in favour of the 

plaintiff  i.e. petitioner  in this  case as such the  cancellation  was finalized up to the 

Apex Court but the Apex Court set aside the concurrent judgments,  hence, the only 

question left for determination of this Court is as to whether second suit filed by the 

petitioner/CDA  is maintainable  in terms of Article  9 I  of the  Limitation Act,  I 908, 

which provides  limitation  of three  years  for  filing  of  the  suit  when  the  fact  came 

into knowledge. In this situation, the matter cannot be settled in a manner, in which 

the petitioner has proceeded. 

I 0. 

I  have  also taken  into account the conduct of the petitioner/CDA, who filed 

civil revision  against the decree of Trial Court dated 28. I I .20 I 2  and did not resort 

C.R No. 312/2014. 

5 

to  legal  remedy  in  terms  of Section  96  CPC.  This  aspect  was  also  discussed  by 

learned  Revisional  Court  in  the  impugned  judgment  dated  14.05.2014  and  the 

matter  was  not  converted  into  Regular  First  Appeal,  even  otherwise,  the  civil 

revision petition was time barred at that time, which shows slackness on part of the 

petitioner/CDA,  who  is  not  serious  for  its  rights.  Another  question  raised  in  the 

proceedings  is that the petitioner  has filed instant civil revision petition against the 

judgment  & decree dated  14.05.2014 passed in civil revision by learned Additional 

District Judge, which  itself is not maintainable.  Series of mistakes have been made 

by  the  petitioner  in  the judicial  proceedings  but  question  remains  the  same  as  to 

whether  plot  No.505  can  be  considered  validly  allotted 

to 

respondent 

No. I/Muhammad  Akram or his legal heirs, the answer is "No". 

11. 

In view of above, the proposition in hand is governed under Article 91  of the 

Limitation  Act,  1908, which  provides  limitation  of three  years  for  cancellation  of 

instrument,  which  is  not  otherwise  provided  in  the  schedule  and  the  time  period 

begins to run from the date of knowledge  and as such the cancellation of plot was 

made on  16.07.1991, therefore, the very filing of the suit by the CDA/petitioner was 

time barred,  hence,  learned  Trial Court has rightly settled the  question  in terms  of 

Order  VII  Rule  11 CPC  and  no  illegality  has  been  observed  in  this  regard. 

The  instant  civil  revision  petition  is  DISMISSED  on  merits  as  well  as  due  to 

non-maintainability. 

1  RAnJam 

(MOHSIN  MIT' ifi'KA "Yi\NI) 
JUDGE 

