ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 3180 OF 2019 

Muhammad Khawer Hasan 
VS 
The Additional District Judge, Islamabad (West), etc 

Petitioner by 

Respondent No. 3 by 

Date of hearing      

: 

: 

: 

Syeda Azra Bibi, Advocate.  

In Person. 

03.12.2020 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ, J. 

Through  present  petition, 

the  petitioner 

Muhammad Khawer Hassan, has assailed judgment and decree dated 11.07.2019, 

passed by learned Additional District Judge, West-Islamabad (hereinafter referred 

to  as  the  ADJ),whereby  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  21.05.2019,  passed  by 

learned Judge Family Court/Guardian, West-Islamabad, was upheld.  

2. 

Brief facts of the case are that petitioner is the ex-husband of respondent No. 

3/Mst.  Ruqaiya  Saireen  Malik.  During  subsistence  of  marriage  daughter  namely 

Khadija-tul-Kubra (the minor) was born on 09.01.2015, who at the time of filing of 

suit  was  about  four  years  of  age.  The  petitioner  filed  guardian  petition  under 

section 25 of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1925 on 28.01.2019, for custody of the 

minor daughter. The petition was disposed of on the basis of compromise between 

the parties before the learned Judge Family Court,  who made the  compromise  as 

part  of  the  impugned  order  and  decree  dated  21.05.2019.  The  petitioner  assailed 

the  said  order  and  decree  to  the  extent  of  maintenance  fixed  @  Rs.  50,000/-  per 

month with 15% annual increase and pleads it to be unreasonable and beyond the 

reach  of  petitioner.  The  learned  ADJ  dismissed  the  appeal,  vide  judgment  and 

decree dated 11.07.2019  and held  that  the  impugned  judgment  was passed  in the 

presence and with the concurrence of the parties. He further held that the petitioner 

is  an  employee  of  well  reputed  international  organization  in  Dubai,  is  earning  a 

 
 
 
 
WP No. 3180 of 2019 

      2 

handsome amount of salary thus, can easily afford maintenance of Rs. 50,000/-per 

month for his daughter.  

3. 

After being unsuccessful in appeal, he preferred present writ petition against 

the  judgment  and decree  dated 21.05.2019, of learned Guardian Judge  as well as 

judgment  and  decree  dated  11.07.2019,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  district 

Judge, respectively. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  while  assailing  the  order/judgment 

impugned herein, submitted that no consent was given by the petitioner as has been 

recorded by the learned Judge Family Court, while passing order dated 21.05.2019, 

as the petitioner at that time was abroad, which can be proved from the fact that the 

compromise is not signed by the petitioner; that the amount of maintenance  fixed 

for  the  minor  at  Rs.50,000/-  per  month  is  exorbitant  and  unreasonable  as  the 

estimated    monthly  expenditure  of  the  minor  is  about  21,000/-;  that  the  learned 

Courts  below  have  failed  to  appreciate  the  arguments  and  documents  submitted 

during the course of proceedings. She submitted that the judgment passed by both 

the learned courts below are not sustainable and liable to be set-aside. 

5. 

Respondent  No.  3  attended  in  person  and  supported  the  judgments  of  the 

learned Courts.  

6. 

Arguments heard. Record perused. 

7. 

The  impugned  order  &  decree  dated  21.05.2019  has  been  perused  which 

basically is the reproduction of the compromise between the parties to the suit. The 

order  not  only  reflects  the  attendance  of  the  learned  Counsels  appearing  for  the 

parties, but amicable and harmonious assent is also evident, as the learned Family 

Judge  before  writing  down  the  terms  and  condition  of  the  compromise  has  also 

recorded the categorical consent of the parties that are ready to settle their dispute 

amicably. Thus the argument of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that he was 

not present in person at the time of compromise and has not signed the same is not 

tenable, being baseless and unfounded. Furthermore the, perusal of the contents of 

 
WP No. 3180 of 2019 

      3 

the  compromise  clearly  shows  that  it  is  a  detailed  and  comprehensive  document 

whereby, every aspect regarding maintenance, custody, visitation and meeting with 

the  minor  through  social  media  application  e.g.  Skype  or  whatsapp  has  been 

appropriately taken care of. It is also worth mentioning that learned counsel for the 

petitioner before this Court has  only assailed the consent  judgment and decree to 

the extent of  maintenance  of  the  minor  @  Rs. 50,000/-  per month  as  well  as  the 

observation that the maintenance allowance should be deposited before 14th of each 

month  failing  which  the  respondent  shall  stop  the  meeting  of  the  minor  with  the 

petitioner. He has no objection to the rest of the settlement. I am of the considered 

view  that  compromised  once  arrived  at  with  due  deliberation  and  consultation  is 

not  legally  challengeable.  Thus,  challenging  the  compromise  partially,  after  its 

submission  before  the  court  of  law  by  the  petitioner,  has  no  moral  and  legal 

justification.   

8.  With  regard  to  appearance  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  before 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  petitioner  has  signed  the 

Vakalatnama in favor of his learned counsel and on the basis of said Vakalatnama 

the  learned  counsel  has  appeared  as  a  representative/attorney  of  the  petitioner. 

Vakalatnama is a document which legally authorizes the lawyer / counsel to act on 

behalf  of  his/her  client.  Thus,  once  the  advocate  is  engaged  through  duly  singed 

Vakalatnama by the client for a case then all acts of the counsel in connection with 

such case are considered to be  authorizedly taken on behalf of his client till such 

time  the  Vakalatnama  is  revoked  or  withdrawn  by  the  client,  as  in  terms  of 

procedure prescribed  under the law. The Civil Procedure Code, 1908, vide Order 

III Rule 4(1) & (2) provides for the appointment of pleader to represent the client 

before Court, which for reference is also reproduced as under:- 

“4. Appointment of pleader.__ (1) No pleader shall act for any person in any 
Court,  unless  he  has  been  appointed  for  the  purpose  by  such  person  by  a 
document in writing signed by such person or by his recognized agent or by 
some other person duly authorized by or under a power of attorney to  make 
such appointment. 

(2) Every such appointment shall be filed in Court and shall be deemed to be 
in force until determined with the leave of the Court by a writing signed by the 

 
client or the pleader, as the case may be, and filed in Court, or until the client 
or  the  pleader  dies,  or  until  all  proceedings  in  the  suit  are  ended  so  far  as 
regards the client. 

WP No. 3180 of 2019 

      4 

3… 

4… 

5…”. 

The  judgment  of  the    Hon’ble  Supreme  Court,  reported  as  Hassan  Akhtar  and 

others v. Azhar Hameed and others (PLD 2010 SC 657) is also referred wherein 

the  authority  of  an  advocate,  when  engaged  through  duly  signed  vakalatnama, 

wherein it has held that:- 

"13. 
It  is  by  now  well-settled  that  an  Advocate  has  authority  to  make 
statement on behalf of his client, which is binding upon the client, unless there 
is anything contrary in the Vakalatnama putting restriction on the authority of 
the  Advocate  to  compromise  or  abandon  claim  on  behalf  of  the  client.  The 
Advocate's  power  in  the  conduct  of  a  suit  allows  him  to  abandon  the  issue, 
which in his discretion, advisable in the general interest of his client.". 

9. 

The  petitioner,  therefore,  after  signing  the  Vakalatnama  in  favour  of  the 

learned  counsel,  submitted  in  the  court  for  conducting  the  proceedings  on  his 

behalf, cannot be allowed to allege before the court that his duly engaged counsel 

has had acted against his will and authorization, and that too without any concrete 

material to prove the allegations. As noted above it is quantum of  maintenance of 

Rs.  50,000/-  per  month  as  settled  through  compromise  is  the  cause  of  his 

grievance, whereas,  the rest  of the  settlement  is acceptable  to him, thus it is  also 

admission on the part of petitioner that the dispute was settled amicably between 

the  parties  through  a  compromise  in  the  light  whereof  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court dismissed the Guardian Petition filed by the petitioner and rightly observed 

that the judgment & decree has been passed  with the consent and concurrence of 

both  the  parties.  Compromise  once  agreed  upon  /  arrived  at  between  the  parties 

before the trial court and  consent judgment / decree passed by a competent court 

thereon,  cannot  be  allowed  to be  retracted  /  challenged partly  on the  ground that 

some of its terms are acceptable and some are not acceptable. Even otherwise it is 

a settled law that the consent decree is not appealable. Hence, appeal filed by the 

petitioner  agitating  consent  decree  has  been  validly  dismissed  by  the  learned 

Appellate Court.  

 
WP No. 3180 of 2019 

      5 

10. 

I have also perused the petition filed by the petitioner u/s 25 of the Guardian 

and  Wards  Act,  1890,  for  the  custody  of  his  minor  daughter  wherein  one  of  the 

grounds for claiming the custody of the minor was:- 

“That  the  petitioner  is  a  foreign  qualified  individual,  is  in  a  much  better 
position to look after the financial and educational needs of the minor as he 
has  a  steady  source  of  income  from  his  current  employment  with  a  reputed 
accounting firm in UAE……..”.  

11.  The  above  admission  of  the  petitioner  is  enough  to  confirm  his  strong 

financial status, therefore, I am in agreement with the findings of learned ADJ that 

the petitioner can easily afford  maintenance of Rs. 50,000/- per month to support 

his minor daughter. 

12. 

In view of the above, no reason to interfere with the judgments and decrees 

dated  11.07.2019  &  21.05.2019,  passed  by  the  learned  Courts  below  has  been 

found, therefore, present petition, being devoid of any merit, is hereby dismissed.   

Announced in the open Court on this 13th day of January, 2021. 

(LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

M. Junaid Usman 

Approved for reporting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
