Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

Writ Petition No.1253 of 2021 

Sajid Ullah and another 

VS

Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Communication, 
Islamabad and 02 others 

Petitioners By 

:  Mr.  Raheel  Azam  Khan  Niazi, 

Advocate for the Petitioners.  

Respondents By 

:  Mr.  Saqlain  Haider  Awan, 
Assistant Attorney General.  

learned 

Date of hearing 

: 

20.05.2021. 

***** 

TARIQ  MEHMOOD 

JAHANGIRI, 

J. 

The 

petitioners  have  challenged  the  order  dated 

24.03.2021, whereby they were transferred from 

N-5 (North) Zone, i.e Peshawar to Lahore to M-5 

Zone, i.e Multan to Sukkur with immediate effect 

on rotation basis for a period of one year.  

2. 

Succinctly  stated  the  facts  of  the  matter 

are  that  the  petitioners  were  appointed  as 

Patrol  Officers  in  (BS-14)  in  National  Highways 

and  Motorways  Police.  Since  then  they  are 

serving  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  their 

superior 

authority.  Presently, 

both 

the 

petitioners  are  posted  at  N-5  (North)  Zone,  i.e 

Peshawar  to  Lahore 

including  the  area  of 

Islamabad.  The  petitioners’  wives  are  also 

serving  in  the  same  department  in  the  same 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

grade  and  cadre  at  the  same  station  under  the 

wedlock policy.   

3.  That  on  24.03.2021,  the  petitioners  were 

transferred  from  N-5  (North)  Zone  to  M-5  Zone, 

i.e Multan to Sukkur. Their wives have not been 

transferred  and  are  still  posted  in  N-5  (North) 

Zone; they have been transferred for more than 

three times in the last three years and have not 

been  allowed  to  complete  normal  tenure  of 

service of three years at one station; they made 

representations before the respondents No. 2 & 

3  to  withdraw  the 

impugned  order  dated 

24.03.2021, to the extent of the petitioners  with 

a  request  that  they  may  be  allowed  to  serve  in 

N-5 (North) Zone where they and their wives are 

already  serving,  in  the  light  of  wedlock  policy. 

The  representations  have  not  been  responded 

yet  and  the  respondents  are  forcing  them  to 

relieve their present posting and to join at their 

new place of posting.  

4.  That  the  petitioners  have  challenged  their 

posting  on  the  ground  that  posting  order  is 

against  the  Rule  20-A  of  the  Appointment, 

Promotion  and  Transfer  Rules,  1973  read  with 

Wedlock  Policy  dated  13.05.1998  issued  by  the 

Government of Pakistan and have prayed to set 

aside the impugned order dated 24.03.2021. 

 
 
3   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

5.  The  respondents  have  filed  comments, 

wherein,  preliminary  objection 

regarding 

maintainability  of  the  present  petition  has  been 

agitated  on  the  ground  that  the  petitioners 

being civil servants are bound under Section 10 

of Civil Servants Act, 1973, as well as the terms 

and  conditions  of 

their  service,  to  serve 

anywhere  in  Pakistan.  It  is  mentioned  in  their 

appointment  letters  that  they  will  be  liable  to 

serve anywhere in Pakistan; they are serving in 

the  same  zone  i.e  N-5  (North)  Zone  since  last 

more  than  10  years  and  have  now  been 

transferred  on  rotation  basis  for  exigencies  of 

service  and  variety  of  experience  of  policing. 

The  petitioners  along  with  107  officers  have 

been  transferred  from  these  zones  for  posting 

to M-5 Zone on rotation basis for a period of one 

(01)  year.  However,  the  officers  more  than  fifty 

five  (55)  years  of  age  and  female  officers  were 

exempted  from  transfer  to  other  zones  on 

rotation  basis.  As  National  Highways  and 

Motorways  Police  is  facing  acute  shortage  of 

officers  for  deployment  on  newly  constructed 

highways  and  motorways, 

therefore, 

the 

exigencies of service require posting of officers 

at these roads.   

6.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  inter 

alia,  contends  that  the  impugned  order  dated 

24.03.2021  is  against  the  law  especially  is 

 
 
4   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

against  the  Wedlock  Policy  dated  13.05.1998 

issued  by  the  Government  of  Pakistan;  the 

impugned order is also against the Articles 4, 5, 

25,  27,  34,  35,  37  &  38  of  the  Constitution  of 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973.  He  has 

further  contended  that  the  guidelines  issued 

under  the  wedlock  policy  clearly  indicate  that 

spouses  already  posted  at  one  station  may 

normally  not  be  disturbed  without  compelling 

reasons  of  public  interest  even  the  employees 

who  are  serving  on  deputation  basis  under  the 

said  policy,  their  serving  period  beyond  the 

permissible 

limit  may  be  condoned  on 

compassionate  grounds  and  the 

impugned 

order  is  in  violation  of  Rule  20-A  of  APT  Rules, 

1973 which provides that:  

“Posting of serving husband and wife 

at the same station, unmarried female 

government servants at the place of 

residence of their parents/family and 

that  of  married  female  government 

servants  at 

the  place  of 

residence/posting  of  their  husbands 

who are not in government employment 

shall be exempted from the said rule.”   

  The  impugned  order  is  the  worst  example 

of  bad  administration  and 

is  against 

the 

promotion  of  good  governance  by  the  state 

functionaries,  which  would  ultimately  cause  to 

social  murder  of  the  petitioners  and  their 

families;  their  children  are  also 

living  and 

getting  education  in  different  schools,  their 

 
 
 
 
5   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

annual  examination  will  be  held  in  near  future 

and  for  their  wives  it  would  become  difficult  to 

live  alone  at  the  present  station  in  case  of 

transfers of their husbands on different stations 

which  would  ultimately  cause  hardships  for 

them  and  their  families.  Learned  Counsel  has 

relied upon the following case laws: 

i. 

PLD  2011  SC  963  (Corruption in 

Hajj Arrangements) 

ii.  Mrs.  Zeenat  Ahmed  VS 

Federation  of  Pakistan  through 

Secretary Defence and 2 other 

(2014 PLC (C.S) 1032) 

iii.  Mumtaz  Ahmad  Khan  VS 

Secretary to Government of the 

Punjab,  Local  Government  and 

Community 

Development 

Department, Lahore and 2 others 

(2016 PLC (C.S) 526) 

7.   Learned Assistant Attorney General, inter-

alia,  contends  that 

instant  petition 

is  not 

maintainable as it is barred by Article 212 of the 

Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 

1973. The appointments of civil servants and the 

terms  and  conditions  of  their  service  are 

regulated  by  Civil  Servants  Act,  1973  and  any 

grievance  arising  in  respect  thereof  is  to  be 

dealt  with  by  the  Service  Tribunal,  as  the 

Tribunal  is  the  sole  Adjudicator  of  all  disputes 

relating  to  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of 

civil  servants  and  only  power  of  judicial  review 

 
 
 
 
 
6   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

lies  with  the  High  Courts.  He  has  further 

contended  that  a  party  has  no  discretion  to 

ignore  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution  to 

select  a  forum  of  his/her  own  choice  and  the 

Supreme Court has disapproved such tendency 

in  number  of  cases,  therefore,  the  present 

petition  merits  no  consideration  and  is  liable  to 

be  dismissed.  Learned  AAG  has  relied  upon 

order dated 06.02.2017 of the Hon’ble Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  in  C.P  Nos.  3311  to  3313  of 

2016 and order dated 28.01.2014 passed by this 

Court in Writ Petition No. 3725 of 2013. 

8. 

I have considered the arguments advanced 

by  learned  counsel  of  the  parties  and  have 

perused the record. 

9.  First  of  all  I  will  take  up  the  question  of 

maintainability  of  this  petition  regarding  which 

specific  objection  has  been  raised  by  the 

respondents by making reference of Article 212 

of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan,  1973,  which  provides  establishment 

of  Administrative  Courts  and  Tribunals  to 

exercise  exclusive  jurisdiction  in  respect  of 

matters  relating  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of 

persons 

in  service  of  Pakistan.  For  ready 

reference, same is reproduced as under: 

"212. Administrative Courts and Tribunals.- (1) 
Notwithstanding  anything  hereinbefore 
contained, the appropriate Legislature may by 
Act [provide for the establishment of] one or 
more  Administrative Courts  or  Tribunals  to 

 
 
 
 
7   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

exercise exclusive jurisdiction in respect of- 

(a)  matters  relating  to  the  terms  and 
conditions of persons [who are or have been] 
in  the  service  of  Pakistan,  including 
disciplinary matters; 

(b)  matters relating to claims arising from 
tortious acts of Government, or any person in 
the service of Pakistan, or of any local or other 
authority empowered by law to levy any tax or 
cess and any servant of such authority acting 
in the discharge of his duties as such servant; 
or 

(c)  matters  relating  to  the  acquisition, 
administration and disposal of any property 
which is deemed to be enemy property under 
any law. 

(2)  Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore 
contained, where any Administrative Court or 
Tribunal is established under clause (1), no 
other court shall grant an injunction, make any 
order or entertain any proceedings in respect 
of any matter to which the jurisdiction of such 
Administrative Court or Tribunal extends [and 
all proceedings in respect of any such matter 
which may be pending before such other court 
immediately before the establishment of the 
Administrative Court or Tribunal [other than an 
appeal pending before Supreme Court,] shall 
abate on such establishment]: 

Provided that the provisions of this clause shall 
not  apply  to  an  Administrative  Court  or 
Tribunal  established  under  an  Act  of  a 
Provincial Assembly unless, at the request of 
that Assembly made in the form of a resolution, 
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] by law extends 
the provisions to such a Court or Tribunal. 

(3)  An appeal to the Supreme Court from a 
judgment, decree, order or sentence of an 
Administrative Court or Tribunal shall lie only if 
the Supreme Court, being satisfied that the 
case involves a substantial question of law of 
public importance, grants leave to appeal.” 

  The perusal of  above referred Article clearly 

reveals  that  the  objection  to  the  maintainability 

of this petition in view of bar contained in Article 

212 of the Constitution, 1973 is fully attracted in 

the instant case. 

10.  It  has  been  held  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 

Court 

of  Pakistan 

in 

a 

case 

titled                    

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

“Peer  Muhammad  VS  Government  of 

Balochistan  through  Chief  Secretary  and   

others” (2007  SCMR  54)  that  “the question of 

posting/transfer relates to terms and conditions of a 

Government servant and Service Tribunal would 

have exclusive jurisdiction to dilate upon and decide 

such matters and Constitutional jurisdiction cannot 

be invoked to get such controversies resolved. We 

have also adverted to the question of mala fides 

which according to the learned Advocate Supreme 

Court could have been dilated upon in Constitutional 

jurisdiction  which  is  not  correct  because  the 

provisions  as  contained  in  Article  212  of  the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan ousts 

jurisdiction of all other Courts and orders of the 

departmental  authority  even  though  without 

jurisdiction or mala fide can be challenged only 

before the Service Tribunal and jurisdiction of Civil 

Court including High Court is specifically ousted.” 

11.  It  has 

further  been  held  by  Hon’ble 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a  case  titled  as 

“Miss Rukhsana Ijaz VS Secretary, Education, 

Punjab and others”  (1997 SCMR 167) that 

“Dispute relates to their transfer/posting which is a 

matter relatable to the terms and conditions of their 

service. Disputes about these matters fall within the 

exclusive jurisdiction of the Service Tribunal and the 

jurisdiction of the High Court is excluded in such 

matters by virtue of the express provisions of Article 

212(2)  of  the  Constitution.  It  appears  that  the 

learned  Judge  in  the  High  Court  has  not  duly 

attended to this aspect of the matter before issuing 

the stay order. In the circumstances, we convert 

this petition into an appeal and allow it.” 

12.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in 

the  case  reported  as Ali Azhar Khan Baloch v. 

Province of Sindh  (2015  SCMR  456)  has  been 

pleased to deal with the issue of maintainability 

 
 
 
 
9   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

of  a  Constitutional  Petition  of  a  Civil  Servant 

before  High  Court  and  at  Para-150  such 

findings  have  been  recorded,  which  read  as 

under:- 

“150. The High Court of Sindh has completely 

overlooked  the  intent  and  spirit  of  the 

Constitutional provisions relating to the terms 

and conditions of service, while entertaining 

Civil Suits and constitution petitions filed by the 

Civil Servants, which are explicitly barred by 

Article  212.  The  expression  'Terms  and 

Conditions'  includes  transfer,  posting; 

absorption,  seniority  and  eligibility  to 

promotion but excludes fitness or otherwise of 

a  person,  to  be  appointed  to  or  hold  a 

particular post or to be promoted to a higher 

post or grade as provided under section 4(b) of 

the  Sindh  Service  Tribunals  Act,  1973. 

Surprisingly, it has been ignored that it is, by 

now, a settled principle of law that the civil and 

writ jurisdictions would not lie in respect of the 

suits or petitions filed with regard to the terms 

and conditions of Civil Servants, and yet some 

of the learned Judges of High Court of Sindh 

have erroneously exercised both civil and writ 

jurisdictions  with  regard  to  the  terms  and 

conditions of Civil Servants.” 

The  Honourable  Supreme  Court  in  the 

aforesaid judgment has clearly and specifically 

held 

that 

terms  and  conditions 

includes 

transfer,  posting,  absorption,  seniority  and 

eligibility  to  promotion  but  excludes  fitness  or 

otherwise  of  a  person  to  be  appointed  to  or 

holding a particular post or to be promoted to a 

higher post or grade. The Honourable Supreme 

Court  in  the  aforesaid  judgment  has  taken 

 
 
 
 
 
10   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

strong exception to the entertaining of petitions 

and  civil  suits  by  High  Court  of  Sindh  in  such 

matters  and  clear  directions  have  been  issued 

in this regard.” (Emphasis added) 

13.  Reliance  is  also  placed  on  the  following 

cases:  

i. 

1998  SCMR  2129  (Asadullah  Rashid  v. 

Haji  Muhammad  Muneer 

and 

others). 

Constitutional petition under Article 199 of the 

Constitution  is  not  maintainable  by  a  civil 

servant in relation to any matter connected 

with the terms and conditions of service in 

respect  whereof  the  Service  Tribunal  has 

jurisdiction. 

ii. 

2012 PLC (C.S.) 665 (Mrs. Abida Jabeen 

v.  Secretary  Education  (Schools)  Government 

of  Punjab).  It was held that the appellant had 

no  vested  right  to  be  posted  against  a 

particular place. Transfer policy was just a 

guideline  which  had  no  binding  force. 

Competent Authority, was to see the feasibility 

that husband and wife could be posted at one 

station  or  not  Impugned  order  passed  by 

Single  Judge  of  High  Court, which was  in 

accordance with law, was maintained. 

14.  I  have  gone  through  the  above  cited  three 

reported  judgments  relied  upon  by  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioners  but  all  of  them  are 

distinguishable and clearly not applicable to the 

facts and circumstances of the present case. In            

PLD  2011  SC  963  which  is  famous  case  of 

“Corruption in Hajj Arrangements”,  the  powers 

of the high courts have been adjudicated.  

 
 
 
 
 
11   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

15.  In 2016 PLC (C.S) 526, it was the case of an 

employee  of  DG  Khan  Development  Authority 

who  was  not  a  government  servant  rather  was 

an  employee  of  Local  Government  Board 

Lahore  which  was  an  autonomous  body  and 

services  were  being  governed  by  Punjab  Local 

Government,  District  Service  (TMA  Cadre) 

Rules,  2005  and  relief  of  reinstatement  was 

granted.     

16.  In case titled as 2014 PLC (C.S) 1032, relief 

on the basis of wedlock policy was granted. It is 

categorically  mentioned  in  the  judgment  that 

the  Federal  Service  Tribunal  was  not 

functioning  hence  the  petitioner  could  not 

approach  to  the  Federal  Service  Tribunal  for 

seeking  appropriate 

relief.  Hence, 

she 

approached  the  High  Court  under  the  writ 

jurisdiction.  

17.  In  view  of  above,  order  dated  24.03.2021 

cannot  be  set  aside  as  prayed  by  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioners.  As  per  the  record, 

the  petitioners  have  already  approached  the 

respondents 

through 

representations, 

this 

Court is confident that the same will, of course, 

be decided on merits and it would then be open 

for  the  Petitioners  to  approach  the  relevant 

forums including the appellate authority, as well 

as, the learned Federal Service Tribunal having 

 
 
12   

  Writ Petition No. 1253 of 2021 

exclusive  jurisdiction,  as  far  as  terms  and 

conditions of their service are involved.   

18.  For the above reasons, instant writ petition 

is dismissed being not maintainable.  

(TARIQ MEHMOOD JAHANGIRI) 
   JUDGE 

Announced in Open Court on this 26th day of May, 2021. 

 JUDGE 

Ahmed Sheikh 

Approved for Reporting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
