          Form No: HCJD/C-121. 

ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

        W.P. No.1975 of 2012  

                             Abdul Qayyum 

  VS 

                                                 Chairman C.D.A, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel 
where necessary.  

27-02-2015. M/S  Muhammad  Ramzan  Khan,  Abdul  Rahim  Bhatti, 
Muhammad  Umair  Baloch,  Abdus  Salam  qureshi, 
Muhammad  Shoaib  Shaheen,  Sana  Ullah  Zahid,  Ch. 
Tanweer  Akhtar,  Zill-E-Huma,  Malik  Umer,  Syed  Kazim, 
Muhammad Fareed Ch, Ch. Abdul Ghafoor Qamar, Farzana 
Sultana Baig, Ch. Fayyaz Ahmed Pandana, Mohtisim Sattar 
Ch.  Ahmed  Nawaz  Bhatti,  Ch.  Saghir  Ahmad,  Ahmed 
Nawaz Bhatti, Tariq Mehmood, G. Farooq Awan, Khawar 
Amir  Bukhari,  Saeed  yousaf  Khan,  Ch.  Asghar,  Tariq 
Mahmood,  Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmed  Nasir,  G.M. 
Chaudhry,  Ahmad  Awais,  Misbah  Ullah  Khan,  Kashifa 
Awan, Muhammad Shabbir Ahmed, Riaz Hanif Rahi, Hafiz 
Arfat Ahmad Ch, Amir Abdullah Abbasi, Syed Atif Hussain 
Naqvi,  Riasat  Ali  Azad,  Ali  Murad  Baloch,  Raja  Tariq 
Mehmood, Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi and Akhtar Hussan Awan    
Advocates for the petitioners in their respective petitions. 
Ch. Haseeb, M. Khalid Zaman, Mrs. Misbah Gulnar Sharif, 
Muhammad  Nazir  Jawad,  Kashifa  Niaz  Awan,  Ch.  Abdul 
Khaliq  Thind,  Muhammad  Anwar  Dar,  Hifz-ur-Rehman, 
Advocates for respondents in their respective petitions. 
Raja Amir Abbas, Standing Counsel. 
Mr. Maroof Afzal, Chairman of the C.D.A. 

Through  this  consolidated  judgment  the 

instant  writ  petition  along  with  the  petitions  listed  in 

Schedule-A hereto, are being disposed of.  

2. 

The  petitioners, in  all  the listed  petitions,  are 

employees of the Capital Development Authority (hereinafter 

referred to as the “C.D.A”). The grievances of the petitioners 

relate to the terms and conditions of their service. They are not 

civil servants and, therefore, not amenable to the jurisdiction 

of the Federal Service Tribunal. They fall within the category 

 
 
 
                
 
 
                  
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
2 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

of employees, who are employed in an organization controlled 

by the Federal Government. They are entitled to  invoke the 

extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction of a High Court under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the "Constitution") 

as  they  fall  in  one  of  the  categories  declared  in  “Pakistan 

Defence Officers Housing Authority and others VSLt. Col 

Syed  Jawaid  Ahmed  and  others”,  2013  SCMR  1707,  to  be 

amenable.  Most  of  the  petitions  are  pending  in  this  Court 

since years, but could not be taken up for various reasons. The 

dominant factors for the delay in deciding the petitions are the 

phenomenal  increase  in  litigation  by  employees  of  various 

organizations  controlled  by the  Federal  Government,  failure 

on  the  part  of  the  respondents  to  file  comments  within  a 

reasonable  time  and  above all,  priority  given  to  other  cases 

requiring urgent attention while exercising the extraordinary 

jurisdiction  by  this  Court.  The  increase  in  litigation  by 

employees of various organizations has inevitably clogged the 

courts, causing delays in dispensation of justice, not only for 

the employees but for other bonafide litigants as well. Both 

the  State  and  the  respective  organizations/employers  have 

failed to provide effective, inexpensive and impartial forums 

for this category of employees to redress their grievances. The 

employees, who are neither civil servants nor amenable to the 

jurisdiction of the Federal Service Tribunal are, therefore, left 

with  no  adequate  remedy  and  are  compelled  to  invoke  the 

extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Courts, provided they 

are  able to  satisfy  the test  laid  down  for maintainability  of 

their petitions.                  

3. 

This  exodus  of  petitions instituted  on  a  daily 

basis  and  thousands  of  other  similar  petitions  related  to 

 
 
 
3 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

service  matters  that  are  already  pending,  is  indeed  a  poor 

reflection on the management of the respective organizations. 

Satisfaction of the employees and resolving their grievances 

without the need for them to approach the Courts manifests 

good governance and an efficient and caring employer. It is 

axiomatic that  disputes  or  conflicts  between  employees  and 

employers arise in every organization, but if left unresolved, 

the fundamental rights of the employees as well as the general 

public  are  violated.  Unresolved  disputes  give  rise  to 

resentment, frustration and stress amongst the employees on 

the  one  hand,  and  consequently  adversely  affects  the 

productivity and performance of state owned and controlled 

organizations on the other. Nevertheless, the most important 

consequence of depriving the employees of an effective and 

inexpensive  forum  for  determination  of  their  rights,  arising 

out  of the  terms and  conditions  of  service,  is  denial  of the 

right  to  access  to  justice.  We,  therefore,  need  to  examine, 

whether the employers owe a duty towards the employees in 

providing an effective and inexpensive forum or Tribunal, and 

if  there  is  such  a  duty  then  its  effect  on  the  rights  of  the 

employees in case of failure to perform the same. It is also 

important to examine whether resorting to the extraordinary 

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution 

is an effective and inexpensive course for the employees for 

determination  of  their  rights  relating  to  the  terms  and 

conditions of service. In the event that there is a duty imposed 

on  the  employer  and  the  extraordinary  jurisdiction  of  this 

Court is not an adequate remedy for the employees, then what 

is the obligation of the State or the respective organizations?     

 
 
4 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

4. 

At the very outset, it is pertinent to examine the 

nature of relationship of an employer with its employee and 

whether the former owes a duty of care?  The law regarding 

the definition of a duty of care has made significant progress 

since the time of Lord Atkin’s formulation of the 'neighbour 

principle' in the celebrated judgment of the House of Lords in 

“Donoghue  VS Stevenson”  (1932)  A.C  562  to the  'Anns 

test  in  “Anns  VS London  Borough  of  Merton”  (1977)  2 

ALL ER 492, and ultimately the law based on the statement of 

Lord  Bridge’s  speech  in  “Caparo  Industries  plc  VS

Dickman and others”, (1990) 1 ALL ER 568. The current law 

is  based  on  a  threefold  test,  firstly,  whether  the  harm  was 

reasonably  foreseeable,  secondly,  whether  there  exists  a 

relationship of proximity and lastly, whether it would be just, 

fair and reasonable in the circumstances for a duty of care to 

be imposed. The satisfaction of this three stage test determines 

if there is a duty of care between the parties. This duty of care 

is a legal duty.  By now it is well settled law that there is a 

general  duty  of  care  between  certain  relationships  i,e 

employers and employees, teachers and students, lawyers and 

clients, motorists and road users, doctors and patients etc. As 

far as duty of care in the case of an employer and employee 

relationship  is  concerned,  reference  may  be  made  to  the 

judgments  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  “Fairchild  etc  VS

Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd and others”, (2002) 3 ALL ER 

305,  and  “John  Edward  Walker  VS Northumberland 

County Council” (1994) EWHC QB 2. The concept of duty of 

care  belongs  to the  realm  of  the law  of  tort,  which is  also 

recognized  by  our  Courts.  The  Supreme  Court  has 

consistently observed and desired the need for promoting the 

law  of  tort  and  reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to 

 
 
5 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

“Punjab  Road  Transport  Corporation  VS  Zahida  Afzal  etc”, 

2006  SCMR  207  &  “Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  through 

Secretary,  M/O  Railways,  etc  vs  Abdul  Wahid  etc”,  2011 

SCMR 1836. Recognizing the applicability of the law of tort, 

it  was  held  in  “Abdul  Majeed  Khan  VS  Tawseen  Abdul 

Haleem”,  PLD  2012  SC  80,  that  the  law  is  applicable  and 

administered in Pakistan as rules of justice, equity and good 

conscience. 

5. 

There is also an implied statutory duty of care under 

the legislative enactment creating an organization such as the 

Capital  Development  Authority.  CDA  is  established  under 

section  4  of  the  Capital  Development  Authority  Ordinance, 

1960  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "Ordinance").  The 

constitution of the Board is provided under section 6. Section 

37  confers  the  power  on  the  Authority  to  appoint  such 

officers,  servants,  experts  or  consultants as  it  may consider 

necessary for the performance of its functions 'on such terms 

and conditions as it may deem fit'. The power of the Chairman 

to  make  such  appointments  is  provided  under  sub  section 

37(2). Section 38 further confers the power on the Authority 

to lay down procedure for the appointment of its officers and 

servants, and the terms and conditions of their service. The 

Authority  is  competent  to  take  disciplinary  action  against 

them. The legislature obviously intended that the terms and 

conditions  once  determined  pursuant  to  section  37  or  the 

procedure  laid  down  under  section  38  shall  be  upheld  and 

strictly followed. This statutory obligation includes an implied 

duty of resolving the grievances and disputes arising from the 

determined terms and conditions fairly, justly and in a manner 

so as to ensure inexpensive and expeditious justice. It is for 

 
 
6 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

this reason that the  legislature  has  vested  the  authority  and 

power to make rules and regulations under section 50 and 51 

respectively. Thus there is a statutory duty as well to ensure a 

mechanism for terminating disputes and grievances.                    

6. 

The  duty  of  care  owed  by  an  employer  towards  an 

employee is, therefore, recognized and applicable in Pakistan. 

It  is a  clear  duty  of the  employer  to  ensure  the safety  and 

welfare of its employees.  It is mandatory for the employers to 

take all reasonable steps for keeping the employees protected 

against  any  foreseeable  risk  or  harm.  This  duty  of  care 

essentially includes safeguarding the rights of the employees 

relating  to  their  terms  and  conditions  of  service.  Ensuring  

them  an  environment  where  they  remain  protected  from 

harassment, discrimination and the feeling of  insecurity is an 

essential part of this duty. The employer, therefore, is saddled 

with the duty to ensure that if a dispute arises relating to the 

terms and conditions of service, there exists a mechanism so 

that  these  grievances  are  redressed.  Such  mechanisms  for 

redressing 

disputes  may 

be 

through 

counseling, 

conciliation/mediation,  and  if  unresolved,  ultimately  placed  

before  an  independent,  impartial,  judicious  and  effective 

forum for  binding  arbitration  or judicial  determination.  The 

State as an employer has provided such a statutory forum to 

its  employees  falling  in  the  category  of  civil  servants,  by 

establishing an exclusive Tribunal under the Federal Services 

Tribunal, 1973. However, employees who do not fall in the 

category  of  civil  servants  have  been  deprived  of  an 

administrative  Tribunal for the  determination  of  their rights 

relating  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service.  They  are, 

therefore, compelled to invoke the extra ordinary jurisdiction 

 
 
7 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  Needless  to mention 

that the employer is in breach of the duty of care it owes to the 

employees. It is not simply a question of breach of this duty, 

but the omission gives rise to a flagrant violation and denial of 

the  right  of  access  to  justice,  which  has  been  held  to  be 

inextricably 

intertwined  with 

the  fundamental  rights 

guaranteed under the Constitution, particularly the right to life 

under  Article  9.  If  no  forum  or  Tribunal  has  been  made 

exclusively accessible to the employees, and they fall within 

the categories enumerated by the Supreme Court in “Pakistan 

Defence Officers Housing Authority and others VSLt. Col 

Syed Jawaid Ahmed and others”, 2013 SCMR 1707, as being 

entitled to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 

199, then it needs to be examined whether the said jurisdiction 

is  an  adequate  remedy  on  the  touchstone  of  providing 

inexpensive and expeditious justice? 

7. 

The jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 

of 

the  Constitution 

is  of  extraordinary  nature.  The 

Constitution has conferred the power on the High Courts for 

enforcement  of  fundamental  rights.  The  power  includes 

issuance of orders, directions or writs of five kinds, namely 

habeas  corpus,  mandamus,  certiorari,  prohibition  and  quo 

warranto.  The 

jurisdiction  being  discretionary  and 

extraordinary,  is  exercised  in  grave  cases  rather  than  in 

routine.  Despite  the  expansive  nature  of  the  powers  and 

jurisdiction,  it  does  not  enable  a  High  Court  to  act  as  an 

appellate  forum.  There  are  also  various  trappings  or 

limitations required to be satisfied before jurisdiction will be 

assumed by a High Court. The jurisdiction, inter alia, cannot 

be exercised to resolve disputed questions of fact, while policy 

matters and enforcement of contractual terms and rights are 

 
 
 
8 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

outside its scope. As it is an extraordinary jurisdiction to  be 

exercised  in  grave  cases,  the  High  Court  structures  its 

discretion in taking up petitions for hearing, by giving priority 

to  cases  requiring  urgent  attention.  Interpretation  of  the 

Constitution,  incarcerated  petitioners  seeking  bail,  family 

disputes  involving  custody  of  children,  missing  citizens, 

human rights and civil liberty violations, excesses of public 

functionaries, public interest litigation, are some of the areas 

considered and treated as of higher priority than the individual 

grievances of employees relating to their service matters. This 

neither being an ordinary appellate jurisdiction nor exclusive 

forum for redressing grievances of the employees, inevitably 

causes  delays  in  the  adjudication  of  their  petitions.  The 

framers  of  the  Constitution  had  surely  not  imagined  that 

employees  of  organizations  controlled  by 

  respective 

governments would be resorting to invoking the extraordinary 

constitutional jurisdiction  under  Article  199 in  such  a  large 

number, nor could they have contemplated that in breach of 

the  duty  of  care  and  in  violation  of  fundamental rights, the 

employers, whether the Federal Government or the respective 

statutory  organizations  controlled  by  it,  would  deny  to  its 

employees an adequate remedy in law. A remedy is  obviously 

adequate  if  it  is  inexpensive,  independent,  impartial  and 

effective  for  redressing  disputes  and  grievances  relating  to 

terms  and  conditions  of  service.  Notwithstanding  the 

extraordinary  nature  of  jurisdiction  under  Article  199,  the 

employees, having no other adequate remedy and, therefore, 

compelled to invoke the jurisdiction of a High Court are faced 

with the insurmountable trappings inherent in this jurisdiction. 

Many  are  left  without  a  remedy  because  their  grievances 

involve  disputed  questions  of  fact  or  enforcement  of 

 
9 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

contractual terms. Most employees, particularly in the lower 

grades, with their meager salaries, find it virtually impossible 

to approach the High Court and as a result retire without a 

remedy, thereby suffering grave miscarriages of justice. Those 

who are fortunate to bear the high cost of litigation and are 

able to overcome the limitations and trappings of Article 199, 

are faced with  enduring a long wait while the courts struggle 

to find time to properly hear and decide their petitions, which 

rank low on the priority list. A favorable verdict is also of no 

avail, as the organizations invariably drag the employees to a 

higher judicial forum. Even the fortunate employees who are 

able to approach a High Court, ultimately become victims of 

miscarriages  of  justice,  finding  it  difficult  to  outweigh  the 

strength of the employers in pursuing litigation. Undoubtedly 

this  tantamounts  to  a  denial  of  access  to  justice.  The 

fundamental  rights  of  the  employees  guaranteed  under  the 

Constitution, particularly Articles 9, 10-A and 25 are violated. 

In  the  circumstances,  the  extraordinary  jurisdiction  of  this 

Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  is  obviously 

neither  an  adequate  remedy,  nor  a  forum  for  providing 

inexpensive  and  expeditious  justice  in  the  case  of  the 

employees for determination of their rights arising from and 

out of the terms and conditions of service.  

8. 

Next, what then is the effect, and whether the Federal 

Government  or  statutory  entities  controlled  by  it  have  any 

obligation  under  the  Constitution  or  law  to  provide  the 

employees  with  a  forum  for  providing  inexpensive  and 

expeditious justice? 

 
 
 
10 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

9. 

The failure on the part of the employer to provide an 

effective forum, ensuring inexpensive and expeditious justice 

to the employees, is indeed a denial of the right of access to 

justice.  The  said  right  being  inextricably  linked,  results  in 

violation  of  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  employees 

guaranteed under the Constitution, particularly under Articles 

9, 10-A and 25. The helplessness of the employee and denial 

of access to justice becomes a form of forced labour, besides 

compromising  the  inviolability  of  dignity  of  the  employee, 

guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution. An employee 

without a remedy in the 21st century is obviously a modern 

slave, as he/she is forced to live with the injustice of being 

deprived of a choice on account of lack of resources, unequal 

bargaining  power  qua  the  employer  and  the  compulsion  to 

provide  for  the  livelihood  of  the  family.  Such  a  shackled 

employee is virtually forced to accept this fate. This is a form 

of  exploitation,  which  the  State  is  under  a  constitutional 

command  to  eliminate  pursuant  to  Article  3  of  the 

Constitution.  It  also  assumes  a  form  of  forced  labour  and 

slavery forbidden under Article 11 of the Constitution. Such 

treatment  of  an  employee  is  a  clear  violation  of  the 

responsibilities and duties imposed on the State, each of its 

organ and authority, and of each person performing functions 

on behalf of an organ or authority of the State. Constitutional 

obligations and duties are, inter alia, imposed under Chapter 2 

of  the  Constitution.  The  Principles  of  Policy  in  the  said 

chapter  are  binding,  inter  alia,  when  read  with  Article  5, 

which declares obedience to the Constitution as an inviolable 

obligation. Article 37 makes it mandatory for the State, under 

clause  (d)  to  ensure  'inexpensive  and  expeditious  justice'; 

under  clause  (e)  to  make  provisions  for  securing  just  and 

 
11 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

humane conditions of work. Likewise Article 38 makes it an 

obligation  to  secure  the  well  being  by  ensuring  'equitable 

adjustment  of  rights  between  employers  and  employees'.  A 

combined  and  dynamic  reading  of  the  provisions  of  the 

Constitution unambiguously shows that the State, its organs 

and  functionaries,  besides  owing  duty  of  care  towards  the 

employees, have a constitutional obligation to provide them 

with  an  independent  and  impartial  exclusive  forum  for 

inexpensive  and  expeditious  justice.  Leaving  an  employee 

without  an  adequate  remedy  is  a  denial  of  justice  and  a 

flagrant  violation  of  the  constitutional  commands  imposing 

mandatory  obligations.  It  has  already  been  held  that 

compelling  the  employees  to  invoke  the  extraordinary 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution, which is not an ordinary appellate forum and as 

a  corollary  not  an  adequate  remedy,  particularly  when  the 

number  of  individual  grievances  relating  to  terms  and 

conditions is as large as is the case in every High Court.   

10. 

It is now pertinent to examine the scope of the 

right of access to justice in the context of these employees and 

the effect of its denial. It is settled law that the right of access 

to justice is fundamental to, and an integral part of the rule of 

law.  There  is  a  chain  of  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court 

lucidly expounding the scope and significance of this valuable 

right. In “Al-Jehad Trust & others VS Federation of Pakistan 

and others”, PLD 1996 SC 324, recording his own reasons, 

Justice Ajmal Mian, as he then was, affirmed with approval a 

passage from the celebrated judgment of the High Court of 

Sind, authored by the then Justice Saleem Akhtar in “Sharaf 

Faridi  and  others  VS The  Federation  and  others”,  PLD 

1989 Karachi 404. This passage was later reaffirmed in “Sh. 

 
 
 
12 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

Riaz-ul-Haq  and  another  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  and 

others,”  PLD  2013  SC  501.  The  same  is  reproduced  as 

follows;  

“In Sharaf Faridi v. Islamic Republic of 

Pakistan  (PLD  1989  Karachi  404)  after 

referring to Ms. Benazir Bhutto’s case (supra) 

it was observed as under:- 

The right of ‘access to justice to all’ is 

a well-recognized inviolable right enshrined in 

Article  9  of  the  Constitution.  This  right  is 

equally found in the doctrine of ‘due process of 

law’. The right of access to justice includes the 

right to be treated according to law, the right 

to have a fair and proper trail and a right to 

have  an  impartial  Court  or  Tribunal.  This 

conclusion finds support from the observation 

of Willoughby in Constitution of United States, 

Second Edition, Vol. II at page 1709 where the 

term ‘due process of law’ has been summarized 

as follows:- 

(1) 

He  shall  have  due  notice  of  proceedings 

which affect his rights. 

(2) 

He  shall  be  given  reasonable  opportunity 

to defend.  

(3) 

That  the  Tribunal  or  Court  before  which 

his rights are adjudicated is so constituted 

as  to  give  reasonable  assurance  of  his 

honesty and impartiality, and 

(4) 

That it is a Court of competent jurisdiction. 

It therefore follows that in terms of 

Article  9  of  the  Constitution  a  person  is 

 
 
 
13 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

entitled  to  have  an  impartial  Court  and 

tribunal.  Unless  an 

impartial  and 

independent Court is established the right 

to have a fair trial according to law cannot 

be achieved. Therefore justice can only be 

done  if  there  is  an  independent  judiciary 

which  should  be  separate  from  executive 

and not at its mercy or dependent on it.”   

11. 

It  was  held  in  “Khan  Asfandyar  Wali  and 

others vs Federation of Pakistan and others”,  PLD 2001 SC 

607, that denial of access to justice to a person for grievances 

to be redressed is a violation of Article 4 of the Constitution, 

which envisages the right of access to justice to all and the 

same being equally  founded in the doctrine of due process of 

law.  

12. 

The Supreme Court emphasized the importance 

of effectual adjudication and inexpensive access to justice as 

an inherent part of the fundamental rights of a person in “Rauf 

B. Kadri vs State Bank of Pakistan”, PLD 2002 SC 1111. 

13. 

The  law  in  the  context  of  right  of  access  to 

justice and observations made in “Government of Baluchistan 

through Additional Chief Secretary VS Azizullah Memon and 

16 others”, PLD 1993 SC 341, were followed and affirmed in 

“Watan  Party  and  others  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan  and 

others”, PLD 2012 SC 292, as follows:-  

 “The  crux  of  the  above  judgments 

persuades us to hold that right of due process, 

inter alia, envisages the right to have a fair and 

proper trial and right to have impartial court 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

or  tribunal.  The  phrase/expression  in  the 

principle  highlighted  therefrom  are  referable 

to the basic judicial function, which necessarily 

are known to judicial minded persons. For the 

safe administration of justice we may observe 

that  the  principle  discussed  in  both  the 

judgments  can  only  be  adhered to  strictly  by 

the forums manned by the persons responsible 

to deliver judicial findings subject to following 

principle of natural justice.”  

A  full  Court  judgment  in  “Suo  Moto  Case  No.  4  of 

2010”, PLD 2012 SC 553, declared as follows:- 

“The  principle  of  right  to  ‘fair  trial’ 

has been acknowledged and recognized by our 

Courts  since  long  and  is  by  now  well 

entrenched in our jurisprudence. The right to a 

‘fair  trial’  undoubtedly  means  a  right  to  a 

proper  hearing  by  an  unbiased  competent 

forum. The latter component of a ‘fair trial’ is 

based on the age-old maxim “Nemo debet esse 

judex in propria sua causa” that “no man can 

be  a  judge  in  his  own  cause”.  This  principle 

has  been  further  expounded  to  mean  that  a 

Judge  must  not  hear  a  case  in  which  he  has 

personal interest, whether or not his decision is 

influenced  by  his  interest,  for  “justice  should 

not  only  be  done  but  be  seen  to  have  been 

done.” 

14. 

While examining the vires of the Contempt of 

Court  Act,  2012,  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  “Baz 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
15 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

Muhammad Kakar and others vs Federation of Pakistan and 

others,”  PLD  2012  SC  923,  reaffirmed  and  followed  the 

exposition  of  law  and  principles  enunciated  in  its  earlier 

pronouncements, declaring the right of access to justice as a 

well recognized inviolable right enshrined in Article 9 of the 

Constitution and equally found in the doctrine of due process 

of  law.  It  was  further reiterated  that  this  right  includes the 

right to be treated according to law, the right to have a fair and 

proper trial and a right to have an impartial Court or Tribunal. 

The  said  principles  were  earlier  declared  in  yet  another 

judgment  i.e  “Muhammad  Nadeem  Arif  and  others  VS 

Inspector General of Police, Punjab, Lahore and others,” 2011 

SCMR 408. 

15. 

The last in the chain of judgments relating to 

the  scope  of  right  of  access  to  justice,  already  referred  to 

above,  is  “Sh.  Riaz-ul-Haq  and  another  VS  Federation  of 

Pakistan and others,” PLD 2013 SC 501. The Supreme Court 

was  examining 

the  provisions  of  respective  statutes 

establishing  the  Federal  and  Provincial  Service  Tribunals. 

Referring to civil servants it has been held that:- 

“Admittedly,  civil  servants  being  citizens  of 

Pakistan  have  Fundamental  Rights  including 

the  right  of  access  to  justice  as  envisaged 

under  Article  9  of  the  Constitution.  The 

enforcement of terms and conditions of service 

of  these  civil  servants  depends  upon  the 

impartial, independent and unbiased Tribunal. 

Further, in the words of our founding father, 

the  services  are  the  backbone  of  the  State  as 

the affairs of the Government are performed by 

 
 
 
 
 
 
16 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

the  civil  servants.  Therefore,  ultimately,  the 

general  public  gets  affected 

from 

the 

functioning of the service Tribunals: as such, 

the instant case involves a question of public 

importance.”  

It was further held that;    

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  right  of 

“access to justice to all” is a well recognized 

inviolable  right  enshrined  in  Article  9  of the 

Constitution  and  is  equally  found  in  the 

doctrine  of  “due  process  of  law”.  It includes 

the  right  to  be  treated  according  to law,  the 

right to have a fair and proper trial and a right 

to have an impartial court or tribunal.”  

16. 

Perusal of the above case law reveals that the 

law relating to the right of access to justice is unequivocally 

well settled. It is an inviolable right inextricably linked, or in 

other  words  an  integral  part  of  the  right to  life  guaranteed 

under Article 9 of the Constitution, and after the eighteenth 

amendment Article 10-A as well, guaranteeing a fair trial and 

due process. The said right also includes within its fold yet 

another integral and valuable right, to have inexpensive and 

expeditious  justice  through  an  impartial  Court  or  Tribunal. 

The tribunal may not necessarily be a court in the strict sense 

of  law.  However, it  ought  to  be  a  competent  forum  having 

judicial  power  and  to  act  in  a  manner  in  which  a  judicial 

forum  is  expected to  act,  as  has  been  held  by  the  Supreme 

Court in the case of Sh Riaz ul Haq (supra) and the guidelines 

have also been laid down for such a forum. It must have the 

power and capacity to determine and terminate a dispute. The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

exercise of power conferred under the Constitution or the law 

to give 'binding and authoritative' decisions, and after hearing 

the  parties,  to  ascertain  and  investigate  facts  based  on 

appreciation  of  evidence.  Impartiality  and  independence  are 

pre requisites for such a Tribunal or forum.  

17. 

In  the  case  of  the  present  petitioners  and 

employees  of  several  other  State/Government  controlled 

corporations and organizations, no Tribunal or forum has been 

provided which meets the above mentioned tests laid down to 

satisfy the threshold of the right of access to justice, nor is 

invoking  the  extraordinary  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution    an  adequate  and  proper 

remedy for the enforcement of their rights resting on the terms 

and  conditions  of  service.  Individual  grievances  invariably 

include  disputed  questions  of  fact  or  enforcement  of 

contractual terms,  leaving most  of the  petitioners  without  a 

remedy,  while  many  others,  due  to  meager  resources,  are 

dissuaded from approaching this Court. The unmistakable and 

manifest  conclusion  is  that  the  employees  suffer  grave 

injustice and the right of access to justice is denied to them. 

18. 

It is also pertinent to emphasize that by keeping 

the employees without a remedy, or refusal to determine their 

rights  in  an  inexpensive,  expeditious  manner  through 

independent and impartial tribunals/forums, the employer, in 

addition to other rights as explained above, also violates the 

principles of legitimate expectation, both procedural as well as 

substantive. The constitutional obligations and duties imposed 

on the State and the entities controlled by it, are explicit and 

manifest representations made to the employees that they shall 

be  dealt  with  in  accordance  with  law  and  the  terms  and 

 
 
 
 
 
18 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

conditions  of  service  shall  be  protected  and  upheld.  At the 

time  of  seeking  employment  with  a  State/Government 

controlled  entity, 

there  also  exists  an  unequivocal 

representation that disputes and grievances shall be terminated 

on  the touchstone  of  providing inexpensive  and  expeditious 

justice. The Principles of Policy enshrined in Chapter 2 of the 

Constitution  and  the  commitments  and  policy  statements 

made and expressed by public sector organizations from time 

to  time  gives  rise  to  legitimate  expectations  on  part  of the 

employees. 

19. 

For what has been discussed above, it is held 

that  providing 

inexpensive  and  expeditious 

justice, 

safeguarding  and  ensuring  the  right  of  access  to  justice 

through  an  independent    and  impartial  Tribunal  for  the 

determination  or  enforcement  of  rights  relating  to  or 

emanating  from  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  such 

persons employed in organizations controlled by the State and 

Governments,  is  a  mandatory  obligation  and  onerous  duty 

imposed  under  the  Constitution  and  the  law.  Failure  in 

providing  a  forum  or  Tribunal  having  judicial  powers  is 

breach  of  the  duty  of  care  of  the  employer  towards  the 

employees and a violation of their fundamental rights. Besides 

being exposed to claims of damages for the breach of duty of 

care, both the Federal Government and the respective entities 

controlled by it, may be liable for exemplary special costs for 

forcing its employees to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction 

of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution, which has 

been held to be an inadequate remedy for the employees in the 

case  of  their  individual  grievances  relating  to  terms  and 

conditions of service.  

 
                 
 
  
 
 
19 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

20. 

It was in this background that this Court had 

directed the Federal Government, including all  organizations 

and entities, to satisfy this Court as to why an order may not 

be passed directing them for taking appropriate measures in 

providing 

independent, 

impartial 

and 

inexpensive 

forums/tribunals to their respective employees, while making 

interim arrangements for having the pending cases decided by 

an 

independent 

forum/commission.  The  Secretary, 

Establishment  had  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Federal 

Government.  All  the  organizations/entities,  including  the 

Federal  Government,  agree  in  principle  that  there  is  a 

constitutional  obligation  to  provide  the  employees  with 

inexpensive  and  expeditious  justice  through  independent, 

effective and judicial tribunals/forums. They have sought time 

and  undertaken  to  make  appropriate  arrangements,  while 

arranging interim forums.  

21.  The Capital Development Authority vide order dated 

16-02-2015 was also directed as above. It was noted in the 

order that the extent of litigation either reflected an indifferent 

attitude  of  the  management  towards  its  employees,  or  the 

absence  of  an  effective 

independent  and 

impartial 

forum/mechanism for resolving the disputes and grievances of 

the employees.  

22. 

In compliance with this Court’s order dated 23-

02-2015, Mr. Maroof Afzal, Chairman of C.D.A, appeared in 

person and has stated that pursuant to this Courts order and its 

constitutional and statutory obligations,  C.D.A has decided to 

appoint Justice (Retd) Maulvi Anwarul Haq, Hon’ble retired 

Judge  of  the  High  Court  and  former  Attorney  General  of 

 
 
 
 
 
20 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

Pakistan,  as  a  forum  for  deciding  the  grievances  of  the 

employees relating to their terms and conditions of service.  

23. 

The  learned  counsels  for  the  petitioners  and 

CDA submitted that CDA is one of such organization which 

has  taken  the  initiative  and  the  lead  in  introducing  an 

independent  effective and  impartial  forum  for resolving the 

disputes  and  grievances  of  its  employees  relating  to  their 

terms  and  conditions  of  service.  The  learned  counsels 

submitted  that  it  is  expected  that  such  a  forum  would 

effectively resolve the disputes and provide for the employees 

an  inexpensive  and  effective  forum.  The  learned  counsels 

appearing for CDA assured this Court that the management of  

C.D.A is conscious of the need to address the grievances of its 

employees in an effective manner. 

24. 

The  learned  counsels  appearing  for  the 

petitioners  have  raised  some  concerns  regarding  the 

implementation  of  the  decisions  of  such  a  forum.  While 

consenting on behalf of the petitioners to refer their petitions 

to  the  forum  established  by  CDA,  they  have  however 

suggested  that  in  order  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  this 

forum  it  may  be  made  binding  on  CDA  to  accept  and 

implement the decisions, including any interim order passed 

by such forum. They have stressed that as it is a new initiative, 

therefore, the right of an employee to assail the order passed 

by the forum may be reserved before this Court.     

 25. 

This  Court  records  its  appreciation  for  the 

initiative taken by the Chairman and the Board of C.D.A to 

provide  for  an  effective,  independent  and  impartial  dispute 

resolution  forum  for  the redressing  of the  grievances  of  its 

employees  relating to their  terms  and conditions  of service.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

C.D.A,  in  taking  this lead,  has  indeed  demonstrated that  it 

owns its employees and is alive to resolving their problems. If 

the management had  provided an effective, independent and 

impartial  dispute  resolution  mechanism  earlier,  there  would 

have been no need for such a large number of its employees to 

have approached this Court by invoking the jurisdiction under 

Article 199 of the Constitution. It certainly becomes a matter 

of concern when the employees of organizations controlled by 

the government raise their grievances in such a large number. 

It undeniably manifests a grave wrong in the system, creating 

an impression that the employees are not being heard and have 

been left without a remedy. The volume of grievance petitions 

invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the 

Constitution speaks volumes for depriving bonafide aggrieved 

employees of an effective forum to redress their grievances. 

When 

the  organization  fails  to  provide  inexpensive, 

independent,  and  effective  forums  for  dispute  resolution,  it 

gives rise to feelings of distrust and frustration amongst the 

employees.  This  in  itself  becomes  a  question  of  judicial 

review for the Court, as on the one hand it reflects the denial 

of the fundamental right of access to justice in the case of the 

employees, and on the other the standard of governance within 

the respective organization. The present petitioners appear to 

be  an  example  of  employees  deprived  of  effective  and 

inexpensive  forums,  or  a  dispute  resolution  mechanism  to 

redress their  grievances.  Most  of the  employees  can  hardly 

afford to litigate within their meager means and may retire in 

pursuit of justice. Many may ultimately be declared to have 

been  wronged,  but  by  then  it  may  be  too  late  as  ‘justice 

delayed  is  justice  denied’.  The  fault,  I  regret  to  say,  is 

inevitably on account of the indifference of the Employers. It 

 
22 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

is the prime duty of the Employer to provide its employees an 

inexpensive and effective forum to resolve their disputes. The 

decision of CDA to establish and provide for an independent, 

inexpensive  and  impartial  forum  to  its  employees  for  the 

redressing of grievances relating to their terms and conditions 

of service is indeed a step in the right direction, for which the 

credit goes to the present management.  

26. 

In  the  light  of  the  above,  and  as  a  consent 

order, the petitions are disposed of in the following terms: 

i- 

The CDA shall issue the notification of Mr. 

Justice  (Retd)  Maulvi  Anwarul  Haq,  for 

appointing  him  as  forum  to  give  binding 

determination  of  disputes  relating  to  the 

terms  and  conditions  of  service  of 

employees  of  CDA  and  full  fill  all  codal 

formalities and requirements of law within 

three weeks from the date of receiving this 

order. 

ii- 

The instant petition and all other petitions 

listed  in  the  Schedule  attached  with  this 

order shall be deemed to be pending before 

Mr.  Justice  (Retd)  Maulvi  Anwarul  Haq, 

and  shall be placed before him by the CDA 

within one week from the date of issuance 

of  the  notification.  Any  grievance  of 

employees other than the petitioners , if not 

resolved through other means, shall also be 

referred  to this forum directly without the 

need  for  the  employee  to  invoke  the 

jurisdiction of this Court.    

 
 
 
  
 
 
23 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

iii- 

CDA having established the forum and the 

employees having given their consent, shall 

respect  the  orders  passed  by  the  forum, 

whether  interim  or  final,  and,  therefore, 

implement the orders without delay.  

iv- 

Any  delay  in  implementing  the  orders, 

whether  interim  or  final,  shall  be  deemed 

as violation of this order and, therefore, the 

person causing any impediment or delay in 

implementing  the  orders,  whether  interim 

or final, shall be  proceeded against under 

the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003.  

v- 

CDA  shall  take  all  measures  to  facilitate 

the  forum  established  with  consent  of  the 

parties so that disputes are decided within 

a reasonable time and on the touchstone of 

ensuring  the  Constitutional  obligation  of 

providing  'inexpensive  and  expeditious' 

justice . 

vi- 

This  Court  expects  that  all  the  petitions 

transmitted to CDA for being placed before 

the  Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice  (Retd)  Maulvi 

Anwarul  Haq,, 

shall  be 

decided 

expeditiously preferably within six months. 

vii- 

Any  petitioner  or  CDA  aggrieved  by  a 

decision  passed  by  the  forum  shall  be  at 

liberty  to  approach  this  Court  and  this 

order  shall  not  be  a  bar 

to 

the 

maintainability of the petition under Article 

199 of the Constitution. However, the CDA 

shall implement the order before invoking 

 
 
 
 
 
24 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

the jurisdiction of this Court as the forum 

has been established with consent. .  

viii-  The interim orders passed in  the petitions 

listed  in  the  schedule  attached  with  this 

order shall continue unless the same have 

been  altered,  modified  or  in  any  other 

manner  changed  by  the  forum  established 

and  headed  by  Mr.  Justice  (Retd)  Maulvi 

Anwarul Haq.  

ix- 

The above is an interim arrangement which 

shall  continue  till  a  permanent  appellate 

forum has been established either by  CDA 

or  the  Federal  Government  by  taking 

measures  for  providing  such  a  forum 

through legislation. 

x- 

CDA  and  Justice  (Retd)  Maulvi  Anwar  ul 

Haq  shall  settle  the  fee  and  terms  and 

conditions with mutual consent. CDA shall 

facilitate the forum so that the grievances 

are decided within the stipulated time.   

xi- 

The  Federal  Government 

shall, 

in 

compliance with the obligations under the 

Constitution, 

take 

necessary 

steps/ 

measures  for  ensuring  'inexpensive  and 

expeditious  justice'  to  the  employees  who 

fall  in  the  categories  amenable  to  the 

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 

of  the  Constitution,  as  identified  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court 

in  “Pakistan 

Defence  Officers’  Housing  Authority  and 

others VSLt. Col Syed Jawaid  Ahmed 

 
 
 
 
 
25 |W . P . N o . 1 9 7 5   o f   2 0 1 2  

and others”,  2013 SCMR 1707, inter alia, 

by proposing to the  Parliament legislative 

enactment  for  establishing  an  appropriate 

appellate forum.  The  Federal Government 

shall comply with this direction preferably 

within 60 days.         

27. 

For  what  has  been  stated  above,  all  the 

petitions are disposed of in the terms mentioned in Paragraph 

No. 26 above. 

28. 

The  office  is  directed  to  send  a  copy  this judgment 

through  special  messenger  to  the  Secretary,  Establishment, 

Government  of  Pakistan  for  compliance  with  Para  26  (xi) 

above.  In  case 

the  Federal  Government  or  Capital 

Development Authority has any difficulty in implementing the 

direction, it shall be at liberty to approach this Court. However, 

this Court expects that the Federal Government shall proceed 

and fulfill its Constitutional obligations and comply with the 

above directions. A report in this regard shall be submitted by 

the Secretary, Establishment Division, to the Registrar of this 

Court within 65 days from the receipt of this order.       

(ATHAR MINALLAH)  

JUDGE                                                                       

Approved for reporting.  

JUDGE 

Asif Mughal/* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
