ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Writ Petition no. 801 of 2022 
Zaheer Abbas  
VS
Additional District Judge, Islamabad-West and another 

S.  No.  of 
order/ 
proceedings 

of  

Date 
order/ 
Proceedings 
07.03.2022  Mr.  Muhammad  Mustafa  Khattak,  Advocate  for  the 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel 
where necessary. 

petitioner. 

This  writ  petition  prays  to  set  aside  the  impugned  order 

dated 08.02.2022 of the learned Additional District Judge-West, 

dismissing  the  appeal  against  the  consolidated  judgment  and 

decree  dated  21.01.2020  of  the  family  Court  on  the  ground  of 

limitation. 

2        The  petitioner  appealed  from  the  judgment  and  decree 

dated  21.01.2020  before  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge-

East,  and  then  the  Covid  shutdown  ensued.    Much  later  on 

25.01.2022, the learned ADJ-East returned the appeal for filing 

before the learned ADJ-West.  The appellate court of the learned 

ADJ-West disbelieved the plea that the appeal was filed in time 

before  ADJ-East  because  the  order  sheets  of  that  appeal  were 

not  appended,  the  application  for  condonation  was  not  filed 

either and, above all, the ADJ-West did not find any pleas in the 

memo of appeal or otherwise to demonstrate good faith and due 

diligence,  and  relied  on  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  through 

Governor  VS Imtiaz  Ali  (2012  SCMR  280)  to  dismiss  the 

appeal.  

3           The  order  sheets  appended  with  the  writ  petition  do 

show  that  the  appeal  was  filed  with  the  Court  of  learned  ADJ-

East  on  14.02.2020,  that  is,  within  24  days  of  the  judgment  in 

the  first  instance,  and  notices  were  issued  for  21.02.2020,  and 

after  a  few  hearings  at  which  the  respondent  did  not  show  up, 

the appeal kept getting adjourned due to Corona pandemic until 

03.09.2020, and the appellant remained represented on all such 

 
 
Writ Petition no. 801 of 2022  

                   -2- 

adjourned  dates.    The  order  sheets  show  that  thereafter,  on 

25.01.2022,  the  Court  of  learned  ADJ-East,  while  deciding  the 

appellant’s application for early hearing, ruled for the first time 

that  the  appeal  should  have  been  filed  before  the  Court  of 

learned ADJ-West, and returned the appeal to the appellant with 

the  words  “…to  file  the  same  before  the  learned  concerned 

court”,  i.e.,  before  the  Court  of  learned  ADJ-West.    In  the 

meantime, the execution proceedings before the executing Court 

in parallel led to the appellant‟s salary being attached vide order 

dated 11.01.2022.   

4          On closer examination, this was not a case of pursuing a 

wrong  remedy  before  the  wrong  forum;  the  appellant  pursued 

the  right  remedy.    Nor  can  it  be  said  stricto  senso  that  the 

appellant  went  before  the  wrong  forum;  he  went  before  the 

correct  appellate  Court,  namely,  the  Court  of  learned  ADJ, 

except that he ended up East instead of West.  The record shows 

that  the  tests  of  good  faith  and  due  diligence  per  section  14  of 

the  Limitation  Act  1908,  which  are  relevant  considerations  for 

the  purposes  of  condonation  under  section  5  per  Khushi 

Muhammad  through  L.Rs.  and  others  VS Mst.  Fazal  Bibi 

and others (PLD 2016 Supreme Court 872) are met in this case.  

The Court of ADJ-East wasn‟t progressing with the appeal until 

the appellant filed his application for early hearing.  Both Covid 

pandemic  and  the  lax  approach  of  the  Court  contributed  to  the 

appellant‟s misfortune.   

5         In so far as the absence of an application for condonation 

of  delay  is  concerned,  it  wasn‟t  fatal  on  the  facts  of  this  case.  

The appellant genuinely believed his appeal never to have been 

time-barred;  for  him  it  was  simply  a  case  of  his  appeal  being 

transferred  from  ADJ-East  to  ADJ-West,  and  he  can‟t  be 

entirely faulted for believing so given the words in the order for 

return  of  appeal  reproduced  above.    Further,  it  was  within  the 

powers  of  the  learned  ADJ-West  to  call  for  filing  of  a 

condonation  application  on  the  peculiar  facts  of  this  case.  

 
 
 
  
Writ Petition no. 801 of 2022  

                   -3- 

Although  Khushi  Mohammad 

requires 

the 

filing  of  a 

condonation application, it does not lay down the inflexible rule 

that  the  Court  is  precluded  for  good  from  calling  upon  the 

appellant to file an application under section 5 for condonation 

of delay in appropriate cases where the appellant believes bona 

fide for objectively demonstrable good reason that there was no 

delay.    While  rejecting  the  principle  actus  curiae  neminem 

gravabit  generally  by  a  majority,  Khushi  Mohammad  did  keep 

open  the  door  for  exceptional  cases  by  stating  that  the  term 

'sufficient cause' had  to be given the widest  possible amplitude 

and in so doing the conditions and principles of section 14 of the 

Limitation Act 1908 could not be left out.  Khushi Mohammad 

held that: 

For  the  purposes  of  determining  whether  in  a  given 
case  sufficient  cause  had  been  made  out 
for 
condonation  of  delay  when  an  appeal  had  been  filed 
before  a  wrong  forum,  no  hard  and  fast  rule  could  be 
laid down; there could not and should not be a simple 
test  for  determining  the  same.  The  establishing  of 
sufficient  cause  was  not  amenable  to  mathematical 
formulae.  Courts  were  called  upon  in  individual  cases 
to  apply  their  judicial  faculties  to  the  facts  placed 
before  them  and  weigh  the  same  in  order  to  decide 
whether  that  ephemeral  threshold  had  been  crossed 
which  meant  that  the  appellant  had  convincingly 
established sufficient cause for condonation of delay.  It 
would be unwise and unadvisable to state for all times 
to  come  that  what  may  or  may  not  constitute  a 
sufficient  cause;  each  case  ought  to  be  decided  on  its 
own merits vis-a-vis the plea of sufficient cause. 

6        On  the  peculiar  facts  of  this  case,  I  find  that  the  test  of 

„sufficient cause‟ is met and accordingly set aside the impugned 

order.    The  appellant‟s  appeal  will  be  deemed  pending  before 

the learned appellate Court for decision on merits. 

Imran 

(Sardar Ejaz Ishaq Khan)     

     Judge  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
