ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 3703 OF 2020. 

MARRIYAM KHALID AND ANOTHER 
VS    
WIQAS MHI UD DIN AND OTHERS 

Petitioners by        

Respondents by   

Date of Hearing 

: 

: 

: 

Mr. Muhammad Ahmed Tariq Fani, Advocate. 

Mr. Naseer Anjum Awan, Advocate. 
(for Respondents No.1 to 3)  

27.04.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:-     Through  the  instant  writ  petition  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  the 

Petitioners  have  assailed  the  concurrent  Judgments  &  Decrees  dated  14.10.2019 

and  06.10.2020  (“Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees”)  passed  by  the  learned 

Senior  Civil  Judge,  (West)  Islamabad  (“Trial  Court”)  and  learned  Additional 

District Judge (West) Islamabad (“Appellate Court”), respectively.  

2. 

Brief facts as per the Memo of Petition are that the Petitioners filed a Suit for 

Recovery  of  Maintenance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.50,000/-  each,  Recovery  of  Past 

Maintenance of Petitioner No.1/Plaintiff No.1 at the Rate of Rs.50,000/- per month 

with  effect  from  June  2017  to  April  2018,  Recovery  of  Future  Maintenance, 

Recovery of Gold Ornaments and Recovery of Delivery/Medical Expenses.  It was 

stated  that the  Petitioner No.1/Plaintiff No.1  and the Respondent No.1/Defendant 

No.1 were married on 12.12.2016 against dower of (a) Rs.10,000/- and (b) learning 

by  heart  Ten  Paras  of  Holy  Quran  and  recitation  of  the  same  during  Nimaz-e-

Taraweeh.  It  was  further  alleged  that  Petitioner  No.1  was  ousted  by  the 

Respondent No. 1 on 19-06-2017. 

3. 

The learned Trial Court framed issues and recorded evidence after which the 

suit of the Petitioners was partially decreed as under:- 

I. 
The plaintiff No.1 is held entitled for recovery of Rs.20,000/- (Twenty Thousand) 
as  monthly  maintenance  allowance  besides  other  household  expenses  which  will  be 
responsibility  of  defendant  No.1  to  bear.  The  amount  so  fixed  shall  be  payable  to  the 
plaintiff No.1 from the date of her joining defendant No.1 as wife. 

II. 
That  plaintiff  No.2  is  held  entitled  for  maintenance  allowance  at  the  rate  of 
Rs.10,000/- (Ten Thousand) per month from the date of her birth till her marriage with 
10%  annual  increase.  The  amount  paid  as  interim  maintenances  shall  be  adjusted 
towards arrears of maintenance allowance. 

 
 
 
 
 
     
2 

W.P. No.3703/2020 

III. 
That  the  plaintiff  No.1  is  held  entitled  for  recovery  of  Rs.57761/-  (Fifty  seven 
Thousand  Seven  Hundred  Sixty  One)  as  consultancy,  medicine  and  baby  care  charges 
from the defendant No.1 

The suit of plaintiff No.1 for recovery of dower amount is also dismissed because as per 
nikahnama  Ex.P2  the  dower  of  plaintiff  No.1  was  fixed  as  Rs.10,000/-  which  has  been 
paid at the time of her marriage. So far, recitation of Holy Quran is concerned, there is 
nothing in that which could be given to the plaintiff No.1. The said clause incorporated in 
column  of  dower  cannot  be  termed  as  dower  in  strict  sense  of  the  dower.  The  suit  of 
plaintiff for recovery of delivery charges of Rs.2,50,000/- gold ornaments of fifteen (15) 
tolas is also dismissed. The suit of plaintiff No.1 for recovery of ten (10) tolas gold has 
already been dismissed vide order dated 21.09.2019 on the basis of special oath taken by 
defendant No.3. 

4. 

Feeling  aggrieved  the  Petitioners  filed  appeal  which  was  dismissed  vide 

Impugned Judgment and Decree dated 06.10.2020.   

5. 

The Petitioners is aggrieved by both the  Impugned Judgments and Decrees 

dated 14.10.2019 and 06.10.2020, hence instant petition. 

6. 

The learned counsel for the Petitioners argued that the Impugned Judgments 

and  Decrees  are  against  the  law  and  facts  of  the  case;  that  the  findings  of  the 

learned  Trial  Court  are  the  result  of  gross  misreading,  non-reading,  non-

appreciation  and  misapplication  of  evidence  available  on  the  record,  which  has 

also not been appreciated by the learned Appellate Court.  He submitted; that the 

Petitioner  alleged  in  her  plaint  that  on  19.06.2017  the  Respondent  threw  out  the 

Petitioner from his house on petty household matter and since then the Petitioners 

have  been  living  with  the  Petitioner  No.1’s  parents  and  all  the  expenses  of 

Petitioners have been borne by them while Respondent No.1 has not paid a penny 

toward  the  Petitioners’  maintenance.      It  is  also  argued  that  the  learned  Family 

Court  did  not  fix  maintenance  for  Petitioner  No.1  on  account  of  her  nursing  the 

Petitioner No.2 who is suckling baby; that the learned Trial Court never considered 

while  deciding  the  Issue  No.4-A  that    payment  of  Haq  Mehar  is  prime 

responsibility  of  husband;  that  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  are  against 

the law and facts and also dictum laid down by the superior courts of the Pakistan 

on the subject; that the learned Trial Court has not gone through the record of the 

case,  which  has  been  produced  before  him  and  decided  the  case  in  arbitrary 

manners. Learned counsel prayed for acceptance of instant petition on behalf of the 

Petitioner and to  set aside the Impugned Judgments and Decrees dated 14.10.2019 

and 06.10.2020  and  to  pass  an  order  to  modify  the  Judgment  and  Decree of  trial 

court as per prayed for mentioned in the suit of the petitioner/plaintiff. 

7. 

On  the  other  hand  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  No.  1  to  3 

contended that the Petitioner No.1/Plaintiff No.1 is not entitled to any maintenance 

 
3 

W.P. No.3703/2020 

because she is  disobedient wife, who  had  been living at the house of her parents 

without  the  consent  of  the  Respondent  No.1/Defendant  No.1.  On  behalf  of  the 

Respondents No.1 to 3, the learned counsel prayed for dismissal of instant petition.  

8. 

9. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record.  

It is noted at the very outset that both counsel have apprised this Court that 

the Respondent No. 1 pronounced divorce upon Petitioner No. 1 after the passage 

of the Impugned Judgment dated 06.10.2020 passed by the learned Appellate Court 

and as such the parties are no longer married to each other. 

10.  Before I go into merits, it has to be borne in mind that this Court in exercise 

of  Constitutional  jurisdiction  does  not  act  like  a  Court  of  appeal.    As  such,  the 

Court cannot embark upon a reappraisal of evidence.  It is settled law that a High 

Court  in  such  jurisdiction  cannot  substitute  the  concurrent  findings  of  the  courts 

below with its own findings solely on the ground that another view was possible on 

the same evidence.  A party approaching the High Court under Article 199 of the 

Constitution has to demonstrate that there is a gross misreading or non-reading of 

evidence or jurisdictional error or such legal infirmity that has caused miscarriage 

of justice.  

11.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  only  raised  objection  to  the 

conclusions  reached  in  respect  of  Issues  No.1  and  4-A  which  pertain  to  past 

maintenance of Petitioner No.1 and deferred dower of recitation of 10 paras of the 

Holy Quran.  

12.  The  Petitioner  No.1 prayed  for Rs.50,000/-  per  month  from  June, 2017 till 

April, 2018 aggregating to Rs.600,000/- as past maintenance from the time when 

she  was  allegedly  ousted  by  the  Respondent  No.1.  The  learned  Trial  Court 

concluded that the Petitioner was not ousted by the Respondent No. 1 based on her 

statement in her cross examination which roughly translates as “It is correct that 

despite  compliance  of  all  the  conditions  as  per  reconciliation,  I  did  not  join  the 

Defendant  and  am  residing  with  my  parents”.  The  learned  counsel  for  the 

Petitioners  contended  that  reliance  on  this  statement  is  erroneous  as  the 

reconciliation referred therein is the pretrial  reconciliation that was carried out as 

part  of  the  proceedings  before  learned  Family  Court  as  such  does  not  have  any 

 
4 

W.P. No.3703/2020 

bearing on the Petitioner No.1’s allegation that she was ousted by respondent No. 

on 19.06.2017, which was prior to filing the suit. 

13.  However, perusal of the Impugned Judgment shows that  apart from relying 

on  the  said  statement,  the  learned  Trial  Court  concluded  that  the  Petitioner  No.1 

was  not  living  at  her  parents’  house  due  to  any  cruel  treatment  on  the  part  of 

Respondent  No.  1  rather  she  has  been  living  with  parents  of  her  own  will  and 

accord. Therefore, she was held not entitled to past maintenance as per settled law 

that a wife is not entitled to maintenance where there is no ouster/desertion.  

14.  The learned counsel is unable to point out any non-reading or misreading of 

evidence  or  any  other  illegality  or  infirmity  in  the  Impugned  Judgments  and 

Decrees  in  respect  of  this  issue.  Therefore,  we  are  not  compelled  to  exercise  the 

discretionary jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 

of Pakistan, 1973 to disturb concurrent findings of fact.   

15.  As  far  as  Issue  No.4-A  is  concerned  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  learned 

counsel for the Respondent that at the time of filing of the suit the parties were still 

married  whereas  dower  concerning  recitation  of  10  paras  of  Holy  Quran  was 

deferred.  According  to  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents  such  prayer  at  that 

time  was  premature  since  the  parties  were  still  married  to  each  other.    However, 

now  that  they  have  divorced,  the  Petitioner  No.1  may  file  fresh  proceedings  to 

claim deferred dower  if she so wishes. On the other hand learned counsel for the 

Petitioner stated that deferred dower is payable on demand at any time.  

16.  The  submissions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  appears  to  be 

correct  in  light  of  the  pronouncement  of  Honourable  Supreme  Court  in  the  case 

titled  Saadia  Usman  VS  Muhammad  Usman  Iqbal  Jadoon,  2009  SCMR  1458, 

wherein  it  was  held  that  prompt  dower  is  payable  on  demand  during  the 

subsistence  of  the  marriage  whereas  deferred  dower  is  payable  at  the  time 

stipulated between the parties but where no time is stipulated, it is payable on 

dissolution of marriage either by death or divorce. Further that deferred dower 

does  not  become  prompt  merely  wife  demands  that.  In  view  thereof  the 

Petitioner No.1 is not entitled to claim deferred dower in the suit filed by her 

as admittedly the parties were married  to each other at such time and no time 

was fixed for payment of deferred dower.  

 
5 

W.P. No.3703/2020 

17.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioners  also  claimed  that  both  the  lower 

courts failed to grant maintenance to the Petitioner No. 1 on account of her nursing 

the Petitioner No. 2.  However, he was unable to point out any prayer in the suit to 

such affect from the plaint. 

18. 

In  view  of  the  foregoing,  no  reasonable  grounds  have  been  made  out  for 

interference  with  the  concurrent  findings  of  the  Courts  below  in  exercise  of  writ 

jurisdiction.  As such, the instant petition is dismissed as being devoid of merit. 

                  (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
                 JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 28th of April, 2022. 

Junaid 

               JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
