ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD 

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Appeal  No.278/  2019 

Khalid Mehmood 
VS
The State and others 

Appellant  by: 
Respondent No.2 to 4 by: 

State by: 

Mr. Nadeem Mukhtar  Ch., Advocate. 
Mr. Sher Afzal Khan Babar, Advocate 
alongwith 
Mr.  Zohaib Hassan Gondal, State counsel 
alongwith  Muhammad Yousaf Sub  
Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

16.09.2020 . 

•••••••••••••••••••••••• 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani.  J.:-  Through  this  appeal  the 

appellant  (Khalid  Mehmood) seeks  setting  aside  of  impugned order 

dated  09.07.2019,  passed  by  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate, 

Section-30, 

Islamabad-West,  whereby  respondents  No.2  to  4 

(hereinafter  be  called  as  "respondents")  were  acquitted  under 

Section 249-A, Cr.P.C. 

2. 

Briefly, the  prosecution case  is  that the  complainant/appellant 

got  registered  F.l.R  No.262 dated  22.09.2016,  under  Sections 279/ 

337-G/  506/  34  P.P.C,  with  Police  Station  Margalla,  Islamabad 

stating  therein  that  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of 

khula  was  pending  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  before  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad;  on  21.05.2016  when  he 

was going to attend the Court on foot, the accused/ respondents 2 to 

4 and 3/4 unknown persons came there on an old model car, and hit 

with  him. Resultantly, he got seriously injured and fell down; that the 

accused  party  threatened  him  that  if  the  family  case  is  not 

withdrawn, they would kill him, hence the above said F.l.R. 

2 

"Crl. Appeal No. 278 of 2019" 

3. 

After registration of F.l.R, the investigation was carried out and 

on conclusion of investigation, report under Section  173 Cr.P.C was 

submitted  before  the  learned  trial  Court  on  14.04.2016  and  the 

charge  was 

framed  on  29.03.2017.  During  the  proceedings, 

respondents  moved  an  application  under  Section  249-A,  Cr.P.C., 

which  was  allowed  vide  impugned  order  dated  09.07.2019.  The 

appellant/  complainant  being aggrieved  of the  impugned  order,  has 

challenged the same through the instant appeal. 

4. 

Learned  counsel 

for 

the  appellant  contended 

that 

the 

impugned  order  has  been  passed  in  haste  without  affording 

opportunity  to  the  prosecution to  lead  their  evidence  and  prove  its 

case;  that  acquittal  of  accused/  respondents  is  not  in  accordance 

with  law and facts of the case. Further contended that the  impugned 

order  is  unreasonable,  perverse  and  manifestly  wrong,  as  such, 

same is  liable to be set-aside. 

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  accused/  respondents 

submitted  that  the  accused/  respondents  are  totally  innocent  and 

have  falsely  been  implicated  in  this  case;  that  after  a  delay  of  33 

days of the  alleged occurrence, the  complainant filed  an application 

before  the  police  for  registration  of  the  instant  case;  that  on 

18.10.2016,  the  complainant  mentioned  the  vehicle  Suzuki  in  the 

FIR,  but  the  said  vehicle  has  not  been  recovered  during  the 

investigation; that false  F.l.R has been registered against them; that 

in  the  MLC  of  the  appellant,  no  injury  has  been  mentioned.  Lastly, 

prayed for dismissal of the instant appeal. The learned State counsel 

supported the version of the appellant. 

6. 

Heard  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 

perused the available record. 

7. 

In 

the 

instant  case,  as  per  version  of 

the  appellanU 

complainant, a  suit for dissolution of marriage on the  basis of  Khula 

was  pending before the learned Judge  Family Court  in  between the 

appellant  and  his  wife  namely  Mst.  Ume  Salma,  daughter  of 

respondent  No.3,  (father-in-law  of  the  appellant).  The  appellant 

3 

"Crl. Appeal  No. 278 of 2019" 

earlier  filed  a  Private  Complaint  under  Section  200  Cr.P.C.  before 

the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  West,  Islamabad,  leveling 

certain  allegations  against  respondent  No.3  and  Mst.Ume  Salma, 

which  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  27.11.2014,  with 

the 

observation that the appellant failed to produce any cogent evidence 

in  the form of oral as well as documentary evidence in  support of his 

allegations  leveled  in  the  complaint.  The  appellant  also  moved  an 

application  under  Section  22-A  of  Cr.P.C.  for  registration  of  a 

criminal  case  against  his father-in-law/respondent  No.3, which  was 

also  dismissed,  but  the  learned  ASJ-West,  Islamabad  vide  order 

dated  17.11.2014  on  the  ground  that  the  appellant  is  engaged  in 

family  litigation  with  respondent  No.3 and  his wife;  that  the  petition 

under Section  22-A,  Cr.P.C. has been moved just  to  exert  pressure 

on them.  Thereafter,  the appellant also  moved an  application  under 

Section  22-B  Cr.P.C.  for  registration  of  case  against  his  father-in  

law, respondent  No.3 and for  recovery of  Rs.2,49,538 and jewellery 

worth  Rs.3, 16,500/-,  which  was  also  dismissed  by  ASJ-West, 

Islamabad vide order dated 17.11.2014. 

8. 

It  also  reveals  from  perusal  of  the  record  that  the  alleged 

occurrence  as  mentioned in  the  F.l.R  is  dated  21.05.2016  whereas 

the F.l.R has been lodged on 22.09.2016, after a  delay of about four 

months; 

therefore,  prima 

facie,  malafide 

involvement  of 

the 

respondents/  accused  in  the  instant  case,  cannot  be  ruled  out. 

Record further transpires that charge in  the instant case was framed 

on  29.03.2017,  but  due  to  the  absence  of  the  complainant/ 

appellant,  proceedings  in  the  case were  stopped and the  case was 

consigned to the  record room under Section 249  Cr. P. C,  vide  order 

dated  13.  09.2017.  The  appellant  moved  an  application 

for 

restoration of the same, which was allowed on 02.11.2017, but after 

restoration  of  the  case,  the  appellant  again  disappeared.  The 

respondents/  accused,  moved  an  application  under  Section  249-A 

Cr.P.C,  which  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  13.03.2019, 

thereafter, repeated summons and warrants were issued against the 

4 

"Crl. Appeal No. 278 of2019" 

complainant/  appellant 

for  production  of  his  evidence,  but 

prosecution failed to produce its evidence. As  such, the  learned trial 

Court  vide  order  dated  09.07.2019,  acquitted  the  respondents/ 

accused  under  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C.  The  learned  trial  Court  after 

proper  appreciation  of  the  material  available  on  record,  has  rightly 

come  to  a  conclusion  of  acquitting  the  accused/respondents, 

keeping in  view the facts  and circumstances  of the  instant case,  as 

there was no probability of conviction of the respondents, even if the 

entire prosecution evidence is summoned and recorded. 

9. 

Jurisdiction  under Section 249-A Cr.P.C can be exercised suo 

motu and  no formal  application is  required when  it  is  found  that  the 

charge against the accused is  groundless and there  is  no possibility 

of  his  conviction  even  after  recording  of  evidence;  provision  of 

Section  249-A  Cr.P.C  is  meant  to  decide  criminal  case  without 

completion of trial and in  order to invoke powers under section 249-A 

Cr.P.C or 265-K  Cr.P.C  as the case  may be,  the  Court  has to fulfill 

the following three conditions:- 

(i)  The Court shall hear the prosecutor; 
(ii)  The Court shall  hear the accused; and 
(iii)  The  Court  shall 

into  consideration 
take 
overall  facts  and  circumstances  and  the 
evidence. 

No  other  embargo  exists  upon  the  learned  trial  Court  to  exercise 

powers under  Section 249-A Cr.P.C. The said  provision is  meant to 

prevent rigours of prolonged trial. Moreover, the use of expression at 

"any stage  of the  case"  is  indicative enough  of  the  intention  of  the 

legislature  that  to  exercise  powers  under  Section  249-A,  Cr.P.C  or 

265-K  Cr.P.C,  an  application  in  each  and  every  case  is  not 

mandatory and  any  such stage could  be the  very  initial stage,  after 

taking cognizance or it would be a  middle stage after recording some 

proceedings, or even, it could be latter stage as well. Reliance in  this 

regard  is  placed  upon  the  case  reported  as  "Chairman  Agricultural 

Development  Bank  of  Pakistan  &  another  VS  Mumtaz  Khan"  (PLO 

2010  SC  665)  wherein the  Hon'ble  Supreme Court  of  Pakistan has 

held as under:- 

5 

"Crl. Appeal No. 278 of 2019" 

"  We  may  observe  that  prior  to  introduction  of  the 
Islamic provisions in  the  Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 an 
acquittal  of  an  accused  person  could  be  recorded 
when  the  prosecution failed  to prove  its case  against 
him beyond  reasonable doubt  or when faced with two 
possibilities,  one  favouring  the  prosecution  and  the 
other  favouring  the,  defence,  the  Court  decided  to 
extend  the benefit  of doubt  to the accused person and 
an acquittal could also be recorded under section 249- 
A,  Cr.  P.  C.  or section 265-K, Cr.  P.  C.  when  the  charge 
against 
to  be 
the  accused  person  was  found 
groundless  or there  appeared  to  be  no probability  of 
his being convicted of any offence." 

It  is  requirement of law that trial of an accused should  be concluded 

within a  reasonable time and speedy trial is  right of the accused. The 

respondents stood remained in  the dock since the year 2016, but till 

date neither the complainant nor his private witnesses  have entered 

appearance and in  this way, more than three years  have been taken 

by the  prosecution for  recording its evidence, which  has badly failed 

to  discharge  its duty.  It  is  well  saying  of  law that  "justice  delayed  is 

justice  denied" Section 344, Cr.P.C. binds the Court that without any 

reasonable  cause  proceedings  in  the  trial  may  not  be  postponed. 

Law on the  point is  very much established as has been laid down in 

case  titled  "The  State  v.  Jagmal  Singh  alias  Madhu  Singh  and  4 

others" (1970 PCr.LJ 649) wherein it  has been observed as follows: 

"It  is  well-settled  that  the  accused  have  a  right  to  a 
speedy  trial and  the  Courts are  not justified  in  granting 
adjournments  to the prosecution indefinitely.  " 

It  has been further  held in  Abdul  Razak Gabole and 2  others v.  The 

State (2012 PCr.LJ 999) as follows:-- 

"Let us first  discuss the minutiae  and niceties of section 
249-A, Cr.P.C.  which empowers  the  court  to  acquit  the 
accused  at  any  stage  of  the  case  if after  hearing  the 
prosecutor  and  the  accused  and for  the  reasons  to  be 
recorded, court considers that  the  charge is  groundless 
or  that  there  is  no  probability  of  the  accused  being 
convicted  of any  offence.  It is  clear from  the  language 
that  while 
embodied  under  section  249-A,  Cr.P.C. 

6 

"Crl. Appeal  No. 278 of 2019" 

deciding application in  this particular section,  court has 
to  consider  two  crucial points,  whether  the  charge  is 
groundless  or  whether  there  is  no  probability  of  the 
accused  being  convicted  of any  offence.  This  provision 
gives  right  to  accused  person  to  move  application for 
his acquittal at any stage  of the proceedings  which may 
be  even  'prior to  framing  of  charge  or  recording  of 
evidence or at any subsequent  stage  and there is no bar 
imposed  by law conditional to stage  of proceedings.  In 
order to decide this application in  true spirit and scope, 
it is  necessary for the  court to  examine  entire  material 
available  on  record  and  hold  in  the  order  in  case  of 
acquittal  that  the  charge is  groundless  or that  there  is 
no  probability  of  the  accused  being  convicted  of any 
offence  and  in  case  of dismissal of application  moved 
under  section  249-A,  Cr.P.C.  court  should  discuss  the 
entire material available on record with probable  cause 
on  the  basis  of  which  reasonable  grounds  appear  to 
continue the trial." 

In  the  case  reported  as  "Sanaul/ah 

VS 

The  State  through 

Prosecutor  Genera/"(2015 P.Cr.L.J. 382 (Balochistan),  it  has been 

held that as under:- 

"It  is  well settled  principle of administration  of justice 
and rule of prudence stipulates  that  the prosecution has 
to prove its case beyond  the shadow  of any doubt.  It is 
a well-settled rule of prudence  that  the accused has not 
to  prove  his  innocence  until  and  unless  proven  guilty. 
The golden  principle of administration  of criminal law 
under  the  Islamic  Jurisprudence  is  that  benefit  of 
slightest  doubt shall necessary be extended  in favour  of 
the accused and not otherwise." 

10. 

The  interference  of  this  Court  would  be  warranted,  if  the 

reasoning  of  the  trial  Court  in  acquitting  an  accused  is  perverse, 

artificial or ridiculous.  It  is  only in  an exceptional case that this Court 

will  interfere  by  setting  aside  the  acquittal  of  an  accused.  Mere 

nomination  of 

the  accused  person 

in 

the  FIR,  without  any 

corroboratory  material,  is  not sufficient for  conviction.  In  the  instant 

case,  number  of  opportunities  were  granted  to  the  appellant  to 

produce his evidence but he failed to appear before the  learned trial 

Court  inspite  issuance  of  summons  and  warrants  against  him  and 

7 

"Crl.  Appeal  No.  278  of 2019" 

keeping in  view the  conduct of the  appellant, the  learned trial  Court 

has  properly  appreciated  the  material  available  on  record  and 

acquitted the accused/ respondents through a well-reasoned order. 

11. 

In  the  case  reported  as  "Sanaul/ah  VS  The  State  through 

Prosecutor  General" (2015 P.Cr.L.J. 382 (Balochistan), it  has been 

held that as under:- 

"It is  well settled  principle of administration  of justice 
and  rule  of prudence  stipulates  that  the  prosecution 
has to prove its case beyond  the shadow  of any doubt. 
It is  a  well-settled  rule of prudence  that  the  accused 
has not  to prove his innocence until and unless proven 
guilty.  The  golden  principle  of  administration  of 
criminal law  under  the  Islamic Jurisprudence  is  that 
benefit  of slightest  doubt  shall necessary be  extended 
in favour  of the accused and not otherwise. 11 

12.  After  considering  the  case  by  all  its  pros  and  cons,  the  tout  

ensemble of the same is that to continue with the proceedings of the 

case  by  the  learned  trial  Court  any  more  against  the  respondents 

would  be  an  abuse  of  process  of  law  and  wastage  of  precious 

judicial  time,  as  keeping in  view the  above facts  and  circumstances 

of  the  instant  case,  there  is  no  probability  of  conviction  of  the 

respondents. I  have found no illegality or irregularity in  the impugned 

order  passed  by  the  learned trial  Court,  warranting  interference  by 

this  Court.  Resultantly,  the  instant  appeal  having  no  force,  is 

dismissed. 

=(Gl4lJLAMAZAM QAMB~NI) 
JUDGE 

Announced In  Open Court On this  21st day of September, 2020. 

~OGE 

