ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Appeal  No.382/2019 
Tanvir Hussain 
VS
The State & another 

Appellant by: 

M/ s Raheema Khan,  Minahil Ali and Saad Satti, 
Advocates for appellant. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Zaheer Ullah Jan, Advocate for Respondent 
No.2. 
Mr. Hasnain Haider Thaheem, State Counsel. 
Nadeem Mughal, S.I., P.S. Secretariat, Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

15.07.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI, 

I:  Through  this  criminal  appeal,  the 

appellant  has  called in  question judgment  of the  learned  Additional Sessions 

Judge  (East)/Gender  Based  Violence  Court  East-West,  Islamabad,  dated 

04.11.2019, whereby Tanvir Hussain (appellant) has been convicted in case FIR 

No.101,  dated  05.06.2017, under  Section  365-B/376  PPC,  P.S.  Secretariat, 

Islamabad  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  life  (R.I.)  along  with  fine  of 

Rs.100,000/-, in  default  whereof, the  appellant  shall further  undergo  six  (06) 

months simple imprisonment. Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. has been extended 

to the appellant. 

2. 

Brief facts referred in the instant case are that on the complaint filed by 

Muhammad Sibtain (Respondent No.2) the  aforesaid FIR No.101/17 has  been 

registered against the  appellant having allegations that on 22.05.2017, her sister 

namely Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom went missing and  despite hectic efforts she was 

not traced out. On further inquiry, it came to the knowledge of Respondent No.2 

that  the  appellant  used  to  tease  and  follow Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom. After the 

arrest  of appellant,  report  under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. was  sent  up  against the 

appellant  to  face trial,  whereupon  charge  under  Section 365-B/376 PPC was 

framed against the appellant on 07.11.2017, to which the appellant pleaded not 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  2 

guilty and claimed trial. Accordingly, the prosecution produced five witnesses in 

order to bring guilt of the appellant home, whereafter the appellant recorded his 

statement under Section 342 Cr.P.C. on 04.10.2019. Ultimately, the learned trial 

Court, vide  impugned  judgment  dated  04.11.2019, sentenced the  appellant to 

undergo imprisonment for life (R.I.)  along with fine of Rs.100,000/-, in default 

whereof,  the  appellant  shall  further  undergo  six  (06)  months  simple 

imprisonment.  Benefit  of  Section 382-B Cr.P.C.  has  been  extended  to  the 

appellant. Hence, the instant criminal appeal. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  appellant  contends  that  impugned  judgment  is 

contrary to law having been passed in a hasty manner and without appreciation 

of  evidence; that  impugned  judgment  is  the  result  of  mis-reading and  non  

reading of the  evidence brought  on  record; that  alleged abductee i.e. sister of 

Respondent No.2 herself refused to  get medically examined, which otherwise 

negates the entire story of the prosecution; that the learned trial Court has not 

appreciated the  record brought  in  shape  of Nikahnama, which has  also been 

verified by  the  ASI; that  the  alleged abductee solemnized marriage with  the 

appellant before registration of the  present case, who  filed private  complaint, 

accompanied with  an  affidavit, wherein  she  categorically contended  that  she 

willfully left her house and  she being sui-juris has a right to contract marriage; 

that the learned trial Court fell in error while passing the impugned judgment 

that  a  suit  for jactitation of marriage has been filed, but  a  decree of conjugal 

rights in favour of the appellant has been awarded; that impugned judgment is 

based on surmises and  conjectures having been passed in  a  slipshod manner, 

therefore, the same may be set-aside and appellant be acquitted of the charge. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.2 opposed the filing of instant criminal appeal  on the  grounds 

that prosecution has produced sufficient and unimpeachable evidence to connect 

the appellant with the commission of offence; that the Nikahnama produced by 

Crl. Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  3 

the  defence is fake and  fictitious one and  this fact has  been proved  from the 

statement of complainant  coupled  with  the  statement  of complainant's  sister; 

that the prosecution has succeeded to establish its case beyond any  shadow of 

doubt,  on  the  basis  of  which  the  learned  trial  Court  has  rightly  passed  the 

impugned judgment, which is liable to be maintained. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals that  PW-1 Muhammad  Sibtain (complainant) 

lodged  the complaint Exh.PA on  05.06.2017, which has been converted in  FIR 

(Exh.PB), having allegations that he is permanent resident of District Hangu and 

currently residing within vicinity of Bari Imam along with  his family, whereas 

his sister namely Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom, being a student of B.A.  in IMCG, Sector 

F-10/2, Islamabad, went to the said college on 22.05.2017, at about 7 a.m., but she 

did  not  return till  evening. On  inquiry, it  revealed that  one  Tanveer Hussain 

(appellant) i.e. wagon driver of Route 120, chased and abducted his sister for the 

purpose of Zina, whereupon  the said accused person was tried to be contacted 

on his phone, but he was not reachable, even his family members were contacted, 

but  to  no  avail.  After  the  arrest  of  appellant  and  recovery  of  Mst.  Umm-e  

Kalsoom, the latter recorded her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. before the 

learned Magistrate on 05.07.2017, referred as Exh.PH/1-6. The police completed 

investigation and  submitted  final report  under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. against the 

appellant in terms of Section 365-B/376 PPC and he was charged by the learned 

Trial Court in same offences vide charged dated 07.11.2017. 

7. 

The  prosecution  in  order  to  prove  the  case  has  produced  PW-1 

Muhammad  Sibtain  (complainant) i.e. real  brother  of  alleged  abductee,  who 

reiterated  his  stance  referred  in  complaint  Exh.P A  and  contends  that  after 

registration of FIR the police has arrested the appellant and recovered his sister 

Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom from  Bhara  Kahu,  whereafter  the  latter  recorded  her 

statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. before the concerned Magistrate and herself 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  4 

opted  to go with  him. During  the course of cross-examination,  PW-1 Muhammad 

Sibtain acknowledged  that  he  moved  application  Exh.PA on  05.06.2017 and  the 

delay in filing of complaint  is due  to the fact that he was personally  searching for 

her sister. He also went  to Muzaffarabad  on 28.05.2017 and  on most occasions the 

sister  used  to  go  to  college  with  the  appellant.  It  was  also  confirmed  from  the 

evidence that  complainant  was not aware whether  his sister was abducted  by the 

appellant  on 28.05.2017, rather  it was assured  to him on 04.06.2017 that  his sister 

was abducted  by appellant. 

8. 

The star witness  of this case is Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom i.e. alleged  abductee 

who  appeared  as  PW-2 and  contended  that  on  22.05.2017, she  left her  home  to 

attend  the  college  as  per  her  routine  and  when  she  boarded  in  the  public 

transport  wagon,  she was told by the appellant  that a route  has been arranged  by 

the  police  and  he  will  drop  her  to  the  college. She further  stated  that  she  was 

taken to Faizabad  instead  of to her college and  on her inquiry  from appellant  that 

why he had  brought  her to Faizabad the appellant  told her to stay silent and they 

are going to Muzaffarabad.  She was also directed  to stay silent otherwise  he will 

kill her brothers.  As per her stance, she was taken to Muzaffarabad  and  locked in 

a room,  where  appellant  used  to torture  and  sexually abuse  her.  After three  (03) 

days  of such  incident,  she  was  taken  to  another  place where  she  was  forced  to 

sign  and  affix  thumb  impression  on  blank  papers.  After  a  month,  PW-2 Mst. 

Umm-e-Kalsoom convinced  the appellant  to return  home at Islamabad  and while 

on their way back to home, they were apprehended  by the police in Bhara Kahu. 

9. 

During  the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-2  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom 

acknowledged  the following facts. 

i. 

zz. 
tu. 
iv. 
v. 

Appellant  was  driving  taxi  at  that  time.  He  was  alone  in  said 
taxi. I cannot tell  the  time of reaching Muzaffarabad as I toas not 
having a watch with  me. 
I reached Faizabad during  morning  time. 
We went  to Muzaffarabad through coaster. 
Other passengers were also traveling in said coaster. 
My  eyes were not closed at that time. 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  5 

vi. 

I remained silent  in coaster due to fear. 
Accused  has not showed me any gun  or pistol etc. 

in 

xz. 

xii. 
xui. 

to  court 

in  Muzaffarabad.  I  remained 

tni. 
tnu.  My family  members were aware about the contact with accused. 
I was provided food by the accused in above said room. 
ix. 
I  never  went 
x. 
Muzaffarabad for more than a month. 
When  I  marked  my  thumb  impression  on  the  alleged  blank 
papers, I was not intoxicated. 
I am waiting for  my  result of graduation. 
I can  read sign  board easily,  I have not seen any  sign  on  the day 
of our arrest. 
It is correct that thumb  impression and signature on  Exh.DA  are 
mtne. 
It  is  correct  that  I  have  refused  to  be  medically  examined. 
Volunteered that I did so  to save respect of my family. 
It  is  correct  that  I  have  not  applied  for  Khula  till  today. 
Volunteered that there was no Nikah solemnized between me and 
there  is  no  need  to  filing  any  suit  for  Khula  or 
accused, 
dissolution of marriage. 
I came back to my  house on 05.07.2017. 

xiv. 

xvii. 

xtn. 

xv. 

10. 

The prosecution has produced Investigating Officer of this case i.e. PW-4 

Imran  Haider/ ASI, who  acknowledged  that  he  went  to  Muzaffarabad  on 

23.06.2017 to  search for  the  accused person, where  it  was  transpired  that  the 

appellant and  Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom have solemnized Nikah, regarding which 

he also obtained certified copy of Nikahnama, referred as Exh.PE. On 04.07.2017, 

appellant  and  alleged  abductee  were  arrested  from  Bhara  Kahu  on  spy 

information. Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom recorded her  statement under  Section 164 

Cr.P.C., whereafter  offence under  Section 376 PPC  was  incorporated  in  the 

report. He also acknowledged that there is no medical evidence for the offence 

under Section 376 PPC and  it was added  due to statement of alleged abductee 

recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. The abductee refused to get herself medically 

examined.  Investigating  Officer  further  confirmed  that  he  recorded  two 

witnesses of  Nikah.  He  has  no  knowledge of  the  fact that  any  statement  of 

abductee was recorded by the Magistrate at Muzaffarabad nor he recorded the 

statement  of  any  passenger  of  coaster in  which  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoomn had 

i 

frl.  Appeal No.382/2019 

Page  I  6 

travelled.  The  prosecution  has  produced  PW-5  Malik  Farrukh  Nadeem, 

Ex-Magistrate, 1st Class, who recorded the statement of Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom, 

11.  After recording  of abovementioned evidence the  statement  of appellant 

was recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C. in which he denied the entire incident, 

rather took the stance of marriage with alleged abductee and produced  attested 

copy of complaint under  Section 107 Cr.P.C., affidavit of cursory  statement of 

Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom recorded by learned Judicial Magistrate at Muzaffarabad, 

copy of Nikahnama  and  attested  copy of ex-parte judgment  and  decree dated 

28.06.2019, passed  by Judge Family Court, Islamabad. All the  documents have 

been referred as Mark-C to  Mark-F. The principal stance of appellant  has been 

recorded in his answer to Question No.2, which is as under: 

Q.  No.2: 

Ans: 

the 

real 

It is  in  the  prosecution evidence  that on 22.05.2017,  you 
abducted  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom  upon  which  PW-1 
Muhammad  Sabtain  submitted  application  Exh.PA 
against  you 
in  PS  Secretariat  upon  which  FIR 
No.101/1.7,  dated  05.06.2017  U/S  365-B  Exh.PB  was 
registered against you  by PW-4  Imran Haider ASI.  What 
do you  say about it? 
It  is  incorrect  that  I  abducted Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom on 
22.05.2017  but 
facts  which  complainant 
(Muhammad  Sabtain)  has  deliberately  suppressed from 
that  on 
the  police  and  this  Honourable  Court  are 
22.05.2017,  the alleged abductee herself went  to my  home 
along  with  me  situated  at  Muzaffarabad  with  her  own 
free  will.  She  lived with  my family  for  some days and his 
brother  (complainant)  visited  our  house  to  persuade  her 
sister  to  come  back but  she  refused.  On  25.05.2017, Mst. 
Umm-e-Kalsoom went  to  the  Court of Judicial Magistrate 
Muzzafarabad  and filed  a  complaint  under  Section  107 
Cr.P.C.  against the complainant Muhammad  Sibtain and 
three  others  in  which  she  contended  that  she  is  sui juris 
and her family  wanted  to  marry her with  an old man and 
threatening her.  She also reaffirmed the same story  before 
the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  in  her  cursory  statement 
the  said 
recorded  before  the  Court.  Even  after  filing 
complaint  against  her  own 
his  brother 
complainant  visited  our home at Muzaffarabad and  tried 
for  compromise with  her own  sister on  pretext  that  they 
will  manage  her  marriage  as  per  customs  of  the  locality 
and  to  come  back  to  their house  as  her  act  would  bring 

family, 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  7 

disgrace  to  their family.  It is  worth  mentioning  here  that 
Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom (alleged abductee) insisted  that she 
knew  her family  very  well and  that she  will go  back only 
to  her  family  if  her  Nikkah  is  performed  with  me. 
Thereafter Nikkah  was conducted on  04.06.2017 with  her 
own free  will.  Upon  this  complainant got enraged and he 
lodged a fake and fictitious  criminal case against me. It is 
further  noteworthy  that  we  both  came  back  to  Islamabad 
as  family  of  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom  was  insisting  that 
they will  only  compromise if we  both  came  to their house 
and seek forgiveness.  When  both of us  reached Islamabad, 
the  complainant's family  got  arrested  me  and  threatened 
Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom  to  give  statement  as  per  their 
direction  otherwise  they  would  kill  her.  Thereupon Mst. 
Umm-e-Kalsoom  got  recorded  statement  under  undue 
influence and coercion.  Complaint made a false complaint 
against  me  after  consultation  and  deliberation  and  in 
connivance  with  local  police  got  registered  this fake  case 
against  me.  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom is  my  legally wedded 
wife  and  I  also  instituted  a  suit  for  conjugal  rights  in 
Family  Court  Islamabad  and  the  same  has  been  decreed 
ex-parte in my favour  on 28.06.2019. 

12.  While considering the entire background of the case in the light of above 

evidence, there  is no evidence qua  the  offence under  Section 376 PPC and  the 

appellant was acquitted of said charge by the learned Trial Court, therefore, the 

only question left for determination of this Court is to the extent of abduction of 

PW-2 Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom in terms of Section 365-B PPC. 

13. 

In  order  to  understand  the  proposition,  it  is  necessary  to  go  through 

requirement  of  Section 365-B PPC, whereby  the  primary  ingredients  are  as 

under: 

a)  Who kidnaps or abducts any woman; 

b)  With intent that she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she 

will be compelled, to marry any person against her will; and, 

c)  Or in order that she may be forced, or seduced to illicit intercourse. 

14.  While considering the  above referred  principles, it  is  obligatory to  the 

prosecution  to  prove  that  PW-2  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom was  forced  by  the 

appellant  for  her  removal  from  one  place  to  another  under  compulsion  or 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  8 

through  inducement by deceitful means and  objection of such removal must be 

to compel her  to marry  against her will or in order that  she could be forced or 

seduced to illicit intercourse. Whereas, there is no element of illicit intercourse in 

this case as she was not  medically examined, therefore, the only issue left is to 

the extent of simple abduction or kidnapping, which has to be seen in the light of 

definition of kidnapping,  meaning "whoever  takes  or entices  any  person  without  his 

or her consent"  and abduction, meaning "whoever  by force compels or by any  deceitful 

means  induces  any  person  to go from  any  place is said  to  abduct  that  person  in  terms  of 

Section  362 PPC".  Therefore, in order to prove these ingredients it is necessary to 

go  through  the  contents  of  statement  of  PW-2 Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom, who 

acknowledged that  she travelled from Bari Imam to Faizabad in the appellant's 

taxi, from where tickets to Muzaffarabad were purchased and when she seated in 

the passenger coaster along with other passengers she never made hue and cry, 

rather remained silent despite the fact that the appellant was not allegedly armed 

with any gun  or pistol at  that  time. This particular scenario provided  by PW-2 

Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom reflects that  the  element of inducement  by  threat  is not 

visible in this case.  When the appellant has neither used force nor ordered its use 

and there is no deceitful means used in this case, the element of abduction is not 

proved.  Reliance is  placed  upon  PLD  2009  SC 814  (Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz 

Sharif VS  The  State). 

15. 

PW-2 Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom also  recorded  her  statement  in  terms  of 

Section 164 Cr.P.C. which is prima facie  case against the appellant, however she 

has given the stance similar to her statement before the learned Trial Court, but 

certain differences have been noted, especially when she acknowledged that: 

bi"' J{·="';; '( £ ~rl. ),,_i.f Li./.. J £ .:;)1.;w,j~i.f..  ~.nU.hi..f. L .:..v-n..£'.;) ),.;J ~ i./.. J~ 1 j!i'" 

"-k'I' {l.i~ .riv L/..f  'fi )''-k'}.f J,1,,. ...frLJ!w1L1I  if L.fr_L,,f 

16.  While considering  the  above stance recorded  under Section 164 Cr.P.C. 

Exh.PH/1-6, the abductee acknowledged the execution of Nikah in presence of a 

_Crl. Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  9 

lawyer and  Moulvi (Nikahkhwan), rather  used  the wordings  that,  11 c:.,b1 .rJi.,,  L {..f 

k'I' {".  This aspect left nothing in favour of the prosecution, rather demolished the 

entire case, especially when a girl like Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom, who is a graduate 

from  a  college, aged  about  21/22  years,  fully  understands  the  nature  of  her 

statement  and  the  concept  of  Nikah,  whereas  this  factum,  if  placed  in 

juxtaposition  with 

the  Nikahnama  Mark-E,  which  is  admitted  by  the 

Investigating Officer along with the documents placed in defence as Exh.DB/1 to 

Exh.DB/ 4 containing the proceedings under  Section 107 Cr.P.C. as recorded by 

the  learned  Judicial Magistrate at  Muzaffarabad, wherein  statement  of alleged 

abductee was recorded  on her own application, as a result  of same Nikah was 

solemnized/ executed.  The  Investigating  Officer further  confirmed  the  Nikah 

from two  of its witnesses and  placed certified copy of Nikahnama  along with 

final report. 

17. 

In addition to above, the appellant has produced certified copy of suit for 

restitution of conjugal rights along with decree passed by the Judge Family Court 

(East), Islamabad, dated  28.06.2019, in which PW-2 Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom never 

put her appearance despite awarding of a number of opportunities. Resultantly, 

she was proceeded ex-parte. All these elements cumulatively create an effect that 

a disgusting trend  in  our society is emerging, whereby firstly a girl elopes with 

her paramour, solemnizes marriage with him and then she takes a somersault on 

joining her  parents,  even implicates her  husband  and  in-laws on  asking of her 

parents,  whereas  such  kind  of disputes  have  to  be  decided  by  the  concerned 

Family Court being the suitable forum. 

18. 

The learned Trial Court has referred in Para-10 of the impugned judgment 

that,  11 whereas  the  learned  counsel  for  complainant  also  stated  that  Mst.  Umm-e  

Kalsoom also filed  suit for jactitation  of marriage". This aspect has specifically been 

confronted to the complainant side to produce any document in this regard but it 

has been conceded before this Court by the complainant side that  no such suit 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  10 

was  ever  filed  nor  available on  record,  therefore, the  learned  trial  Court  has 

incorrectly passed such observation. On the other hand, the decree passed by the 

Family Judge, Islamabad in suit for restitution of conjugal rights titled, "Tanveer 

Hussain  VS  Mst.  Umm-e-Kalsoom"  holds  the field. It  is trite law that  decision of 

superior Courts, including the Hon'ble Supreme Court, on the plea of Nikah will 

have effect on same issue before the Family Court and the decision on behalf of 

Family Court will have binding effect on the decision in criminal trial. In such 

type of cases the apex Court  in case reported  as PLD  1984 SC 95 (Muhammad 

Azam VS Muhammad  Iqbal) has held that as under: 

"That  the  decision  of a  superior  Court  including  the  Supreme  Court  on 
the plea ofNikah  will have effect on the same issue before a Family Court; 

That at the  trial level  the decision in  this behalf of the Family  Court will 
have binding  effect on the decision in criminal  trial; 

That  unless  there  is  pressing  unavoidable  need  to  proceed  with  the 
criminal  trial  (as  is  in  the present  case  to  record essential evidence only 
regarding  which  there  might  be  danger  of  it  being  lost)  the  Criminal 
Court should stay  the proceedings and await  the  result  of the contest on 
issue of Nikah  before  the  Family  Court,  if the suit  is already pending  or 
is filed  during  the  criminal  trial  proceedings;  That otherwise  too  it  can 
ask  the party/person  concerned to  seek a  decision  on  that  issue from  the 
Family  Court  and  on  refusal  or  failure  in  this  behalf  to  raise  the 
necessary  presumptions  That  in  the  last-mentioned  eventuality 
the 
criminal 
trial  would  Proceed  with  no  change  except  firstly,  as 
aforementioned about certain presumptions,  and secondly,  that the  issue 
concerned  shall  be  decided as  nearly  as  possible  in  accordance  with  the 
spirit  underlying  the procedure prescribed by the Family  Courts Act  and 
the  rules  thereunder,  in  so far  as  they  do  not  come  in  conflict  with  the 
procedure  for  the  criminal  trial-the  provisions  regarding  compulsory 
two efforts at compromise would  then not apply; 

That in  case  the proceedings of the criminal  trial are stayed  the accused; 
might  be  released on bail so as  to enable him  them  to pursue  the;  Family 
Court case and refuse/cancel the same in exceptional appropriaiel cases; 

That  in  case  it  is just  and  proper and  the  Sessions Judge  or Additional 
Sessions Judge  is empowered  to  try  both  the  matters  under  both  system 
of  laws,  the  trial  by  the  same  Court  would  not  be  illegal  provided  the 
case under  the Family Law is decided in the first  instance ; 
That when any  case on the criminal side has reached the appeal stage but 
the  issue  is  still  pending  before  the  Family  Court,  the  hearing  of  the 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  11 

appeal  should  be  stayed for  a  reasonable  time  to  await  the  decision  by 
that forum  and  in  case  of intentional  or otherunse  inordinate  delay,  to 
take  appropriate  measures  in  re-consideration  of  any  concession 
including  bail and the stay, whether it is not being misused. 

That when  the same question is pending before the Federal Shariat Court 
and  the  High  Court  the  latter  would  await  the  decision  by  the former 
Court." 

19. 

In view of the  above factual legal position, the forced removal of PW-2 

Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom from  one  place to  another  by  compulsion or  through 

deceitful means is not  proved, and  even her  removal to  compel her  to  marry 

against her will is not justified in the light of judgment and decree passed by the 

Family Court. Reliance is placed upon 2020 YLR  404 Quetta  (Humayoun  Saeed 

VS The State). 

20. 

The bare  perusal  of statement of PW-2 Mst. Umm-e-Kalsoom discloses 

that  it  is not  believable that  she was  abducted from  Bari Imam and  taken to 

Faizabad  for  onward  travelling  to  Muzaffarabad  as  despite  availability of 

numerous opportunities she never raised any hue and cry, rather moved along 

with the appellant, which is against the concept of kidnapping and abduction, as 

such, offence under Section 365-B PPC is not attracted. Reliance is placed upon 

2015 P.Cr.Ll  197 Lahore  (Ghulam  Hussain  VS  The State).  Even her  testimony 

remained uncorroborated and based upon untrustworthy evidence, which seems 

an  unreliable story  and  even  the  very  registration of case with  delay  of one 

month  is  not  justified.  Reliance is  placed  upon  2014  P.Cr.Ll  1753  Lahore 

(Muhammad  Qasim  VS  The State),  2018 MLD  508 Lahore  (Rehmat  Ali  VS  The 

State),  2019 SCMR  1048 (Muhammad  Siddique  VS  The State)  and  1969 SCMR 

491  (Hussain Ali Shah VS Crown). 

21.  Another  important  aspect  creating  a  marked  difference  in  entire 

prosecution case is the registration of FIR with  delay of almost a month of the 

alleged  incident  with  no  plausible  explanation  and  even  date  of  alleged 

abduction  i.e.  22.06.2017 was  not  proved  independently  by  the  prosecution, 

Crl.  Appeal  No.382/2019 

Page  I  12 

whereby  it  was  settled  that  in  absence of any  plausible explanation, the  apex 

Court had always considered the delay in lodging of FIR to be fatal and it casted 

suspicion on the prosecution story, extending the benefit of doubt to the accused. 

Reliance is placed upon PLD 2019 SC 64 (Mst. Asia  Bibi VS The State). 

22. 

From the facts and circumstances narrated  above, I  am persuaded to hold 

that  prosecution has badly  failed to  bring the  guilt  of appellant  home  and  the 

learned Trial Court was not justified in convicting the appellant which is based 

on  the  untrustworthy  and  uncorroborated  evidence  produced  by  PW-2 Mst. 

Umm-e-Kalsoom, which  even  otherwise  is  full  of  material  contradictions, 

especially when there is no explanation that why she remained silent on her way 

from Bari Imam to  Faizabad and  then  to  Muzaffarabad during  her  journey in 

public transport.  Furthermore,  the  unexplained  delay  in  lodging  crime report 

and the absence of medical evidence further cast serious doubt, benefit of which 

shall be extended to the appellant as a matter  of right. Reliance is placed upon 

1995 SCMR 1345 (Tariq Pervez VS The State). 

23. 

In  view  of  above,  the  instant  appeal  is  ALLOWED,  the  impugned 

judgment dated  04.11.2019 is hereby SET ASIDE,  the appellant  is ACQUITTED 

of the charge in case FIR No.lfll. dated 05.06.2017, under Section 365-B/376 PPC 

P.S.  Secretariat, Islamabad and  he shall be released forthwith, if not required in 

any other case. 

Announced  in open Court on: 24.07.2020. 

(MOHSINAKHT AR  KAY A1QI) 
JUDGE 

KhalidZ. 

JUDGE 

