ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 398 OF 2020 

Moeen Adnan Taj 
VS    
Mst. Rabia Arif and others  

Petitioner by       : 

Mr. Abdur Rashid Awan, Advocate. 

Respondent by  : 

Muhammad Wajid Hussain Mughal, Advocate. 
(for Respondent No.1) 

Date of hearing     : 

17.02.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:- 

Through 

the 

instant  writ  petition, 

the 

Petitioner  (Moeen  Adnan  Taj)  assailed  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  14.12.2019 

(“Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree”)  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge  (West),  Islamabad  (“Appellate  Court”),  whereby  his  appeal  was  partially 

allowed  and  consequently  the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  19.09.2019  passed  by 

the  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge/Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad-West  (“Trial 

Court”) in the Suit for Recovery of Maintenance and Dowry Articles filed by the 

Respondent No. 1 was modified only to the extent of her claim of dowry articles.  

2. 

Brief  facts,  as  per  Memo  of  Petition,  are  that  the  Petitioner  was  married  to 

Respondent No.1 (Mst. Rabia Arif ) on 26.02.2011. Mehr was fixed at Rs. 60,000/- 

out  of  which  Rs.  5,000/-  was  paid  on  the  day  of  marriage  whereas  the  remaining 

Mehr was paid by the Petitioner to Respondent No.1 on 03.03.2011. At the time of 

marriage,  gold  ornaments  weighing  about  10 

tolas  and  valuing  about 

Rs.1,000,000/- were also given by the parents of the Petitioner to Respondent No. 

1, which have been misappropriated by her.  

3. 

Further  that  soon  after  the  marriage,  on  the  demands  of  the  parents  of 

Respondent No.1, the Petitioner was compelled to rent a house in Islamabad at an 

enormous  amount  of  rent.  During  the  month  of  April,  2012  Respondent  No.1 

demanded  an  amount  of  Rs.500,000/-  from  the  Petitioner  on  the  pretext  that  she 

has  to  complete  a  course  in  Australia  offered  by  her  company  namely  IBM.  The 

Petitioner was forced to arrange the said amount from his hard earned money and 

Rupees  400,000/-  was  deposited  by  the  Petitioner  in  the  account  of  Respondent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 398/2020 

No.1  whereas  Rs.60,000/-  was  paid  in  cash.  During  the  month  of  June  2011, 

Respondent No.1 allegedly left for Australia for the completion of said course with 

the commitment. An amount of Rs.40,000/- was also sent to the Respondent No.1 

by  the  Petitioner  through  I.Net  Banking.  Hence  the  Petitioner  paid  an  amount  of 

Rs.500,000/- to Respondent No.1.  

4. 

It was further stated that the subsequent events proved that the Respondent 

No.1  cheated  the  Petitioner  by  misappropriating  the  amount  of  Rs.500,000/-  as 

well  as  the  jewelry.  In  fact  the  Respondent  No.1  never  went  to  Australia  and  in 

spite  of  repeated  demands  by  the  Petitioner  avoided  to  join  the  Petitioner  as  his 

wife. The Petitioner filed suit for restitution of conjugal rights which was decreed 

in his favour but Respondent No.1 failed to honour the decree of the Family Court 

and  finally  the  marriage  was  dissolved  by  way  of  divorce  pronounced  by  the 

Petitioner in May, 2014.   

5. 

According  to  the  Memo  of  Petition,  the  Petitioner  requested  Respondent 

No.1  to  pay  cash  amount  of  Rs.500,000/-  with  interest  and  to  return  gold 

ornaments  or  to  pay  the  value  thereof  but  no  fruitful  result  was  achieved.  This 

constrained  the  Petitioner  to  file  a  suit  for  recovery  of  Rs.1500,000/-,  which  was 

partially  decreed  vide  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  08.12.2016  to  the  extent  of 

recovery of Rs.500,000/- whereas the relief for the return of gold ornaments or to 

pay  value  thereof  was  refused.  Both  the  parties  filed  appeals.  The  learned 

Additional District Judge Islamabad (West) dismissed the appeals. The Respondent 

No.1  accepted  the  said  Judgment  and  Decree  whereas  the  Petitioner  filed  a  Civil 

Revision No.411/D-2017 before this Court which is still pending.  

6. 

The Petitioner also submitted  in the Memo of Petition that  as counter blast 

and  to  further  pressurize  the  Petitioner  the  Respondent  No.1  filed  a  Suit  for 

Recovery of Maintenance for the Period of Iddat and Past Maintenance of Plaintiff 

No.1  and  Recovery  of  Dowry  Articles  on  29.05.2017.    The  learned  Trial  Court 

partially  decreed  the  said  suit  vide  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  19.09.2019  as 

follows: 

“I.  The plaintiff is held entitled for recovery of maintenance allowance for 
her Iddat period only at the rate of Rs. 30,000/- (Thirty Thousand) per 
month. 

II. 

That  plaintiff  No.1  is  held  entitled  for  recovery  of  dowry  articles 
mentioned under the heading of electronics of list Ex.P3 Serial No.1 & 

Oven,  under  heading  of  furniture  at  serial  No.  1  to  4  and  under  the 
heading  of  crockery  at  serial  No.1  to  12,  whereas,  to  the  extent  of 
remaining claim of recovery of dowry articles her suit is dismissed. 

III.  That the plaintiff is held entitled for recovery of Rs. 55,000/- as dower.” 

P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 398/2020 

7. 

The Petitioner preferred an appeal and the learned Appellate Court vide the 

Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  accepted  the  appeal  partially.  The  learned 

Appellate Court granted the following reliefs to the Petitioner. 

Islamabad, 

“In  view  of  the  above  circumstances,  this  appeal  is  partially  allowed  the 
impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated  19.09.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Judge 
the 
Family  Court-West, 
respondent/plaintiff  is  not  entitled  to  receive  the  dowry  articles  from  the 
appellant/defendant.  The  learned  Judge  Family  Court-West,  Islamabad  is 
directed to make necessary amendments in the decree accordingly and also make 
necessary  entries  to  that  effect  in  the  appropriate  column  of  the  register  of  the 
decrees U/R 22(4) of the West Family Courts Rules 1965.” [Emphasis added]. 

is  modified 

the  extent 

that 

to 

8. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  submitted  that  as  per  Nikkahnama 

dated  26.02.2011  dower  was  fixed  at  Rs.60,000/-  out  of  which  Rs.5,000/-  was 

prompt whereas the remaining was deferred.  It was highlighted that the Petitioner 

specifically stated in his Affidavit-in-Evidence that the remaining amount was paid 

on  03.03.2011,  however,  no  cross-examination  was  conducted  by  the  learned 

counsel  for the Respondent No.1. As such, he argued, that the payment of  dower 

stood  admitted.    He  submitted  that  the  Respondent  No.1  left  the  marital  home  in 

June, 2011 and she admitted  leaving the  house of  her own will and accord  in her 

cross-examination.  According 

to 

the 

learned  counsel, 

the  Trial  Court 

in 

consideration of such admission did not  find  her entitled  for past maintenance. In 

such circumstances learned counsel for the Petitioner raised the question as to how 

Respondent  No.1  would  be  entitled  to  maintenance  for  the  Iddat  period  when 

admittedly  she  left  the  husband  house  of  her  own  will  and  which  is  precisely  the 

reason  why  the  learned  Trial  Court  did  not  find  her  entitled  to  past  maintenance. 

As  per  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  the  Impugned  Judgment  is,  therefore, 

suffering from an inherent contradiction.  

9.  With  regard  to  quantum  of  maintenance,  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner 

submitted  that  the  Respondent  No.1  failed  to  support  her  allegation  that 

Petitioner’s  income  was  200,000/-  per  month  and  in  fact  admitted  in  her  cross-

examination that she has not submitted any proof in this regard. On the other hand 

 
 
P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 398/2020 

since the Petitioner stated that his monthly income was Rs.50,000/- per month the 

burden shifted upon the Respondent No.1, which she was unable to discharge. 

10.  On the other  hand, the  learned counsel  for Respondent No.1 argued  that  in 

family  law  cases,  failure  to  cross-examine  does  not  necessarily  mean  admission. 

Since it was the Petitioner who claimed to have paid deferred dower, the onus of 

proof  lay  upon  him  to  prove  the  same.  He  highlighted  that  the  Petitioner  did  not 

produce  any  witness  nor  was  any  question  put  to  the  Respondent  No.1  as  to  any 

specific  date  on  which  the  Respondent  allegedly  paid  such  dower.  He  further 

submitted that it is settled law that the one in possession of proof must submit it. In 

this  case  a  wife  who  is  no  longer  living  with  the  husband  cannot  be  expected  to 

produce proof  of the  husband’s salary. On the other hand, the Petitioner admitted 

that he is an Engineer and he is a salaried person yet no salary slip or other proof of 

his  monthly  income  was  produced  by  him.  Lastly  he  stated  that  writ  has  become 

infructuous as the Impugned Decree has already been executed.  

11. 

In exercise of his right of rebuttal the learned counsel for the Petitioner made 

a  statement  at  the  bar  that  the  payment  made  in  the  execution  proceedings  was 

subject to decision of this writ petition. This statement was not controverted by the 

learned counsel for the Respondent No.1.   

12.  Arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties have been heard 

and record perused with their assistance.   

13.  The thrust of the arguments  made by  Petitioner was that a wife who  is  not 

entitled to past maintenance on account of leaving the husband’s house of her own 

will  cannot  be  held  entitled  to  maintenance  during  iddat  period.  In  this  regard 

reliance  was  placed  on  para  277  titled  Husband’s  Duty  to  Maintain  his  Wife 

contained  in  Part-B  of  Chapter  XIV  on  Marriage,  Maintenance  of  Wives  and 

Restitution of Conjugal Rights of Muhammadan Law, which provides as follows: 

“277.  Husband’s  duty  to  maintain  his  wife.—The  husband  is  bound  to 
maintain  his  wife  (unless  she  is  too  young  for  matrimonial  intercourse,)  so 
long  as  she  is  faithful  to  him  and  obeys  his  reasonable  orders.  But  he  is  not 
bound  to  maintain  a  wife  who  refuses  herself  to  his,  or  is  otherwise 
disobedient,  unless  the  refusal  of  disobedience  is  justified  by  non-payment  of 
prompt dower, or she leaves the husband’s house on account of his cruelty.” 

14.  According to the submissions  made on behalf  of the Petitioner, generally a 

wife who refuses herself to the husband or is otherwise disobedient is not entitled 

P a g e  | 5 
W.P.No. 398/2020 

to maintenance unless refusal or disobedience is justified by non-payment of dower 

or if she leaves the husband’s house on account of his cruelty.  

15. 

In the  instant case, there are concurrent  findings that deferred dower  in the 

amount  of  Rs.  55,000/-  remained  unpaid.  Whereas  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Petitioner argued  that payment of deferred dower  stood proved as the Petitioner’s 

statement that it had been paid was not challenged on cross examination.  

16. 

It  is settled  law  that concurrent  findings of  fact cannot be disturbed  in writ 

jurisdiction in the absence of misreading or non-reading of evidence.  In the case at 

hand, the learned Trial Court observed that no contrary evidence was produced by 

the  Petitioner  to  dislodge  the  entry  in  the  Nikahnama  which  showed  that  

Rs.  55,000/-  was  deferred  dower  amount,  which  view  was  maintained  by  the 

learned  Appellate Court.   The Petitioner  has failed to point out any evidence that 

was produced by him which has not been read or misread by the two lower courts 

with regard to payment of deferred dower.   

17.  The sole ground that payment stood proved on account of failure to conduct 

cross  examination  with  regard  to  the  Petitioner’s  statement  alleging  that  payment 

had in fact been made is neither correct nor tenable.  All entries in the Nikahnama 

are  presumed  to  be  correct,  which  presumption  can  only  be  rebutted  through 

cogent evidence.  A bare perusal of the Petitioner’s cross-examination reveals that 

he specifically admitted that he does not have any evidence to support his claim of 

payment of  deferred dower in the amount  of Rs. 55,000/-. On the other hand, the 

Respondent categorically denied in her cross-examination that she has received the 

deferred dower.  In such circumstances, it cannot be concluded that there was any 

misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  which  would  warrant  interference  by  this 

Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction.   

18.  Since he failed to prove payment of dower, by his own arguments in reliance 

of  para  277  of  Muhammadan  Law,  the  Petitioner  cannot  be  held  absolved  of  his 

duty to maintain his wife despite her refusal to him or disobedience. 

19.  Even otherwise, with regard to the question as to whether a husband who is 

otherwise  justified  in  not  maintaining  his  wife,  is  nevertheless  liable  to  maintain 

her during the iddat period,  the relevant para of Muhammadan Law would be para 

279 which provides as follows:- 

P a g e  | 6 
W.P.No. 398/2020 

“279.  Maintenance  on  divorce.-  (1)  After  divorce,  the  wife  is  entitled  to 
maintenance during the  period of  iddat.  If  the  divorce  is  not  communicated to 
her until the expiry of that period, she is entitled to maintenance until the expiry 
of  that  period,  she  is  entitled  to  maintenance  until  she  is  informed  of  the 
divorce.  
(2) 

A widow is not entitled to maintenance during the period of iddat 

consequent upon her husband’s death.” 

20.  The said paragraph provides that the wife is entitled for maintenance during 

iddat  after  divorce.    There  is  no  exception  provided.  Nowhere  does  it  say  that  a 

wife would be deprived of her right to maintenance during the iddat period if she 

herself left the husband’s house.  

21. 

In  the  following  judgments  passed  by  various  Honourable  High  Courts  of 

this country, maintenance during the iddat period was allowed despite the fact that 

the wife was held not entitled for maintenance allowance for leaving the husband’s 

house of her own will and accord and also in cases where she was seeking khula: 

(i)   Sh. Azmatullah VS Mst. Imtiaz Begum, PLD 1959 (Lahore) 167,  

(ii)   Muhammad Zairaf VS Mst. Safia Bibi, 2000 MLD 1900 (Lahore),  

(iii)  Kashif Akram VS Mst. Naila, 2011 MLD 571 (Karachi),  

(iv)  Mst. Ghazala Sadia VS Muhammad Sajjad, 2012 YLR 2841 (Lahore),  

(v)  Razia Bibi VS Muhammad Iqbal, 2012 MLD 1943 (Lahore),  

(vi)  Abdul  Rafay  Butt  VS  Additional  District  Judge,  PLD  2015  (Lahore) 

258,  

(vii)  Mst.  Parveen  Khan  VS  Abdul  Ghafoor,  2016  CLC  932  (Baluchistan), 

Israfeel VS Nekam Zada, 2016 YLR 1103 (Peshawar),  

(viii)  Rukhsana  Ambreen  VS  District  and  Sessions  Judge,  Khushab,  2021 

CLC 1512 (Lahore) and  

(ix)  Fahad Khan VS Mst. Farukh Tabbassum, 2021 MLD 109 (Peshawar). 

22. 

 It  is  therefore  clear  that  maintenance  for  iddat  period  rests  on  a  different 

footing  and  a  wife  is  entitled  to  maintenance  for  such  period  even  if  she  is 

disentitled to claim maintenance otherwise. 

23.  Similarly, the Petitioner failed to point out any non-reading or misreading of 

evidence or any other infirmity or illegality in the concurrent findings of both the 

lower  courts  pertaining  to  quantum  of  maintenance.  Therefore,  the  Petitioner  has 

failed to make out a case for interference by this Court. 

 
 
24. 

In view of the above, the Impugned Judgment and Decree dated 14.12.2019, 

passed by the learned Appellate Court, is upheld. Consequently the titled petition, 

being devoid of any merit, is dismissed. 

P a g e  | 7 
W.P.No. 398/2020 

Announced in the open Court on _________________________. 

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
