ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P. No. 3956/2019.

Mst. Kausar Bibi

VS

The Learned Additional District Judge, Islamabad (West), etc.

Petitioner by:

Mr. Muzammil Hussain Shad, Advocate.

Respondent No.2 by:

Mr. M. Safdar Ali Bhatti, Advocate.

Date of Decision:

11.01.2021.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J: Through  this  Writ  Petition,  the

petitioner has called in question the judgment & decree dated 15.10.2019, passed

by  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  claim  of  recovery  of

two tola gold ornaments and a gold ring granted by learned Judge Family Court,

Islamabad vide judgment & decree dated 27.05.2019 was set aside.

2.

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  petition  are  that  petitioner  entered  into

marriage with respondent No.2 Haq Nawaz on 05.05.2013 against the dower of

Rs.3500/-. At the time of rukhsati, parents of petitioner gave gold ornaments of

two  tola,  dowry  articles  and  in  addition  to  the  same  a  gold  ring  to  respondent

No.2,  marriage  lasts  for  few  years  and  later  on  petitioner  was  deserted  by

respondent  No.2  from  his  abode.  The  petitioner  filed  suit  for  dissolution  of

marriage,  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance, gold  ornaments  and  dowry

articles,  which  was  contested  by  respondent  No.2  by  way  of  filing  written

statement  and  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad after recording  the

evidence of the parties passed the judgment & decree in favour of petitioner on

27.05.2019.  Respondent  No.2  feeling  aggrieved  with  the  said  judgment  filed

appeal  before  the  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  which  was  accepted  to

the extent of two tola gold and a gold ring and judgment of Family Court was set

aside to that extent. Hence, instant writ petition.

W.P. No.3956/2019

2

3.

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that learned  appellate  court

has not appreciated the evidence and passed the impugned judgment & decree

on  the  basis  of  surmises  and  conjunctures;  that  two  tola  gold  ornaments  have

been  acknowledged  by  respondent  in  the  evidence  and  same  has  rightly  been

extended to the petitioner by the trial Court, as such impugned judgment to the

extent of wrong appreciation by the appellate Court requires interference of this

Court in the constitutional jurisdiction.

4.

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  contends  that  petitioner  left  the

abode by herself and she was not deserted by respondent as alleged in the plaint;

that it  is  usual  norms  and  practice  in  our  society  that  women  folk  retain  their

gold jewelry with them.

5.

6.

Arguments heard, record perused.

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that claim  of  the  petitioner  was  decreed  to  the

extent  of  dissolution  of  marriage,  maintenance  allowance,  two  tola  gold

ornaments  with  gold  ring  or  in  alternate its  current  market  value  from

respondent  vide  judgment  &  decree  dated  27.05.2019,  passed  by  learned  Judge

Family  Court,  Islamabad.  Respondent  No.2  being  aggrieved  with  the  said

judgment filed appeal before learned Additional District Judge, Islamabad, who

set  aside  the  same  to  the  extent  of  two  tola  gold  ornaments  and  a  gold  ring,

resultantly instant writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.

7.

While  considering  the  arguments  rendered  by  the  parties,  I  have  gone

through the evidence submitted on record by the petitioner through her attorney

Hasnain Iqbal, her real brother, whereby it was specifically stated in Ex.P.2 that:-

او 

 ہو

 سا  د 

 ن  روا تار ز 

2 

او 

۔

و 

ر 

ا 

ا

8.

The  above  referred  stance  of  the  petitioner  if  read  in  conjunction  with

para-5  of  the  said affidavit,  it  appears  that  petitioner  was  deserted  from  her

abode  in  December,  2016  in  three  clothes  after  physical  abuse,  however,  on the

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3956/2019

3

other  hand  respondent  No.2  denied  such  allegations.  Respondent  No.2

submitted his affidavit Ex.D-1 and taken a categorical stance that:-

ا 

 ا

ر  

 روا 

 ڑ

د

But  during  the  course  of  cross-examination  he  acknowledged  that  he  is  not

aware about the  date  and  time  when  petitioner  (plaintiff)  left  the  abode.

However, when he was asked specific question regarding two tola gold and gold

۔

ring, he answered in the following manner:-

However, at later part of cross-examination he acknowledged that:-

۔

ا روا 

 ں  

 ر ا 

 لا

 د

 زا ۔

 د

 س  ے  

ا روا 

رد 

 ود 

۔

9.

While  considering  these  contrary  stances  taken  by  respondent  No.2,  it

appears  that  he  is  not  truthful  witness,  who  has  taken  summersault  in  same

breath, even he is not aware when his wife left the abode. Similarly, respondent

No.2 has denied the gold ring which was gifted by parents of petitioner although

he acknowledged the same. In such eventuality minimum requirement of law in

favour  of  petitioner  qua  her  claim  of  two  tola  gold  ornaments  has  rightly  been

appreciated  by  the  trial  Court,  however,  while  going  through  the  judgment

rendered  by  first  appellate  Court  in  Para-13,  it  appears  that  learned  appellate

Court has heavily relied upon the presumption that gold ornaments have usually

been retained by women folk though such presumption appears to be contrary in

this  case.  The  appellate  Court  has  given  much  emphasis  upon  the  statement  of

respondent  No.2  that  petitioner  while  leaving  the  house  took  alongwith  her  all

gold ornaments, such stance if placed in juxtaposition with the cross-examination

of respondent No.2, the same has been denied, therefore, findings given by first

appellate  Court  are  contrary  to  the  record  and  evidence  has  wrongly  been

appreciated  which  could  be  settled  by  way  of  interference  in  the  constitutional

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3956/2019

4

jurisdiction.  Learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad  has  rightly  passed  the

decree in favour of petitioner which could not be set aside on the presumption. It

is  trite  law  that  when  a  witness  has  acknowledged  the  stance  in  cross-

examination  no  other evidence  is  required,  therefore,  judgment  & decree  dated

15.10.2019, passed by learned Additional District Judge, Islamabad is hereby set

aside and judgment & decree dated 27.05.2019, passed by learned Judge Family

Court, Islamabad is hereby restored.

10.

Instant writ petition is allowed in above terms.

Zahid

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)
JUDGE

