Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.4607 of 2021 

Sania Shahzad  
VS
The Deputy Commissioner, Islamabad and others  

S. No. of order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary. 

  09.           06.06.2022.  Ms.  Shagufta  Jabeen  Malik,  Advocate  for 

petitioner.  
Mr.  Ghulam  Hassan,  Law  Officer,  M/o 
Human Rights. 
Mr. Khalid Latif, Director, ICT.  
Ms. Afshan Tehseen, Chairperson, NCRC. 

The  matter  before  the  Court  relates  to 

the  obligations  of  the  state  to  protect  and 

uphold the  rights  of  a  child  whose  rights  may 

be  at  risk  while  in  the  custody  of  his/her 

biological  parents.  This  Court  through  various 

orders  invited  the  Ministry  of  Human  Rights, 

Government  of  Pakistan,  the  Child  Protection 

Institute  as  well  as  the  office  of  Chief 

Commissioner,  Islamabad  to  assist  the  Court 

as to what provisions have been made by the 

state  to  protect  the  rights  of  children  in 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  In  view  of  the 

representations made by the learned counsels 

as  well  as  Chairperson,  National  Commission 

on  the  rights  of  Child,  it  appears  that  the 

provisions of Islamabad Capital Territory Child 

Protection  Act,  2018,  have  not  been  given 

effect within Islamabad. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4607/2021 

2. 

Let  a  notice  be  issued  to  the  Ministry  of 

Human  Rights,  Government  of  Pakistan  to 

furnish  a  report  stating  why  provisions  of 

National  Commission  on 

the  Rights of 

the Child Act, 2017, and the Islamabad Capital 

Territory Child  Protection  Act,  2018,  have  not 

been given effect despite the passage of many 

years since the promulgation of such laws.  

3.  This  Court  also  finds  it  essential  to 

constitute a committee headed by the Minister 

for  Human  Rights,  Government  of  Pakistan 

and  comprising  (i)  Secretary,  Ministry  of 

Human  Rights,  (ii)  Chairperson,  National 

Commission  on  the  rights  of  Child,  (iii) 

Secretary,  Ministry  of  Planning,  Development 

&  Special  Initiatives  (or  a  representative  not 

below  the  rank  of  BS-20),  (iv)  Secretary, 

Ministry  of  Finance  (or  a  representative  not 

below 

the 

rank  of  BS-20), 

(v)  Chief 

Commissioner, 

Islamabad, 

(vi) 

Inspector 

General  of  Police,  Islamabad,  (vii)  Chairman, 

NADRA  (or  a  representative  not  below  the 

rank  of  BS-20)  and  (viii)  Ms.  Sadia  Bukhari, 

Council Member, Human Rights Commission of 

Pakistan,  who  will  identify  the  steps  required 

to  establish  fully  functional  Child  Protection 

Institutes  (with  require  human  and  financial 

resources)  for  the  protection  and  ease  of 

 
3 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4607/2021 

children,  both  boys  and  girls.  The  committee 

will  furnish  a  report  stating  the  steps  to  be 

taken  to  render  provisions  of  the  National 

Commission  on  the  Rights of  the Child  Act, 

2017,  and  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Child 

Protection  Act,  2018,  functional  together  with 

resources  required  to  put 

in  place  the 

institutional  arrangements  conceived  under 

these  two laws. The committee  will also  state 

the  timeframe  within  the  Child  Protection 

Institutes will be rendered fully functional and 

the  standard  operating  procedures  and  or 

institutional  arrangements  shall  be  in  place 

that are required to ensure that the children in 

ICT  who  need  custodial  care  (whether  due  to 

custody disputes or being unattended children 

within  the  meaning  of  ICT  Child  Protection 

Act),  are  afforded 

the  benefit  of 

the 

aforementioned  laws  in  ICT.  The  committee 

will identify the point persons in the offices of 

Chief Commissioner, Islamabad and Inspector 

General  of  Police,  Islamabad  who  will  ensure 

that  all  children  in  need  of  care  including 

unattended  children  (resorting  to  beggary  for 

example)  have  the  benefit  of  the  institutional 

infrastructure  and  care  conceived  under  the 

aforementioned  laws.  The  committee  will  also 

identify  the  time  period  by  which  unattended 

children  will  be  registered  by  NADRA  within 

 
4 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4607/2021 

the  terms  of  Section  22  of  the  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory  Child  Protection  Act,  2018. 

The  committee  is  being  constituted  to  ensure 

that all relevant stakeholders are on the same 

page  and  are  able  to  furnish  a  concrete  date 

by  which  the  infrastructure  conceived  by  the 

two  laws  for  protection  of  fundamental  rights 

of children in ICT is in place. 

4. 

Let  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Human 

Rights,  Government  of  Pakistan 

file  the 

required  report  before  this  Court  within  a 

period of two months. Let a copy of this order 

be  sent  by  the  office  to  all  members  of  the 

committee constituted pursuant to this order.  

5.  Re-list on 05.09.2022.    

*M.A. Raza* 

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
