ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.231 of 2022 

Ghazala Asjad 
VS 
Assistant Commissioner/Sub-Divisional Magistrate (City) and another 

S. No. of order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  order/ 
Proceedings 

                                    28.08.2023. 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary.  
Mr. Jameel Hussain Qureshi, Mr. Azhar Yousaf, 
Mr.  Qaiser  Mansoor  and  Ms.  Almas  Bano, 
Advocates  for  the  Petitioner  in  their  respective 
Petitions. 
Barrister  Munawar  Iqbal  Duggal,  Additional 
Attorney General, Rana Imran Farooq, AAG and 
Ms. Sadia Kiran Shahzadi, State Counsel. 

1. 

The  learned  Additional  Attorney  General  has 

appeared  and  submits  that  the  matter  regarding 

Executive  Magistrates  is  also  pending  before  the 

Supreme  Court against  the  judgment of  Balochistan 

High  Court 

reported  as  Muhammad  Kamran 

Mullahkhail VS Government of Balochistan through 

Chief  Secretary,  PLD  2012  Balochistan  57. 

However, he seeks some time to confirm whether the 

said judgment has been suspended and also the effect 

thereof  on  this  Court’s  power  to  issue  direction  to 

the  Federal  Government  to  issue  notification  in 

accordance  with  Section  1(2)  of  the  Code  of 

Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2. 

Both  the  learned  counsels  also  seek  time  to 

assist this Court whether or not the issue may not be 

resolved  expediently  by  issuing  direction  to  the 

Federal Government to issue Notification pursuant to 

Section 5(3) of the Family Courts Act, 1964 and for 

the  High  Court  to  invoke  the  said  Section  to 

empower  the  Family  Courts  to  take  up  the  matters 

regarding  polygamy  as  per  Section  6(5)  of  the 

Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961  and  also  the 

effect of any such notification on the pending cases 

before the Executive Magistrates, if issued.  

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  shall 

also  submit  his  arguments  with regard  to powers of 

the High Court to take suo moto action as detailed in 

the Order dated 03.08.2023. 

4.    Relist on 11.09.2023. 

R..anjam  

   (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 

            JUDGE 

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
