ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLATIABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.19Ogl2O17

Shaukat Hussain
VS
The Learned Additional District Judge-V, East lslamabad  and others

S. No. oforder
/ oroceedinos

Date of order/
Proceedinos
24.06.2019  Sardar Anzar lqbal Khan, Advocate for the

Order  with signature of Judge  and that of parties or counsel
where necessarv.

petitioner.
Raja Muhammad  Shakeel Abbasi, Advocate  for
respondent  No.3.

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner, Shaukat Hussain,  impugns  the
judgment  dated 30.03.2017,  passed by the Gourt
of  the  learned Additional  District Judge,
lslamabad, whereby  the petitioner's appeal
against the judgment and decree  dated
29.11.2016, passed by the learned  Family Court,
lslamabad, was dismissed. Vide the said
judgment  and decree dated 29.11.2016, the
learned Family Court partially decreed
respondent No.3's suit for  dissolution  of
marriage, recovery of maintenance allowance,
gold ornaments and dowry articles.
2.  Learned counsel for  the  petitioner
submitted  that the petitioner and respondent  No.3
got married on 03.03.2008;  that subsequently,  the
relations  between the couple turned sour; that
respondent  No.3 left her matrimonial  abode  with
her own sweet will; that respondent  No.3 was a
Nasheza,  and therefore, not entitled to receive
any maintenance;  that as per column No.13 of the
Nikahnama,  the dower amount  was Rs.1,000/-
only which had already  been paid; that as per
entry in column No.16 of the Nikahnama,  five tolas

2

W.P. No. 190812017

in the form of gold ornaments had been gifted  to
respondent No.3; that the said gold ornaments
were never snatched from respondent No.3; that
respondent  No.3 was never subjected to any
cruelty;  and that the learned Family Court  did not
have any jurisdiction to  decide the matter
pertaining  to the gold ornaments,  which had been
gifted to respondent  No.3. Learned counsel  for
the petitioner  prayed for the writ petition to be
allowed in terms of the relief sought  therein.  ln
making his submissions, learned counsel for the
petitioner  placed reliance on the judgment
reported  as "Syed  Mukhtar Hussain Shah VS Mst.

Saba lmtiaz"  (PLD 2011 S.C. 260).
3.  On the other hand, learned  counsel for
respondent No.3 submitted that the concurrent
judgments passed  by the learned Courts below do
not suffer from any jurisdictional infirmity  so as to
warrant interference in  the  constitutional
jurisdiction of this Court; that the entry of five
tolas of gold ornaments  gifted to respondent  No.3
finds mention in column No.16 of the Nikahnama
dated 03.03.2008, and therefore, the learned
Family Court did have jurisdiction in the matter;
that the petitioner had not filed any suit for
restitution of conjugal rights; that during  the
subsistence  of the marriage, the petitioner  had
remained  abroad for three years and did not pay
maintenance from 2O1O til! the filing of the suit;
that while the petitioner  was abroad,  respondent
No.3 had no option but to live with her parents;
and that the maintenance  of Rs.3,000/-  per month
awarded in respondent No.3's  favour is too little.
Learned counsel for respondent  No.3 prayed for
the writ petition  to be dismissed.

J

W.P. No. 190812017

4. 
I have heard the contentions  of the learned
counsel  for the contesting parties and have
perused the record with their able assistance.
5.  Learned  counsel for the petitioner  had
stressed on the fact that since the five tolas ol
gold ornaments had been gifted to respondent
No.3, she was bound to return the same upon the
dissolution of marriage on the basis of khula.  The
entry as to the five tolas of gold ornaments  gifted
to respondent  No.3 finds mention  in column  No.
16 of Nikahnama  (Exh.P-2)  whereas in column
Nos.  13 to 15 prompt dower  is fixed as Rs.1,000/-
and shown to have been fully paid in cash.
Specific  entry with regard to dower in the
Nikahnama  shows that the gift of five tolas of gold
was not a part but in addition  to dower.
6.  Now adverting to the question of $he return
of such a gift by a wife to her ex-husband on
dissolution  of marriage  through  khula, it is settled
law that the gifts received  by a bride at or after
marriage from her husband  or parents  of husband
is personal  property of the wife. ln case of Mst.
Mahwish  VS Additional  District  Judge, lslamabad-
West (2018  CLC 1337) while discussing  import of
Sections  2 (al and 5 of the Dowry and Bridal Gifts
(Restriction)  Act (XLlll  of 1976) this Court had the
occasion  to hold that the gifts given to a wife at or
during subsistence  of marriage by husband or his
parents are the absolute property of the bride.
7.  By virtue of the Family  Courts (Amendment)
Ordinance  (Ordinance XLV of 2OO2l, Schedule
(Part-l) to the Family Courts Act, 1964 was
amended by addition of item No. 9 so as to confer
jurisdiction in the matters relating to personal
property and belongings of wife on the Family
Courts. Since it has been held that items gifted to

4

W.P. No. 190812017
a  wife during  subsistence  of her marriage
comprise  her personal property thus the dispute
relating to the same would be within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Family Court.  Consequently, the
objection raised  by the petitioner  in that regard is

not well found.
8.  The petitioner's stance during  the trial was
that he gave the gold ornaments,  as mentioned  in
Column 16 of lhe Nikahnama, to the respondent.
Therefore, as per his own statement such
ornaments  became respondent No.3's property.
The Judgment  of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
case of 'Syed Mukhtar Hussain Shah',  supra is
distinguishable being inapplicable  to facts and
circumstances of present case. This law point
was considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of "Mst. Yasmeen Bibi VS Muhammad
Ghazanfar Khan"  (PLD 20',6 SC 613) and it was

held as follows;

"17. As in this case the landed property,
given  to the wife, or the unclertaking given in
the "Nikah  Nama",  to be transferred  to her
name is conclusive in nature  and may be
construed as a part of dower or a gift in
consideration of marriage  therefore, it was
falling within the exclusive  domain of the
Family Court  at Multan, as the wife was/is
residing  there, which  has not been denied  by
the respondent,  therefore,  in our considered
view,  the District Appeal  Court and the learned
Judge in Chamber  of the High Court, Multan
Bench, Multan fell into legal error by holding
the view to the contrary. Any departure made
from the true object and spirit of law, enacted
by the Legislature  would defeat the same,
which  is not permissible under any cannon  of
justice and principle  of law, nor the Courts  are
having any authority or powers  to import their
own opinion therein,  defeating the clear
intention of the Legislature  and when the
provisions  of Ss. 16 to 20 of the C.P.C. stand
excluded  from the proceedings  before the
Family  Court then, the guestion of its territorial
jurisdiction  would  never arise, provided  that
the Family Court where  the wife resides,  shall
have the exclusive  iurisdiction over all such

5

W.P. No. 190812017

matters  for the sake of convenience  because
Rule 6 of the West Pakistan  Family  Court  Rules,
1965  so provides."

9.  The possession  of the gifted gold ornaments
weighing twe tolas was concurrently decided, by
the learned Courts below, to  be with the
petitioner, the learned Courts based their finding

on the reconciliation agreement  dated  03.10.2009
(Exh-P-4)  wherein the petitioner agreed to return
the said gold ornaments to respondent-wife.
Since execution of the said agreement  is admitted

throughout, the learned Courts  below have rightly

relied on the same.
10. The question regarding the dowry  articles
was also decided  on the basis of petitioner's  own
statements. During the evidence, he admitted to
be in possession  of the dowry  articles consisting
of furniture, plastic ware etc as such the learned
courts below correctly decreed the suit of
respondent.
'11. Petitioner  was bound to pay maintenance,
to the respondent  during the period  respondent
No.3 remained his wife. This is particularly so
when in the evidence  the petitioner's version  was
that he himself accompanied  the respondent  to \
her parent's house and that he did not make any '
efforts for her return. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
in case titled as "Muhammad Sharif VS Additional
District Judge" (2007 SCMR 49) held thaL"Mustim
husband was under legal obligation to  maintain
his wife and if she was forced to live away from her
husband for no fault on her part even  then  husband was to
provide  maintenance to  his wife". The  petitioner
admitted  that respondent  No.3 had been at her
parents'  house since the year 2O'aO and he was
urorking  abroad for three years since the year

6

W.P. No. 190A12017

2011.  He admitted to have made no effort for the
return of his wife and neither did he pay any
maintenance.  ln  the agreement  Exh-P4 he
covenanted  to pay maintenance  to his wife at the
rate of Rs.5,000/- per month but learned trial
court fixed the maintenance  al a lower rate of
Rs.3,000/-.  The learned Court below  had already
fixed the maintenance  at a lesser rate, therefore,
no interference is called for.
12. ln the result, no illegality or infirmity found
in the impugned  judgments, instant writ petition is
thus dismissed. There is no order as to costs.

Ahteshem*

(MTANGUL  HASSA AURANGZEBI
JUDGE

