ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Revision No.20/2019 
Mufti Kafayat Ullah 
VS
The State & another 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr. Bakht Badar Jan Syed, Advocate along with 
petitioner. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Sadaqat Ali [ahangir, State Counsel. 
Shah Nazar, S.I., P.S. Margalla, Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

05.03.2020. 

MOHSIN AKHTAR  KA YANI,  I:  Through  the  instant  criminal  revision 

petition,  the  petitioner  has  called  in  question  judgment  of the  learned  Sessions 

Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  27.02.2019, whereby  appeal  filed  by  the 

petitioner  against  the conviction  order  of the learned  Judicial Magistrate  Section 

30, (West), Islamabad,  dated  17.i2.2018, has been dismissed. 

2. 

Brief facts referred  in  the  instant  criminal  revision  petition  are  that  Mrs. 

Sabiha/Respondent  No.2 filed a complaint  having  allegations  that  on 08.02.2013, 

when  she along with  brother  namely  Abdul  Majeed went  to District Courts,  F-8, 

Islamabad  and  got free from  the  proceedings  of the  suit filed by her  against  the 

petitioner  for  dissolution  of  marriage,  she  was  attacked  by  the  petitioner  by 

making fire shot through  pistol, however  they luckily survived  as the bullet went 

off missed.  However,  the  petitioner  along  with  a  police constable  present  there 

managed  to  disarm  the  petitioner,  though  the  petitioner  succeeded  to  escape 

from  the  scene.  Resultantly,  FIR No.68, dated  08.02.2013, under  Section 324/34 

PPC, P.S.  Margalla,  Islamabad  was  registered.  On  22.03.2013, the  petitioner  was 

arrested  and  after  completion  of investigation,  report  under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. 

was  submitted  in  the  Court,  whereafter  charge  under  Section 324/34  PPC was 

framed  against  the  petitioner  on 09.05.2013, to which  he pleaded  not  guilty  and 

claimed  trial.  The prosecution  in order  to bring  guilt  of the  petitioner  home  has 

~rl.  Revision No.20/2019 

Page  I  2 

produced  five prosecution witnesses and  the  learned  trial  Court  pursuant  to 

recording  of  evidence  of  prosecution  witnesses,  recorded  the  statement  of 

petitioner under  Section 342 Cr.P.C., on  the  basis  of which  the  learned  trial 

Court, vide impugned judgment dated 17.12.2018, convicted the petitioner under 

Section 324  PPC  and  sentenced  him  to  undergo  six  (06)  months  rigorous 

imprisonment along with fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default of payment of fine, the 

petitioner has  to  further  undergo  one  week  simple imprisonment. However, 

benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. has  been  extended  to  the  petitioner. Feeling 

aggrieved thereof, the  petitioner filed an  appeal, which was  dismissed by the 

learned first Appellate Court vide impugned judgment dated 27.02.2019. Hence, 

the instant criminal revision petition. 

3. 

Learned counsel for petitioner contends that both the Courts below have 

not appreciated the facts and circumstances of the case in true perspective as it 

has been ignored that no recovery has been effected from the petitioner and as 

such, the  allegedly recovered pistol  has  not  been  sent  to  forensic expert  for 

opinion; that there are material contradictions in the statements recorded by the 

prosecution witnesses but  both the  Courts below have not  taken into account 

such discrepancies and resorted to passing the impugned judgments, which are 

not sustainable in the eyes of law, therefore, the same are liable to be set-aside 

and the petitioner may be acquitted of the charge. 

4. 

Conversely, learned State Counsel opposed the filing of instant criminal 

revision petition  and  supported  the  impugned judgments  of both  the  Courts 

below by  contending that  the  law  on  subject has  rightly  been  applied  while 

passing the  impugned  judgment  and  as  such, the  petitioner  was  caught  red 

handed in attempting murder of Respondent No.2; that the petitioner has failed 

to shatter the stand taken by the prosecution witnesses, who remained consistent 

in  their  statements, which  have  rightly  been appreciated by  both  the  Courts 

f rl.  Revision No.20/2019 

Page I  3 

below while passing the impugned judgments, therefore, the same are liable to 

be maintained and the instant criminal revision petition may be dismissed. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of  record  reveals that  Mufti Kefayat Ullah/ petitioner  has  been 

convicted in case FIR No.68, dated  08.02.2013, under  Section 324/34 PPC, P.S. 

Margalla,  Islamabad  vide  impugned  judgment  dated  17.12.2018, passed  by 

learned  Judicial  Magistrate  Section 30  (West), Islamabad  for  attempting  to 

commit  murder  of  his  ex-wife  Mst.  Sabiha  daughter  of  Muhammad 

Nawaz/complainant  (PW-1), whereby  the  petitioner  has  been  sentenced  to 

undergo six (06)  months rigorous imprisonment along with payment of fine of 

Rs.5,000/-, and  as  such,  the  said  sentence  has  been  maintained  by  learned 

Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad vide impugned judgment dated 27.02.2019. 

7. 

The entire prosecution case is based upon the testimony of PW-1 Sabiha, 

who filed a  suit  for  dissolution of marriage on the  basis of khulla against the 

petitioner, which was pending before the Family Court, Islamabad, however on 

08.03.2013, when  the  complainant along with  her brother  namely PW-2 Abdul 

Majeed was going from the Family Court after attending the hearing of the suit, 

petitioner started firing upon PW-1 Sabiha (complainant), but all the bullets went 

off missed and  the  petitioner  was  apprehended  by  PW-2 Abdul  Majeed and 

PW-5 Syed Tahir Abbas/Constable. The pistol Exh.Pl was taken over from the 

petitioner, however  the  petitioner managed  to  fled  away  from the  scene. The 

complainant  has  lodged  the  FIR  (Exh.PC) in  P.S.  Margalla,  whereby  the 

Investigating  Officer  namely  PW-4  Muhammad  Anwar/ ASI  confirmed  the 

occurrence of this case and  contended that  five live bullets (Exh.P2 to 6)  were 

taken into possession vide recovery memo Exh.PD. 

8. 

The  prosecution  evidence  of  three  (03)  eyewitnesses i.e.  PW-1 Sabiha 

(complainant), PW-2 Abdul Majeeb (brother of complainant) and an independent 

witness  namely  PW-5  Syed  Tahir  Abbas/constable  remained  consistent 

~rl.  Revision No.20/2019 

Page  I  4 

~egarding the allegation of attempt to commit murder, especially the mode and 

manner in which the  petitioner had  drawn  the pistol and  made repeated fires, 

but  all the  fires went  off missed, even the  stance referred  in  the  statement of 

PW-2 Abdul Majeed explained every aspect in  a clear manner, as  it has been 

stated that by PW-2 Abdul Majeed that: 

JD ~J;.;vklliHJ'.71'Lv1.r.LJ1i,(° /ijn,V/ijJ v'-utitJ;.;L(  ;J.ii:...('.tl'vL!JJ('' 
)Jlkl ;f I( ;J. LJ Lvxrril vd {iJ~J?./t)JILl)!j,,~  ..J )J vrv!iJlP~JliJ  /-ALvl)JI 
"-l.JLJ;.; 

The above referred stance has also been considered by the learned Trial Court in 

Para-8 of the impugned judgment, with due care and caution, which proves the 

intention of the petitioner to commit the offence. 

9. 

The prosecution has successfully proved the case in the mode and manner 

in which the criminal case has been registered as the incident took place around 

12:20 p.m. while the FIR (Exh.PC) was got lodged at 01:35 p.m., which suggests 

that  it  was  promptly  registered  and  such  promptness  negates  every  possible 

concoction and  false implication of  the  petitioner. The  motive  of  this  case is 

apparent from record that petitioner is aggrieved with the conduct of his ex-wife 

i.e. Mst. Sabiha (complainant), who has filed a suit for dissolution of marriage 

against the  petitioner  and  the  Family Court 

is  proceedings in  the  said  suit, 

therefore, the revenge and  anger is apparent  on the part  of petitioner, even the 

complainant's statement,  if seen in  the  light  of the  fact that  the  two  children 

(aged  10  and  11)  born 

from 

the  wedlock  of 

the  petitioner  and 

complainant  are  with  the  complainant/mother  i.e.  ex-wife of  the  petitioner. 

PW-1 Mst. Sabiha/ complainant has justified the motive part, which has not been 

denied in this case. 

10. 

The  Investigating  Officer has  taken  the  pistol  from  PW-5 Syed  Tahir 

Abbas/ constable including the missed rounds and live bullets, while PW-5 Syed 

Tahir Abbas/ constable is a natural and independent witness, who is not related 

frl.  Revision No.20/2019 

I 

Page I  5 

to  either  party  and  was  appointed  in  prosecution branch  available in  District 

Court premises. 

11. 

The petitioner has also given his version in his statement recorded under 

Section 342 Cr.P.C., whereby he denied the entire case, however while answering 

Question No.9,  he has confirmed the motive part in the following manner: 

QNo.5. 

Why this case has been registered against you? 

i:f)(' I ~J  LJ1.!f1r'Cf 1),/,)1,tJ /-U'f-t,JY'LJ°!! '--/- )1,L;1.i ..I 4  ..:.-L--'" _(i ,,;'C(Jl.!f'trrf l)J 
)IJ/!"J_. 7,)1,tJ /-~,)2  t.J11h1J?.J~?..:t;/,)1,(J.,1,_t fk"V  vf='ef  L1;;~J{.:l.-L?-~ 

-V/1J,.,.#L',.( ._;~ '--/-)21)11(( 4Lt,J,f1iJJ1,.; 

12. 

Besides the above referred position, the petitioner has also taken another 

stance for false implication in this case as he while answering Question No.5 has 

stated that: 

Q. No.9. 
J"ij...t~if--71J1V ~i../...:.--Jl~l).A 

Do you want to say anything else? 

... ,f ~:! ...tvfL,.( 

)11..:.-/i.:f ~-t.JJ1,if 4-...t-t.JhJ. 

tJ ~'--/  JJ'--/-4:,if  1),171J1ihm/ 

t.J.f;'--/- ~.:1. ~tJ ,Jv,f ~ Jf_t,JJ11:J~{J ( {J}JLJ1l{J} 

L...Jl)1.Jt·L1rVtJ.-:- {J}..:.-.1~~,.( 7~..c-1~..:)1,,..;71/- -1.JJ'.5')'.r,J,f" I ,JLfiJ!~uf;L 

_,_Jf J1 (.....Ji.!!..~ 

.. 

13. 

Placing the  above reasons  of false involvement of the  petitioner  in  this 

case in juxtaposition with  the entire case, there is nothing on record to suggest 

that  there  is  a  dispute  of  inherited  property  of  petitioner's  mother  with  the 

complainant's  father,  even  no  such  document  has  been  placed  on  record  nor 

even this fact has been corroborated through any independent  mean, rather the 

reason for such attempt  to commit murder  is the filing of suit for dissolution of 

marriage filed by PW-1 Mst. Sabiha, which is apparent from the record. 

14. 

I  have considered the impugned judgments of the learned trial Court as 

well as of the learned  first Appellate Court, who have rightly appreciated each 

and every aspect of this case i.e. from the motive part till recovery of pistol, and 

as such, all the prosecution witnesses remained consistent with each other. The 

'Crl. Revision No.20/2019 

Page  I  6 

learned  Trial Court  has rightly  awarded  the sentence of six (06) months  rigorous 

imprisonment  along with  fine of Rs.5,000/-, though  it is on lesser side, but it is in 

accordance with  settled principle  of law. 

15. 

Keeping  in view  the  above  position,  the instant  criminal  revision  petition 

is misconceived as no illegality has been highlighted  in the impugned  judgments, 

therefore,  the  same  is hereby  DISMISSED. The petitioner  is on bail, he be taken 

into  custody  and  sent  to  prison  to serve  his remaining  sentence.  His  bail bonds 

submitted  before  this  Court  during  suspension  of  his  sentence  are  hereby 

DISCHARGED. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KA Yil) 

JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 

/?~March,  2020. 

KhalidZ. 

. 
JUDGE 

