ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

Crl.  Misc.  N o.845/8/2020. 

Muhammad  Naveed 

VS

The State, etc. 

S.  No. of 
order/ 
P!~c~~ings_~_P_r_oc_e_e_d_in~lg~1s~~~-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Order with  signature  of Judge  and  that  of parties  or counsel 
where  necessary. 

Date  of 
order/ 

28.07.2020 

Mr.  Sher  Afzal  Khan  Marwat,  Advocate 
petitioner. 
Ms. Khadija Ali, State Counsel. 
Mr. M. Bilal Siddique  Chouhan,  Advocate  for respondent 
No.3. 
Munir Ahmed, S.I. 

for 

the 

Through  this  Crl.  Misc.  petition,  the  petitioner  has 

prayed  for  post  arrest  bail  in  case  FIR  No.262,  dated 

23.05.2018,  U /Ss  302/148/149 /337-A(i)/337-A(ii)/337- 

F(i)/337-F(ii) PPC, P.S. Khana, Islamabad. 

2.  Brief facts  referred  in  the  instant  FIR lodged  on  the 

complaint  of  respondent  No.3  Bakhat  Munir  are  that  on 

23.05.2018 at  about  06:30 p.m.,  present  accused/ petitioner 

alongwith  other  co-accused  have  committed  murder  of 

complainant's  brother  Arshad  Khan  deceased  and  injured 

the  other  family members  Anwar  Khan,  Naseer  Khan and 

neighbor  Asad Khan. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends 

that 

petitioner  has not  caused  fatal  injuries  to  the  deceased  and 

instant  matter  will be resolved  after  recording  of evidence; 

that  evidence  of  doctor  was  recorded  by  the  trial  Court, 

whereby  doctor  has not  supported  the medical  evidence  in 

favour  of  prosecution  and  as  such  deceased  died  due  to 

Crl.  Misc.  No.845/B/2020 

2 

hatchet  blow  which  is not  attributed  to  the  petitioner  and 

even  eyewitnesses  have  contradicted  each  other  in  the 

mode  and  manner  in  which  alleged  murder  has  been 

committed;  that  instant  petition  is  second  bail  application 

on 

fresl,t.  ground  discovered 

from 

the  evidence  of 

prosecution  witnesses  and  on  the  statutory  ground;  that 

petitioner  was  arrested  on  28.05.2018 and  has  spent  two 

years  and  two  months  period  approximately  but  trial  has 

not  yet  been  concluded  despite  direction  of this  Court  in 

the  previous  round;  that  petitioner  is also  suffering from 

different  medical  issues which  could  not  be treated  in the 

jail hospital. 

4.  Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  complainant  as  well 

as  learned  State  Counsel  contend  that  petitioner  is  not 

allowed to argue  his case on merit  as the same has already 

been settled in the previous  round  as such fresh ground  on 

merit as argued  by the petitioner's  side amounts  to deeper 

appreciation  of evidence  which  is  not  permissible  at  bail 

stage; that  non-compliance  of direction  is not  a  ground  to 

grant post-arrest bail in such type of heinous cases. 

5.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

6. 

From  the  tentative  assessment  of  record,  it  reveals 

that  petitioner  has  directly  been  nominated  with  specific 

role  of allegedly  committing  murder  of  deceased  Arshad 

Khan  in  the  instant  matter.  The  post-arrest  bail  of 

petitioner  on  merit  has  already  been  dismissed  by  this 

Court  vide  order  dated  03.05.2019, passed  in  Crl.  Misc. 

No.219/B/2019,  whereby  direction  was  issued  to  the  trial 

Court  to conclude the trial within  period  of 06 months. The 

Crl.  Misc.  No.845/B/2020 
3 

petitioner  tried  to  convince  this  Court  that  he  is  eligible 

and  entitled  for  grant  of  bail  on  merit  due  to  new 

circumstances  emerged  on  record  when  the  eyewitnesses 

and doctor have been cross-examined. 

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  referred 

different extract of evidence of prosecution  recorded  by the 

trial Court but it is settled law that merit which has already 

been  discussed  could  not  be  considered  in  the  second 

round,  even  the  evidence  which  has  been  referred  by  the 

petitioner  if  considered  at  this  stage  would  amount  to 

deeper  appreciation  of evidence,  which  is not  permissible 

in  bail  application.  The  second  ground  referred  by  the 

petitioner 

is  statutory  delay  and  learned  counsel  for 

petitioner  has  referred  that  total  76 dates  of hearing  were 

observed  by the trial Court  in which 36 adjournments  were 

obtained  by  the  prosecution  and  17th  are  the  result  of 

Covid-19 pandemic  and  strikes  of bar  association, whereas 

only 07 adjournments  are attributed  to the  defense as such 

the  record  reflects  that  petitioner  was  arrested  on 

28.05.2018, challan was submitted  on 25.05.2019 and charge 

was  framed  on  21.06.2019,  whereas 

trial  Court  has 

recorded  12 prosecution  witnesses  as of today  and  only  LO 

is 

left 

for 

cross-examination. 

In 

these  peculiar 

circumstances,  this  Court  believes  that  trial  is likely  to be 

concluded  in  near  future,  hence,  it  is  not  appropriate  to 

grant  bail  to  the  accused  at  this  stage.  Reliance is  placed 

upon 2008 YLR  2399 (Tanveer  Hussain  VS  The State). 

8. 

It  is  also  settled 

law 

that  bail  to  accused  on 

completion  of  statutory  period  could  be  granted  when 

Crl.  Misc.  No.845/B/2020 
4 

there  is  no  prospect  of completion  of trial  in  near  future. 

Reliance is placed  upon  2019 MLD  906 (Malik  Za(arullah 

Khan  VS  Murad  Ali  and  another).  Mere  mathematical 

calculation alone was not sufficient for grant  of bail, rather 

the  Court  had  to  look  into  the  overall  conduct  of accused 

during  the  course  of trial  and  factors  which  caused  delay 

in  the  trial  on  the  part  of defence.  There  is no  denial  that 

defense  side  has  also  requested  for  adjournments  due  to 

absence of defense counsel and  in such situation  bail could 

not  be granted.  Reliance is placed  upon  2018 YLR Note  57 

(Mst.  Robina  Bibi  VS  The  State and  others).  This  Court 

has  already  passed  the  direction  for  early  conclusion  of 

trial  in the previous  round  while  relying  upon  2011 SCMR 

1332 (Rehmatullah  VS  The State),  but  this  does  not  give 

premium  to  the  petitioner  for  grant  of  bail.  Reliance  is 

placed  upon  PLD 2016 SC 11  (Nisar Ahmed  VS  The State 

and others). 

9. 

The last  ground  raised  by  the  petitioner  is ailment  of 

petitioner  who  is  allegedly  suffering  from  chest  infection 

and  the  same was  managed  by jail authority,  even  he was 

referred  to  PIMS and  it  has  been  observed  that  seasonal 

chest  infection has  been  treated  with  oral  medication  and 

as such there is no surgical treatment  required  or any other 

ailment  which  could  not  be  treated  while  keeping  the 

petitioner  behind  the  bars.  The  petitioner  has  highlighted 

the recent report  of PIMS dated  23.06.2020, which  discloses 

chronic  anal  fissure,  whereas  doctor  has  given 

the 

medication 

to  the  petitioner  and  as  such  minimum 

requirement  for  protection  of  petitioner's  life  has  been 

Crl.  Misc.  No.845/8/2020 

5 

meted  out.  The  petitioner  is  prima-facie  link  with  the 

hideous  crime of murder  of deceased  Arshad  Khan and  his 

role  could  not  be  segregated  on  the  basis  of  evidence 

brought  on  record  rather  trial  is  likely  to  be  concluded 

within  next  sixty  days,  therefore,  no  ground  for  grant  of 

post-arrest  bail  is  made  out  and  the  same  is  hereby 

dismissed  with  direction  to  the  learned  trial  Court  to 

conclude the trial on or before 31.10.2020. 

Zohid. 

(MOHSIN AKHTARKArNl) 

JUDGE 

