S. No. oforder
/ proceedinos

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLA]I,IABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTTI'ENT

W.P.No.713l,2019
Mst. Fauzia
VS
Director General, FlA, lslamabad and others

Date of order/
Order  with slgnature of Judge  and that  of partles or counsel
Proceedlnos
where necessarv.
22.05.2019 Agha Abdul Sattar, Advocate for  the

petitioner.
Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Khan Khakwani,
learned Assistant  Attorney-General.
Mr. Sadaqat  Ali Jahangir, learned State
Counsel.
Mr. Abdul Majid Afridi, Advocate for
respondents  No.2 and 3.

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner,  Mst. Fauzia, seeks  the recovery  of
her children namely,  Muhammad Hassan
(aged 05 years) and Husnain (aged 3.5
years) from  the  custody of  their
father/respondent No. 2 (Aadil  Akram).
2.  The facts essential for the disposal  of
this petition are that the petitioner  and
respondent No.2 got married on 20.10.2011.
The couple were blessed with two sons,
whose custody is sought  to be recovered by
the petitioner from her former husband.  lt is
not disputed that the marriage between the
petitioner  and respondent No.2 has come to
an end and divorce  certificate has already

been issued.
3.  The petitioner asserts  that respondent
No.2 snatched the children from her on
2O.O1.2019.  The instant petition  was filed on
21.02.2019 and taken-up for hearing on
26.02.2019, whereon  notices were directed
to be issued to the respondents. Vide order
dated 08.04.2019, this Court directed

2

W.P.  No.713l2O',9

respondent No.2 to  tender appearance
before this Court along with the minors on
18.O4.2O19.  On 18.O4.2O19,  respondent No.2
complied  with the said order and tendered
appearance  before this Court along  with the
minors on 21.05.2019. The minors  were
directed  to be handed over to the petitioner,
who was to keep them overnight. The matter
was fixed for  further proceedings  on
22.O5.2O19  i.e. today.
4.  The petitioner  resides in Pakistan along
with her father and has asserted that she is
capable of taking care of her children  and
also to admit them in a school  in Pakistan.
5.  Respondent  No.2 works for a living  in
the United  Arab Emirates  ("U.A.E."). He has
brought  on record  certificates  showing that
the minors had been admitted  in Pace
lnternational School L.L.C.,  Sharjah,  U.A.E.
Learned counsel for respondents No.2 and 3
took the position that it would be in the
interests of the minors  if their education  was

to continue  in the said school.
6.  Respondent  No.2 has filed a petition
before the  learned Guardian Judge,
Abbotabad under the provisions of the
Guardians  and Wards Act, 1890, praying for
him to be appointed as his children's
guardian. Respondent  No.2 has no family
member residing in the U.A.E. who could
take care of the children  while respondent

No.2 is on duty.
7.  The petitioner's  brother had filed an
application under Section 491 Cr.P.C.  before
the Court of the learned Sessions  Judge,
Abbotabad  seeking the petitioner's recovery
from the illegal confinement  of respondent

3

W.P.  No.71312019

No.2's  relatives. Pursuant to the order dated
29.01.2019, the petitioner  was recovered,
and presently she is residing with her father.
The petitioner claims to  have been
maltreated  by respondent  No.2.
8.  A petition under Section 491 Cr.P.C., or
a petition seeking the issuance of a writ of
habeas  corpus, is ordinarily not found to be
competent  where there is no element of
illegal custody by the father of minors.
However,  in the interests  of the children's
welfare,  the Court  could pass an appropriate
order in exercise of its inherent  jurisdiction.
A Court while deciding such petitions does
not conduct a detailed inquiry or go into
factual  controversies.  Such proceedings are
summary in nature and are meant for
providing  immediate and efficacious  relief to
the aggrieved  party. Orders  passed in such
proceedings are interim in nature  and are
subject to the final orders  passed by a Court
exercising jurisdiction under the provisions
of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
9.  Since I  find the  petitioner  and
respondent No.2's children to be at the
tender  age of hizanal and since respondent
No.2 has no relative in the U.A.E. to attend
the children  when he is on duty, I am of the
prima-facie view that it would be in the
children's best interests if  their interim
custody is handed  over to their mother i.e.,
the petitioner. ln holding So, I have  been
guided by the law laid down in the following

cases:-
(i)  ln the case of Khalida Perveed  VS
Muhammad Sultan  Mehmood  (PLD 2004 SC
1), it was opined as follows:-

4

W.P. No.713l2O',9

oln our opinion in the cases pertaining  to
the custody of a child, the Courts are not
supposed  to go into the technicalities of
the law and they should decide the case
keeping in  view the  facts  and
circumstances of each case placed  before
it  for the decision mainly taking into
consideration  welfare of  the  child.
Although ordinarily a  petition under
section,  491, Cr.P.C, is not found to be
competent  when there is no element of
illegal custody by the father of his own
child but in the welfare  of the child as well
as to ensure that the rights which have
been confered upon the child are fully
protected in a suitable mannen the Courts
could also pass approprlate  orders  in
exercis  e of its finherentJ jurisdiction.  "
(ii)  Recently,  in the case of M,iriam  Aberras
Lehdeaho  VS SHO. Police Station Chung.
Lahore (2018 SCMR 427), the Hon'ble
Supreme  Court, after making reference to a
number of judicial precedents, held as
follows:-

'22. The Guardian Court is the final Arbiter
for adjudicating the question  of custody of
children. However,  where  a parent  holding
custody of a minor lavvfully has been
deprived of such custody, such parent
cannot be deprived  of a remedy to regain
the custody  while the matter  is sub iudice
before a Guardian  Coutt. Therefore, in
exceptional  cases  (like the instant  case),
where the High Court finds that the best
interest and welfare of the minor  demand
that his/her custody be  immediately
restored  to the person who was lawfully
holding such custody before being
deprived of the same, the Court is not
denuded ofjurisdiction  to pass appropriate
orders  under section  491, Cr.P.C. directing
that custody  be restored  to that person as
an interim  measure pending  final decision
of the Guardian  Court. While the tender
age of the minor is always a material
consideration  but it  is  not the only
consideration to be kept in mind by the
High Court.  Other factors like best interest
and welfare of the minor,  the procedural
hurdles  and lethargy of the system,  delays
in  finalization  of  such matters,  the
handicaps  that the mother suffers owing to
her gender and financial position, and
above  all the urgency  to take appropriate
measures  to  minimize  the  trauma,

5

W.P. No.71312019

emotional stress  and educational loss of
the minor are equally important and also
need to be kept in mind while granting or
refusing an order to restore  interim
custody by the High Court."

10. ln view of the above, the instant  petition
is allowed;  the interim custody of the
petitioner  and respondent  No.2's children
has been handed  over to the petitioner.  lt will
now be for the learned Guardian  Judge to
finally determine  as to who shall be given the
custody of the children  and to fix a visitation
schedule  for the parent who is not given the

children's  custody.

(MIANGUL HASSAN

RANGZEB)

JUDGE

Ahtesh.m'l

