ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Criminal Appeal No.79/2016 
(Muhammad Awais VS The State) 

Appellant by: 

Mr. Muhammad Arshad Tabrez and Mr. Ansar 
Nawaz Mirza, Advocates. 

Complainant by: 

Ch. Zafar Ali Warraich, Advocate. 

State by: 

Mr. Sadaqat Ali Jahangir, State Counsel.  

Criminal Appeal No.99/2016 
 (Dr. Munir Ahmad VS Muhammad Banaras Sadozai, etc.) 

Appellant by: 

Ch. Zafar Ali Warraich, Advocate. 

Respondent by: 

Mr. Muhammad Arshad Tabrez and Mr. Ansar 
Nawaz Mirza, Advocates.  
Mr. Sadaqat Ali Jahangir, State Counsel. 

and 

Murder Reference No.4/2016 
(The State VS Muhammad Awais) 

State by: 

Mr. Sadaqat Ali Jahangir, State Counsel. 

Respondent by: 

Mr. Muhammad Arshad Tabrez and Mr. Ansar 
Nawaz Mirza, Advocates. 

Date of Hearing: 

19.04.2018. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J:-  Through this common judgment, 

we  intend  to  decide  the  two  captioned  criminal  appeals  and  murder 

reference as it arose out of same FIR No.269, dated 11.08.2014, U/S 302/109 

PPC, P.S. Ramna, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief facts referred in the instant criminal appeals are that Dr. Munir 

Ahmed  Abro/complainant  lodged  the  complaint  Exh.PE,  upon  which  the 

aforesaid  FIR  was  got  lodged.  The  complaint  in  brief  is  that  complainant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [2] of [38] 

was  informed  by  his  son  Fazil  on  telephone  to  reach  PIMS  Hospital 

Emergency  as  her  sister  Sarah  Abro  was  murdered.    On  receiving  the 

information  he  reached  the  hospital  at  about  3:50pm  and  he  has  seen  the 

dead body of Sarah Abro who was murdered by Muhammad Awais son of 

Muhammad Banaras through firearm and her dead body was left at  PIMS 

hospital  and  claimed  the  drama  of  suicide.  He  further  contends  that  her 

daughter  Sarah  Abro  was  abducted  on  23.09.2013  by  Muhammad  Awais 

and  he  detained  Sarah  Abro  in  his  house  at  G-10/2  where  he  assaulted 

Sarah  Abro  and  committed  rape  and  against  which  FIR  was  registered  in 

P.S. Ramna. The complainant has also involved Muhammad Banaras, father 

of  Muhammad  Awais,  as  abettor  in  this  case.  The  police  has  arrested 

Mohammad  Awais  and  recovered  the  pistol  which  was  used  in  the  said 

crime  and  after  the  completion  of  Investigation  submitted  the  Challan 

under section 173 Cr.P.C. against the appellant and his father  Muhammad 

Banaras who have been charged under section 302/109 PPC by the learned 

trial  court  in  the  murder  of  Sarah  Abro  vide  order  dated  21.11.2014.  Both 

the  accused  pleaded  not  guilty  and  claimed  trial  whereupon  the 

prosecution  has  tendered  12  witnesses  and  after  completion  of  the 

prosecution  evidence  appellant  and  Muhammad  Banaras  recorded  their 

statements  U/S  342  Cr.P.C.  whereafter  the  learned  trial  Court  has  passed 

the 

impugned 

judgment  dated  13.04.2016  whereby 

the  appellant 

Muhammad Awais son of Muhammad Banaras has been held guilty for the 

murder of Sarah Abro and he was convicted U/S 302-B PPC and sentenced 

to death by way of Tazir. He was also directed to pay compensation to the 

sum 

of 

Rs.500,000/- 

to 

the 

legal 

heirs 

of 

deceased 

U/S  544-A  Cr.P.C.  and  in  case  of  failure  to  pay  the  compensation  he  shall 

have to further undergo 1 year S.I. whereas the other accused Muhammad 

Banaras was acquitted from the said charge. Hence, these criminal appeals.  

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [3] of [38] 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  appellant  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.79/2016 

contended  that 

impugned 

judgment 

is  against 

law  and  facts  and 

prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt; 

that  Sarah  Abro  deceased  has  committed  suicide  and  there  is  no  direct 

evidence  available  on 

record 

to 

confirm 

the 

stance  of 

the 

complainant/prosecution  to  charge  the  appellant  with  the  murder  of 

deceased Sarah Abro; that the recovery is planted and the recovered pistol 

9mm  Beretta  was  sent  to  the  forensic  expert  after  the  delay which  has  not 

been  explained  by 

the  prosecution  and 

the  entire 

recovery 

is 

inconsequential. 

4. 

Conversely,  the  State  Counsel  and  learned  counsel  for  complainant 

contended  that  prosecution  has  successfully  discharged  the  onus  whereby 

the appellant/Muhammad Awais is the only person who was last seen with 

the  deceased  while  holding  the  pistol  in  his  hand  when  PW-9/Aleena, 

housemaid,  reached  after  hearing  the  fire  shot;  that  as  per  the  medical 

evidence  of  PW-1/Dr.  Nasreen  Butt  and  PW-8/Dr.  Farukh  Kamal  the 

deceased Sarah Abro had received twelve (12) different injuries on her body 

which  were  not  explained  by  the  appellant  in  any  manner;  that  PW-1/Dr. 

Nasreen  Butt  has  categorically  stated  in  her  examination-in-chief  that  the 

injury is from approximate distance of two (2) feet are slightly above which 

confirms that it is not the case of suicide. 

5. 

Argument heard, record perused. 

6. 

From the approval of record it has been observed that the Dr. Munir 

Abro/complainant  has  lodged  the  case  FIR  No.269,  dated  11.08.2014, 

U/S  302/109  PPC,  PS  Ramna,  Islamabad  on  the  basis  of  his  complaint 

(Exh.PE) and the FIR has been referred as Exh.PE/1. As per the complaint 

Dr. Munir Abro, father of deceased, contended that he received a call from 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [4] of [38] 

his real son that his sister was murdered and her dead body is lying in the 

PIMS  Emergency  on  which  he  reached  to  the  PIMS  Hospital  where  he 

found out that his daughter Sarah Abro was lying dead as murdered by her 

husband  i.e.  Muhammad  Awais  son  of  Muhammad  Banaras,  with  firearm 

weapon  and  left  the  dead  body  at  PIMS  Hospital  and  created  a  drama  of 

suicide  of  Sarah  Abro.  The  complainant  further  contended  that  her 

daughter  was  abducted  on  23.09.2013  by  Muhammad  Awais/appellant 

who  detained,  assaulted,  and  committed  rape  with  her  in  his  house  in 

G-10/2,  Islamabad,  accordingly  FIR  was  registered  in  P.S.  Ramna.  The 

complainant 

also 

involved  Muhammad 

Banaras, 

father 

of 

appellant/Muhammad  Awais,  in  this  case  for  the  purposes  of  abetment. 

After  the  registration  of  criminal  case  the  police  have  started  investigation 

and  arrested  appellant/Muhammad  Awais.  After 

completion  of 

investigation,  challan was  submitted in  the  trial  Court  whereby  charge  was 

framed  U/S  302/109  PPC  against  appellant/Muhammad  Awais  and 

acquitted accused/Muhammad Banaras whereas both the accused denied the 

charges and claimed trial. 

7. 

The  prosecution  has  produced  Dr.  Nasreen  Butt,  MLO  as  PW-1,  who 

conducted the postmortem examination of the dead body of Sarah Abro, wife 

of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant,  aged  about  20  years,  brought  by  the  police 

officials  of  P.S.  Ramna,  identified  by  Dr.  Munir  Abro,  father  of  deceased  at 

about 4pm. PW-1 stated in her evidence that the dead body was of a young girl 

having  height  of  5’4”,  both  eyes  were  open  whereas  mouth  was  semi-open. 

The  deceased  was  wearing  pink  trousers,  underwear  with  pad  and  green 

t-shirt. Rigor mortis was positive on neck, both arms, and both legs. The injuries 

found on deceased body were explained by PW-1 in the following manner:  

“There were multiple contusion/abrasion marks on lower 1/3rd and 
middle 1/3rd in front of neck, which was 6x7cm above the right eye-

lid.  There  was  4x2cm  contusion  on  the  lateral  angle  of  eye. 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [5] of [38] 

Contusion  mark  on  lateral  angle  of  right  eye  1/2cm.  There  were 

two contusion marks on nasal bridge, tangentially. There were two 

bruises on  right middle thigh 2x2cm. There were faint bruises on 

both  knee  joint  interiorly,  2x2  and  1x2  respectively.  Contusion 

mark on left eye 8x1cm. Contusion mark on left side of cheek just 

below  the  left  eye.  2x1cm  contusion  mark,  middle  of  front  of 

superior  side  of  forehead.  There  was  cyanosis  on  hypotheses 

theenar of left hand on palmer aspect. There was synopsis with red 

coloured  cyanosis  on  nail  of  little,  ring  and  middle  fingers.  There 

was  fire  arm  entry  wound  middle  of  abdomen,  10cm  below 

epigestrum, 07cm above umbilicus 1x1, very faint blackening and 

charring,  corresponding  with  holes  of  shirt  but  there  was  no 

blackening mark and burning on shirt. There was no burning and 

there was no close contact of wound. Exit wound of fire arm injury 

measuring ½ x ½ cm with everted and rough margins, 38 cm from 

middle of lower end of neck posteriorly at the back of the body.” 

 The PW-1/Dr. Nasreen Butt also given the opinion that the firearm wound 

was  fired  from  approximate  distance  of  two  feet  or  slightly  above. 

PW-1/Dr.  Nasreen  Butt  has  also  given  the  final  opinion  on  internal 

examination of the dead body in the following manner:  

“ 

On  internal  examination,  abdominal  aorta  was  ruptured. 

On  examination  of  scalp,  there  was  sub-periostel  bleeding, 

vertebrae  was  healthy,  membrane  of  scalp  were  having  bleeding 

and contusion on brain.  

In  my  opinion,  deceased  died  due  to  firearm  injury  on 

abdomen, which caused rupture of spleen, kidney, small and large 

intestines,  with  their  blood  vessels  and  abdominal  aorta  which 

caused  severe  bleeding  and  shock,  sufficient  to  cause  death  in 

ordinary  course  of  life.  All  injuries  were  ante  mortem  in  nature. 

Time  between 

injuries  and  death  was  within  1/2  hour 

approximately  and  between  death  and  post  mortem  examination 

within  5  to  5-1/2  hours  approximately.  The  dead  body  was  with 

menstruation  at  that  time  of  examination.  Post  mortem  report  is 

Ex.P.A  and  sketches  of  injuries  Exh.A/1  and  Exh.A/2.  All  are  in 

my hand and with my signatures.” 

On cross-examination, PW-1/Dr. Nasreen Butt stated that she prepared the 

report of dead body Exh.DA which bears her signatures and acknowledged 

that she mentioned only one injury in it and that too without exit. She also 

acknowledged  that  neither  the  contusion  or  abrasion  is  mentioned  in 

 
 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [6] of [38] 

examination report Exh.DA nor there is any mentioning of duration of said 

contusion  and  abrasion  marks  present  on  the  dead  body  of  Sarah  Abro. 

However, she acknowledged that she was called by Islamabad High Court 

regarding medical examination of Sarah Abro and it was regarding change 

in medical examination for rape and on the order of the High Court inquiry 

was conducted against her. She also acknowledged that she is not a firearm 

expert.  

8. 

Dr.  Farrukh  Kamal,  MLO,  PIMS  Hospital,  Islamabad  appeared  as 

PW-8 and stated that Exh.DA is in the handwriting and duly singed by Dr. 

Samia.  Nothing  incriminating  was  hauled  out  in  favour  of  either  party 

during the course of cross-examination.  

9. 

Dr. Munir Abro/complainant appeared as PW-10 and stated that on 

11.08.2014 he was in his office in Serena Hotel, and he received a call from 

his  son  Fazil  Abro  at  around  03:27pm  who  told  him  to  rush  to  PIMS 

Hospital  Emergency  because  Sarah  Abro  has  been  murdered.  He 

immediately  rushed  to  the  hospital  and  reached  there  at  around  03:50pm 

where  other  three  children  Fazil  Abro,  Sarmad  Abro  and  Afroz  Abro 

standing  next  to  the  dead  body  of  Sarah  Abro  which  was  lying  on  a 

stretcher in PIMS Emergency. He contended that Sarah Abro is his youngest 

daughter,  fifth  in  sequence  and  recognized  the  dead  body  of  Sarah  Abro 

who had many injuries and bruises on her face and neck and staff of PIMS 

was  standing  there.  He  asked  the  staff  of  PIMS  as  to  who  brought  the 

dead  body  whereupon  it  was  told  that  a  lady  and  a  boy  had  brought  the 

dead  body  and  left  it  in  the  PIMS  Emergency.  He  also  stated  before  the 

Court  that  he  has  given  application/complaint  Exh.PE  to  Nawaz  Gondal, 

Sub-Inspector, who already got his signatures on memo of identification of 

dead body (Exh.PH). He received the dead body vide receipt Exh.PI for the 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [7] of [38] 

purpose of burial and Sarah Abro was buried on the next day i.e. 12.08.2014. 

He  nominated  Awais  Sadozai  as  a  murderer  and  his  father  Banaras  as  an 

abetter 

in 

this  case.  During 

the  course  of  cross-examination,  he 

acknowledged that when he reached hospital Nawaz Gondal, S.I. was in the 

hospital, however he also acknowledged that he did not mention in Exh.PE 

that there are bruises on the face and neck of Sarah Abro deceased. He has 

also not mentioned that who brought the dead body to the hospital. He also 

denied that he ever had knowledge that Muhammad Awais/appellant was 

taken  into  custody  by  police  on  the  same  day.  He  is  also  not  aware 

regarding Aleena, the servant of the house, who was taken into custody by 

the  police  on  the  same  day.  However,  he  acknowledged  that  Sarah  Abro 

married Muhammad Awais but neither he nor any member of family was 

part  of  marriage  ceremony.  He  also  acknowledged  that  he  got  registered 

case  of  abduction,  Zinna  and  beating  against  Muhammad  Awais  in  P.S. 

Ramna, Islamabad on 23.09.2013 and he never appeared as a witness in that 

case  while  it  was  pending  before  the  Court.  However,  he  denied  that  his 

daughter Sarah Abro appeared before the Court in the said case and made a 

statement,  in  consequence  thereof,  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  was 

acquitted in the said case. He also acknowledged that  Sarah Abro gave an 

affidavit  before  the  Hon’ble  High  Court  for  exonerating  the  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant.  However,  he  also  acknowledged  that  Sarah  Abro  was 

pursuing  her  study  regarding  MBBS  in  the  month  of  March/April,  2013 

from China. He also acknowledged that after 14.02.2014 he had no contact 

with  Sarah  Abro  but  his  family  members  contacted  deceased  Sarah  Abro 

and  he  never  disallowed  his  family  members  to  meet  her.  He  was  also 

confronted  with  the  document  Exh.DA,  the  report  prepared  by  Dr.  Samia, 

where only single firearm wound was mentioned, however at that stage the 

learned  counsel  for  complainant  has  raised  objection  that  such  kind  of 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [8] of [38] 

question could not be asked from the complainant as the report was neither 

prepared  by  him  nor  he  is  the  medical  expert  or  author  of  the  said  report 

despite  the  fact  that  the  complainant  is  also  a  doctor  and  remained  DG 

Health. At last, one of the  suggestions put forward to the complainant has 

been written in the following manner:  

“It  is  also  incorrect  to  suggest  that  Muhammad  Banaras  accused 
has  been  falsely  involved  as  abettor  in  this  case.  It  is  correct  to 
suggest that my daughter has committed suicide.” 

The  above  referred  admission  regarding  suicide  has  been  negated  by  the 

learned Session Judge through a separate handwritten order on the margin, 

which read as under:  

“With  reference  to  the  application  for  correction  filed  before  this 
Court word “correct” is replaced by word “incorrect.” 

10.  Muhammad Sharif, Constable of P.S. Ramna appeared as PW-2 and 

stated that on 03.09.2014, Moharrar of P.S. Ramna, Islamabad handed over 

him  sealed  parcel  containing  the  bloodstained  piece  of  cloth  of  “Sofa”, 

which he deposited with PFSA, Lahore, on the very said day intact.   

11. 

Shakeel  Abbas,  Head  Constable,  Foreign  Mission  Lines,  Islamabad 

appeared  as  PW-3  and  stated  that  on  11.08.2014  he  was  posted  at  P.S. 

Ramna,  Islamabad  when  he  accompanied  Nawaz  Gondal,  S.I.  to  PIMS 

Hospital  where 

the  dead  body  was 

lying  mortuary.  Dr.  Munir 

Abro/complainant  presented  application  before  Nawaz  Gonda,  S.I., 

whereby PW-3 along with Akhtar Shah, Constable took the same to police 

station  and  handed  over  to  Noor  Ellahi,  ASI,  who  recorded  the  FIR, 

whereafter PW-3 along with said Akhtar Shah, Constable brought it back to 

Nawaz  Gondal,  SI  at  PIMS  Hospital,  who  annexed  the  same  with  other 

papers.  PW-3/Shakeel  Abbas,  HC,  further  stated  that  he  along  with  said 

police  officials  went  to  the  place  of  occurrence  i.e.  House  No.54,  Street 

No.23,  Sector  G-10/2,  Islamabad where  Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.,  collected 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [9] of [38] 

one empty cartridge and one lead of bullet of 9mm pistol, which were taken 

into  possession  by  Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PB, 

which  was  attested  by  PW-3  along  with  Ismat  Tahira,  lady  constable. 

Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.,  also  took  into  possession  a  bloodstained  piece  of 

‘sofa’ cloth vide recovery memo Exh.PC., which was attested by PW-3 along 

with  Ismat  Tahira,  lady  constable.  PW-3  further  stated  that  during 

investigation,  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  disclosed  that  he  could  get 

recovered the weapon of offence i.e. 9mm from his house, on which PW-3 

along  with  Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.,  reached  at  the  house  where 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  got  recovered  the  said  pistol  from  an 

Almirah  placed  at  western  side  of  the  T.V. lounge,  though  no  fingerprints 

were identified by fingerprint expert. I.O. taken into possession  that pistol 

vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PD,  which  was  attested  by  PW-3  and  Tasaddaq, 

Constable.  PW-3  further  stated  that  Moharrar  P.S.  Ramna,  Islamabad 

handed  over  him  two  sealed  parcels  said  to  have  contained  empty 

cartridge, lead of bullet, and pistol 9mm which he deposited the same with 

FSL,  Main  Margalla  Road,  Islamabad  intact.  PW-3  also  stated  that 

Muhammad Nawaz, S.I., got snapped ten (10) photographs of the deceased 

and  place  of  occurrence  in  his  mobile  and  took  the  same  into  possession 

vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PE,  which is  attested  by  PW-3. However, during 

the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-3/Shakeel  Abbas,  HC,  acknowledged 

that  complainant  presented  the  application  at  about  12:36  noon  which  he 

presented  at  the  police  station  at  about  01:00pm  and  returned  to  PIMS  at 

about 01:25pm, whereafter PW-3 along with other police officials reached at 

the place of occurrence i.e. house of Awais, where one maid servant, mother 

and  sister  of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  were  present.  PW-3  further 

conceded that they remained in the house for about 25/30 minutes whereas 

Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.,  had  visited  other  rooms  of  the  house  as  well, 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [10] of [38] 

whereafter  they  returned  to  police  station  at  about  03:30pm.  PW-3  also 

acknowledged  that  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  was  interrogated  during 

the  night  of  21.08.2014  and  on  the  next  date  i.e.  22.08.2014,  they  left  the 

police  station  for  the  place  of  occurrence  at  about  11:40am  where  mother 

and sister of Muhammad Awais/appellant along with maid servant of the 

house  were  present  there.  The  Almirah,  from  where  the  pistol  was 

recovered, was closed but not locked and fingerprint expert was a constable 

from  Rescue-15  Emergency  Police,  who  was  summoned  by  Muhammad 

Nawaz, S.I., before leaving for the recovery.  

12. 

Ismat Tahira, Lady Constable, appeared as  PW-4 and stated that on 

11.08.2014  she  was  directed  to  reach  PIMS  Hospital  regarding  conduct  of 

autopsy of Sarah Abro. Father, mother, and brother of deceased along with 

Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I./I.O.  were  already  present  there.  PW-4  further 

stated that autopsy of deceased was conducted whereby the doctor handed 

over to her last worn clothes of deceased in a shopping bag. PW-3 presented 

the same as shirt (P1), trousers (P2), both bloodstained underwear (P3), and 

short vest (P4) before Muhammad Nawaz, S.I./I.O., who took the same into 

possession  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PF,  which  was  attested  by  her  and 

brother  of  deceased.  Thereafter  they  went  to  place  of  occurrence  from 

where  Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I./I.O.,  cut  a  piece  of  sofa  cloth  which  was 

lying  in  the  TV  lounge  and  took  the  same  into  possession  vide  recovery 

memo Exh.PC. Muhammad Nawaz, S.I./I.O. also collected empty cartridge 

along  with  lead  (slug)  of  bullet  and  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery 

memo  Exh.PB.  However,  during  the  course  of  cross-examination,  she 

acknowledged  that  two  constables  including  Shakeel  Abbas  were  also 

accompanied  with  them  when  they  reached  at  place  of  occurrence,  where 

they stayed in the TV Lounge for about half an hour whereas Investigation 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [11] of [38] 

Officer  had  checked  other  rooms  of  the  house  also.  PW-4  further 

acknowledged that  the house was locked and got opened by  a boy having 

key, whereas there were nobody in the house.  

13.  Muhammad  Akram,  ASI,  appeared  as  PW-5  and  stated  that  on 

11.08.2014 he was Moharrar in P.S. Ramna  when Muhammad Nawaz/I.O. 

handed  over  him  bloodstained  cloth  of  sofa,  sealed  in  parcel  along  with 

another  parcel  said  to  have  contained  lead  of  bullet  and  empty  cartridge 

which  were  placed  in  Malkhana.  On  22.08.2014,  Muhammad  Nawaz,  I.O., 

handed  over  him  sealed  parcel  containing  a  9mm  pistol  which  he  also 

placed  in  Malkhana.  On  11.09.2014,  all  these  parcels  were  handed  over  to 

Muhammad Sharif, Constable for onward transmission to FSL and chemical 

examiner  at  Lahore,  whereafter  his  statement  was  recorded.  PW-5  also 

acknowledged that FSL is located in F-10/3, Islamabad and Shakeel Abbas, 

Constable after depositing of above said parcel submitted a road certificate 

to police station at about 05:00pm.  

14.  Noor Ellahi, ASI, appeared as PW-6 and stated that on 11.08.2014, he 

was  duty  officer  in  P.S.  Ramna,  Islamabad  and  received  the  complaint, 

Exh.PE, through Shakeel, Constable, sent by Muhammad Nawaz, S.I./I.O., 

which was converted into formal FIR, Exh.PE/1.  

15.  Aamir  Shahzad,  Draftsman,  appeared  as  PW-7  and  stated  that  he 

visited  the  place  of  occurrence  on  17.08.2014  along  with  Investigation 

Officer  and  on  his  pointation  and  on  the  pointation  of  complainant,  he 

prepared  rough  notes  and  also  prepared  scaled  site  plan,  Exh.PG,  on 

20.08.2014. All the drawing and notes were signed by him. However, during 

the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-7  acknowledged  that  if  any  witness 

would have had told him the name and position of accused, he would have 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [12] of [38] 

mentioned it the site plan Exh.PG. PW-7 also acknowledged that the house 

was open and inmates were present in the house. 

16.  Aleena daughter of Ghulam Shabbir , appeared as PW-9, who is the 

star  witness  in  this  case,  stated  that  she  was  working  as  housemaid  at  the 

time  of  occurrence  in  the  house  of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  On 

10.08.2014, Asif, cousin of Muhammad Awais/appellant, visited the house 

where a quarrel took place between Asif and Muhammad Awais/appellant 

whereafter  Asif  left  the  house.  On  his  leaving,  Sarah  Abro/deceased  and 

Muhammad  Awais  had  a  quarrel  on  the  point  that  Sarah  Abro/deceased 

asked  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  as  to  why  he  treated  Asif  like  that. 

PW-9/Aleena further stated that she heard Sarah Abro saying that she will 

take  revenge  from  Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  PW-9  also  heard 

conversation took place between Sarah Abro and Jasia, sister of Muhammad 

Awais/appellant,  where  Jasia  was  talking 

loudly  that  Sarah  Abro 

(deceased) should be sent back to her parent house as they did not want to 

keep  her,  even  Jasia  told  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  that  she  did  not 

want  to  keep  Sarah  Abro  in  the  house  and  she  should  be  sent  back  to  her 

parent  house.  However,  at  about  10:30pm  Jasia  and  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  left  the  house  for  a  marriage  ceremony  and  Sarah  Abro 

remained in  the  house.  On  their  return,  Jasia  and  Sarah  Abro  had  another 

quarrel.  PW-9/Aleena  further  stated  that  on  the  next  morning,  i.e. 

11.08.2014, Sarah Abro was very upset and constantly strolling between the 

room and TV lounge, whereas Shamas, who came to take Jasia, handed over 

some  money  to  PW-9/Aleena  for  further  transmission  to  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  which  she  gave  to  Sarah  Abro.  PW-9  further  stated  that 

when  Sarah  Abro  was  going  to  her  room  with  money,  she  saw  a  pistol  in 

her pocket. Feeling worried, she managed to take out the pistol and hide it 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [13] of [38] 

in  the  cupboard  of  Jasia,  though  Sarah  Abro  time  and  again  asked  her  to 

hand over the pistol back to her on the stance that “گاےد رما مجھے یسوا”. On this, she 

gave  back  the  pistol  to  Sarah  Abro  deceased  who  later  on  sat  in  the  TV 

lounge.  PW-9/Aleena  thereafter  stated  that  she  went  out  to  see  garbage 

collector  and  when  she  reached  at  the  main  gate,  she  heard  a  fire  shot 

and screams of Sarah Abro.  

17.  At  this  stage,  learned  counsel  for  complainant  requested  the 

Court to declare PW-9/Aleena as hostile. The said request was allowed 

and  she  has  been  cross-examined  by  complainant  as  well  as  defence 

counsel  simultaneously.  However,  during 

the  course  of  cross-

examination, 

PW-9/Aleena 

acknowledged 

that  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  took  her  and  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  to  a  private 

hospital  on  vehicle  which  he  lend  from  the  neighborhood,  and  that 

Sarah  Abro  deceased  was  in  senses  on  the  way  to  hospital  and  some 

blood  drops  shed  on  the  floor  of  house  and  on  the  seat  of  vehicle  as 

well, however she do not remember the name of the private hospital to 

which  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  took  the  deceased  at  the  first 

instance. PW-9/Aleena also acknowledged that Sarah Abro had nothing 

in  her  hand,  then  again  said  Sarah  Abro  had  a  pistol  in  her  hand  and 

when  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  picked  her  up  the  pistol  got 

dropped  from  deceased’s  hand  which  she  picked  up  and  put  it  on  a 

nearby  table.  PW-9/Aleena  further  acknowledged  that  she  had  also 

gone  to  the  second  hospital  where  she  saw  sister  of  deceased  and  that 

she  remained  in  the  Women  Police  Station  till  night.  The  Learned 

counsel for defence has also cross-examined PW-9/Aleena whereby she 

acknowledged  that  she  recorded  her  statement  before  PW-12/Nawaz 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [14] of [38] 

Gondal,  S.I.,  and  that  she  remained  in  the  Woman  Police  Station  for 

12/13 days though she was not produced before any Court.  

18. 

Faazil Abro, the brother of deceased Sarah Abro, appeared as PW-11 

and  stated  that  he  was  informed  by  his  sister  regarding  the  death  of 

deceased  Sarah  Abro  and  on  his  inquiry  he  find  out  that  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant brutally beaten up the deceased in the morning and shot 

her  dead,  and  that  his  father  reached  to  the  hospital  at  about  3:25pm. 

During the course of cross-examination, PW-11/Faazil Abro acknowledged 

that her sister Sarah Abro was forced into that marriage, and on 14.02.2014, 

she left the  house for university but never came back  to home whereas he 

never  visited  the  house  of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  after  marriage. 

PW-11  further  acknowledged  that  prior  to  registration  of  instant  case  his 

father  got  lodged  a  case  regarding  abduction,  rape  and  torture  of  Sarah 

Abro deceased against Muhammad Awais/appellant in P.S. Ramna, though 

Sarah  Abro  deceased  appeared  before  the  Court  and  belied  that  story 

whereby  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  was acquitted.  PW-11/Faazil  Abro 

also  acknowledged  that  family  of  appellant  was  with  the  dead  body  of 

Sarah Abro in the hospital whereas Muhammad Awais/appellant was not 

present there but he was outside the hospital premises, and that he had also 

seen PW-9/Aleena in the hospital along with police officials. PW-11/Faazil 

Abro  further  acknowledged  that  he  met  the  police  officer  in  the  hospital 

who  has  not  recorded  his  statement,  the  same  was  got  recorded  by  the 

police  official  after  3/4  days,  and  that  he  never  went  to  the  house  of 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  PW-11/Faazil  Abro  further  acknowledged 

that  police  officials  arrested  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  in  the  hospital 

on  11.08.2014  whereas  police  officials  have  neither  interrogated  nor 

recorded statement of PW-9/Aleena in his presence.  

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [15] of [38] 

19.  Muhammad Nawaz, S.I./I.O, appeared as PW-12 and stated that he 

was  posted  in  P.S.  Ramna  on  11.08.2014  and  he  received  a  message  from 

Rescue 15 at about 2:05/2:10pm that a girl named Sarah Abro has received a 

bullet  injury  whereupon  he  along  with  Shakeel  Abbas  and  Akhtar  Shah, 

constables, reached  the PIMS Hospital at about 02:35pm where he saw the 

dead body of deceased Sarah Abro and her siblings i.e. Faazil, Sarmad, and 

Afroz. PW-12/Muhammad Nawaz, S.I., further stated that the proceedings 

were  initiated  on  the  arrival  of  complainant at  about  3:50pm,  who drafted 

an  application  (Exh.PE)  on  which  he  formulated  Isteghasa  and  sent  it  to 

P.S.  Ramna  through  Shakeel  Ahmad,  constable.  PW-12  also  stated  that  he 

conducted  examination  of  the  deceased  through  Asmat  Tahir,  lady 

constable,  from  a  lady  doctor  whereas  Doctor  Samia  conducted  first 

examination  of  the  dead  body  whereupon  he  formulated  inquest  report 

Exh.PJ/1-2,  which  was  signed  by  Munir  Abro  and  Sarmad  Abro.  PW-12 

also  stated  that  he  formulated  memo  of  identification  of  dead  body 

(Exh.PH),  application  for  conducting  postmortem  of  deceased  (Exh.PK), 

and  application  for  keeping  the  dead  body  in  mortuary  (Exh.PL).  PW-12 

further  stated  that  Dr.  Nasreen  Butt,  CMO,  conducted  the  postmortem  of 

deceased  Sarah  Abro  whereafter  last  worn  clothes  (P1  to  P4)  of  deceased 

were  handed  over  to  him  which  were  taken into  possession  vide  recovery 

memo Exh.PF and thereafter handed over the dead body of the deceased to 

Dr. Munir Abro/complainant vide receipt Exh.PI. PW-12 also got recorded 

the statement U/S 161 Cr.P.C. of deceased’s siblings i.e. Faazil, Sarmad and 

Afroza along with supplementary statement  U/S 161 Cr.P.C. of Dr. Munir 

Abro/complainant as well as statement of Asmat Tahira, lady constable. 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [16] of [38] 

20. 

PW-12/Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.,  further  stated  that  he  visited  the 

place  of  occurrence  along  with  Asmat  Tahir,  Lady  Constable,  and  Akhtar 

Shah, Constable, and on inspection he found bloodstains on the sofa kept in 

the TV lounge, which he cut through scissor and prepared a parcel and took 

the  same  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PC.  PW-12  also  found 

the  lead  from  sofa  and  an  empty  of  9mm  which  was  lying  seven  (7)  feet 

from  the  sofa  on  floor  which  he  also  took  into  possession  vide  recovery 

memo Exh.PB. PW-12/Muhammad Nawaz, S.I., also prepared an un-scaled 

site plan Exh.PM and recorded the statement of Asmat Tahira and Shakeel 

Abbas  U/S  161  Cr.P.C.  He  further  acknowledged  that  he  arrested 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  on  12.08.2014 as  he  himself  came  to  the  P.S. 

Ramna,  whereafter  on  22.08.2014  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  was  taken 

to  his  residence  i.e.  House  No.54,  Street  No.23,  G-10/2,  Islamabad,  from 

where  he  got  recovered  the  pistol  from  the  cupboard  kept  in  the  western 

room and then another complaint U/S 13, 20, 65 of AO was registered. On 

20.08.2014,  PW-12  formulated  the  scaled  site  plan  through  PW-7/Amir 

Shahzad  (Exh.PG)  and  on  21.08.2014,  he  obtained  postmortem  report 

(Exh.PA)  from  Dr.  Nasreen  Butt.  He  completed  the  investigation  after 

receiving certain documents from mother of Muhammad Awais/appellant 

on 15.08.2014 which also included the details of Muhammad Banaras, father 

of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant,  who  went  abroad  one  day  after  the 

occurrence.  On  19.08.2014,  PW-12  also  visited  the  Life  Care  Hospital  and 

joined  the  Chowkidar,  lady  doctor,  and  incharge  of  the  hospital  in  the 

investigation,  and  finally  submitted  the 

incomplete  challan  against 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  On  03.09.2014,  the 

investigation  was 

transferred to the CIA. 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [17] of [38] 

21.  During the course of cross-examination, PW-12/Muhammad Nawaz, 

S.I., acknowledged that no eyewitness of occurrence has been mentioned in 

Exh.PE and that neither in the scaled site plan (Exh.PG) nor in the unscaled 

site plan (Exh.PN) Muhammad Awais/appellant has been mentioned, and 

that  he  obtained  attested  copy  of  initial  examination  report  (Exh.DA) 

conducted by Dr. Samia. PW-12 also acknowledged that he visited the place 

of  occurrence  and  found  it  open  whereby  he  searched  the  rooms  which 

were  opened  and  left  those  which  were  locked.  He  also  conceded  that 

Chowkidar of the Life Care Hospital and other staff affirmed that appellant 

along  with  two  other  women  brought  deceased  to  the  hospital.  He  also 

acknowledged  that  he  did  not  meet  PW-9/Aleena  during  the  period  of 

11.08.2014  to  22.08.2014  and  that  he  did  not  join  any  inhabitant  of  the 

locality  in  the  recovery  proceedings  and  that  the  house  of  appellant  was 

open  and  mother  of  appellant  was  present  inside  the  house  whereas  the 

house comprises of total five (5) rooms with a basement while he recovered 

the  pistol 

from 

the  room  adjacent 

to 

the  room  of  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  and  even  the  said  room  and  Almirah  therein  was  open 

and not locked. PW-12 also acknowledged that he sent the pistol and empty 

to  the  Forensic  Science  Laboratory  through  Shakeel  Abbas/Constable  on 

the same day. 

22.  On  thorough  perusal  of  the  evidence  tendered  by  the  prosecution, 

following key facts emerged on record:  

(i.)  Mst.  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  received  a  firearm  injury  on 

11.08.2014  on  her  abdomen,  10cm  below  epigestrum,  7cm 

above  umbilicus  1x1,  very  faint  blackening  and  charring, 

corresponding  with  the  holes  of  shirt  whereas  the  said bullet 

exit from backside, 38cm from middle of lower end of neck. 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [18] of [38] 

(ii.) 

PW-1/Dr. Nasreen Butt referred 11 injuries on the body of the 

deceased including the firearm injury.  

(iii.)  PW-1/Dr.  Nasreen  Butt  suggested  that  the  firearm  wound 

was  caused  from  approximate  distance  of  two  (2)  feet  or 

slightly above.  

(iv.)  Dr.  Samia  prepared  Exh.DA  in  which  only  one  injury  entry 

wound was referred.  

(v.)  No witness of occurrence has been brought on record. 

(vi.)  Sarah Abro deceased entered into marriage with Muhammad 

Awais/appellant against the wishes of her family. 

(vii.)  PW-9/Aleena,  housemaid  of  appellant,  was  declared  hostile 

by the prosecution. 

(viii.)  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  and  PW-9/Aleena  took  Sarah 

Abro  deceased  in  injured  condition  to  Life  Care  Hospital  for 

treatment  and  later  on  when  she  died  she  had  been  taken  to 

PIMS Hospital on 11.08.2014.  

(ix.)  The  incident  took  place  in  House  No.54,  Street  No.23,  Sector 

G-10/2, Islamabad with 9mm Beretta Pistol.  

(x.) 

Fire  empty,  lead,  and  piece  of  bloodstained  sofa  cloth  were 

taken 

into  possession  by  Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I.,  on 

11.08.2014 from the place of occurrence, i.e. TV lounge.  

(xi.)  Muhammad Awais/appellant was arrested on 12.08.2014 who 

himself surrendered before the police.  

(xii.)  Muhammad Awais/appellant got recovered the pistol kept in 

a cupboard from his house on 22.08.2014.  

(xiii.)  PW-9/Aleena  recorded  her  statement  U/S  161  Cr.P.C. 

on 22.11.2014.  

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [19] of [38] 

(xiv.)  The recovered pistol and fire empty had been sent to National 

Forensic  Science,  Laboratory  on  22.08.2014,  the  same  was 

matched as per National Forensic Science, Laboratory.  

(xv.)  Scaled  site  plan  (Exh.PG)  and  unscaled  site  plan  (Exh.PN) 

were  prepared  on  the  instructions  of  Investigation  Officer  by 

Draftsman and not on the instructions of any witness.  

(xvi.)  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  has  taken  a  plea  that  Sarah 

Abro had committed suicide.  

23. 

 In  view  of  above  background,  this  Court  on  the  basis  of  available 

evidence  and  the  points  noted  above  reappraised  the  view  of  the  learned 

Trial Court and came to the conclusion that Sarah Abro (deceased) entered 

into  marriage  with  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  against  the  will  of  her 

family members, against which the case FIR No.372, dated 29.09.2013, U/S 

376,  384,  337H,  337,  506-A(1)  PPC,  P.S.  Ramna,  Islamabad  was  got  lodged 

with  the  accusation  that  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  abducted  Sarah 

Abro (deceased) and raped her. However, Sarah Abro (deceased) recorded 

her statement as PW-2 and submitted her affidavit before the Court on the 

basis  of  said  affidavit  the  learned  Trial  Court  vide  judgment  dated 

16.04.2014  acquitted  Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  Whereas,  if  the  said 

matter  is  placed  in 

juxtaposition  with  the  statement  of  Dr.  Munir 

Abro/complainant,  it  appears  that  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  had  no  contact 

with  her 

family  members, 

including 

the  parents,  as  Dr.  Munir 

Abro/complainant  stated  that  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  left  the  house  on 

14.02.2014  and  never  came  back  home,  whereafter  he  saw  Sarah  Abro 

(deceased) on 11.08.2014 when he was informed about her death.  

24. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  background,  there  is  no  apparent 

malafide on the part of prosecution, especially the  complainant, to involve 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [20] of [38] 

Muhammad Awais/appellant in this case while considering the statements 

of PW-9/Aleena who has given the details of the day of occurrence as well 

as the previous day  i.e. 10.08.2014 whereby she has narrated the following 

facts: 

i. 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  and  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  had  a 

quarrel on the visitation of Asif and the way he was treated. 

ii. 

Jasia  quarreled  with  Sarah  Abro  (deceased) and  told  her  that  she  is 

unwanted and should be sent back to her parent house.  

iii.  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  also  joined  and  supported  her  sister 

and quarreled with Sarah Abro (deceased). 

iv.  When  Jasia  came  back  to  house  after  marriage,  she  and  Sarah  Abro 

(deceased) quarreled again.  

v. 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  locked  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  in  the 

house  when  he  and  Jasia  left  the  house  to  attend  a  marriage 

ceremony.  

The above facts narrated by PW-9/Aleena give an overview of the chain of 

events of  the earlier day  of murder. The second important question before 

this  Court  is  to  verify  the  statement  of  PW-9/Aleena,  who  had  been 

declared hostile by the prosecution, whereas before declaring PW-9/Aleena 

hostile,  she  categorically  stated  that  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  had  a  pistol  in 

her hand which was taken by her but she stated that Sarah Abro (deceased) 

told  PW-9/Aleena  that  “گاےد  رما  مجھے  یسوا”  and  she  needs  the  pistol,  whereupon 

PW-9/Aleena  returned  the  pistol  to  her.  Such  kind  of  statement  gives  an 

impression  that  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  is  under  fear  of  her  death  and 

therefore,  kept  the  pistol  for  her  safety  and  protection.  However,  when 

PW-9/Aleena went out of home to see the garbage collector, she heard the 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [21] of [38] 

fire shot and shouts of Sarah Abro (deceased). Though, during the course of 

cross-examination, she acknowledged that: 

“She  did  not  have  anything  in  her  hand,  again  said,  she  had  a 
pistol in her hand. When Awais picked her, the pistol was dropped 
from  her  hand.  The  pistol  dropped  from  hand  closed  to  her  feet.  I 
picked the pistol.” 

25. 

If  we  compare  the  above  referred  position  with  the  statement  of 

PW-9/Aleena,  it  turns  the  table  otherwise  as  she  earlier  confirmed  before 

the  Investigation  Officer  that  the  pistol  was  in  the  hand  of  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant.  Such  kind  of  approach  raise  a  serious  concern  upon  the 

conduct of said witness, however all these facts have to be seen in the light 

of  technical  evidence  of  the  nature  of  injury  as  well  as  medical  expert’s 

evidence, therefore, in order to proceed further, the nature of injury as well 

as  medical  affect  of  the  firearm  injury  has  to  be  analyzed.  Accordingly, 

Dr. Nasreen Butt/PW-1 has categorically deposed in her testimony that: 

“In  my  opinion,  the  firearm  wound  was  fired  from  approximate 
distance of 2 feet or slightly above.” 

While considering the said stance of Dr. Nasreen Butt/PW-1, we have also 

gone through the autopsy report wherein PW-1 defined the relevant portion 

as under: 

“There  was  a  firearm  entry  wound,  middle  of  abdomen,  10cm 
below  epigestrum,  07cm  above  in  umbilicus  1x1,  very  faint 
blackening and charring corresponding with the holes of shirt, but 
there was no burning mark on the shirt. There was no burning and 
there was no close contact of wound. Exit wound of firearm injury 
measuring  ½  ½  cm  with  aberted  and  rough  margins,  38cm  from 
middle of lower end of neck. Posteriously at the back of body.” 

Such  technical  evidence  of  the  doctor  confirms  that  the  fire  shot  hit  Sarah 

Abro  (deceased)  above  the  umbilicus,  which  is  also  apparent  in  the 

photographs  referred  as  Exh.PE,  whereas  the  exit  wound  confirms  the 

trajectory  in  the  lower  region  from  the  back  as  both  these  exit  and  entry 

wounds  are  not  in  a  straight  line  rather  it  is  a  downward  angle,  even  the 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [22] of [38] 

same has been confirmed by the photographs produced by the Investigation 

Officer in which the slug was taken from the wooden portion of the sofa on 

which  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  was  sitting  at  the  time  of  receiving  bullet 

injury.  

26. 

In view of above background, it is inconceivable that how had Sarah 

Abro (deceased) fired using a 9mm Beretta pistol while pointing the pistol 

upon  her  upper  portion  of  abdomen  with  an  approximately  distance  of 

more  than  2  feet  while  sitting  on  a  sofa.  Such  kind  of  angle  by  any 

impression could not be caused to a person if he or she holds the pistol in 

his/her own hand(s).  

27. 

The second important factor  regarding which the matter revolves is 

the  distance  of  approximately  seven  feet  at  which  the  firearm  empty  was 

found as referred by the Investigation Officer at the time of visit of the place 

of  occurrence  and  taken  into  possession  by  him  through  Exh.PB.  This  also 

confirms that someone was standing in front of Sarah Abro (deceased) and 

shot her.   

28.  We  have  also  gone  through  a  number  of  forensic  medicine  and 

toxicology references and it has been observed that a firearm like pistol or a 

gun  is  an  instrument/device,  which  propels  a  projectile  by  expansion  of 

gases generating by the combustion of an explosive substance and pistol is a 

hand gun in which cartridges are directly loaded in the chambers of a barrel 

and when the bullet comes out of muzzle with rotating movement and with 

considerable  velocity  and  energy  it  is  a  combinate  by  flame,  gases, 

accompanied by unburned burning or partially burned propellant, whereas 

when there is a close shot that is in the range of power blast and the flame is 

into  one  and  three  inches  for  a  small  arm  there  is  a  collar  of  shoot  and 

grease around the circular wound of entry partially burned and unburned 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [23] of [38] 

grains of powder are blasted into the skin causing a tattooing which cannot 

be easily wiped off. Similarly, blackening is found if firearm like a shotgun 

is discharged from a distance of not more than three feet and a revolver or 

pistol discharge within about two feet.  

29.  We  have  also  gone  through  the  Medical  Jurisprudence  and 

Toxicology  by  John  James  Reese  wherein  he  has  also  referred  certain 

observations  regarding  the  average  tendencies  of  suicide  observed  from 

different  cases  where  the  style  of  killing  oneself  has  been  explained in  the 

following manner: 

“The  question  of  the  homicidal,  suicidal,  or  accidental  character  of 
gunshot wounds must generally be settled by the appearance  of the 
wounds, and also by the particular circumstances. Thus, if it be on 
the  forehead  or  temple,  behind  the  ear,  in  the  mouth,  or  over  the 
heart,  and  if  it  be  blackened  or  lacerated  (indicating  the  close 
proximity  of  the  weapon),  it  may  be  regarded  as  almost  certainly  a 
suicidal act. If, on the contrary, the wound be on the back or side of 
the head (except in the case of the insane), or of the body, without the 
blackened  and  lacerated  appearance  above  alluded  to,  it  may  be 
considered as the act of a homicide. Accidental gunshot wounds bear 
the  marks  of  near  wounds,  as  they  are  mostly  the  result  of  the 
accidental discharge of the piece, either in the hands of the deceased 
at the time, or else in close proximity to his person. The possibility of 
a bullet glancing from a hard surface, and thus  entering a point at 
which the weapon was not aimed, must not be overlooked. 

Out  of  368  cases  of  suicide  by  firearms,  in  France,  297  were  from 
wounds in the head; of these, 234 were fired into the mouth; only 71 
were from wounds inflicted on the chest or abdomen.” 

30.  We  have  also  gone  through  the  concept  of  blackening  in  the 

abovementioned  paragraph  and  this  Court  has  taken  account  of  different 

citations  while  considering  the  question  of  distance  of  a  firearm  whereby 

the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court  while  replying  upon  the  book  “Medical 

Jurisprudence  and  Toxicology  by  Jaising  P.  Modi”  has  observed  in  case 

reported as 2018 MLD 410 [Lah] (Muhammad Rizwan VS The State, etc.) that:  

“A  suicidal  firearm  wound  is  usually  a  contact  wound  situated  on 
the  side  of  the  temple,  depending  on  which  hand was  used  to  shoot 
himself,  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  the  roof  of  the  mouth,  in  the 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [24] of [38] 

chest or epigastrium in front or the left side and sometimes under the 
chin. The firearm is usually fired at close range.” 

Similarly,  the  apex  Court  has  also  explained  the  concept  of  burning  and 

blackening  in  PLD  2002  SC  786  (Muhammad  Tufail  VS  The  State)  in  the 

following manner: 

“Fire  arm  wound  Absence  of  burning  and  blackening  around  the 
wounds Effect Where there was no burning and blackening present 
around the wound the same itself suggested that shot was fired from 
longer  distance  than  nearer  distance  but  such  fact  was  also 
dependent  upon  the  kind  and  quality  of  gun  powder  used  in  the 
cartridges and the length of barrel and its diameter at muzzle end.” 

We  have  also  taken  into  account  the  view  of  the  Hon’ble  Peshawar  High 

Court reported in 2018 YLR 282 [Peshawar] (Haji Qasim Kkhan VS  Kabir 

Khan, etc.) wherein it has been held that: 

“11. 
In  view  of  the  Modi  Medical  Jurisprudence  and  Toxicology 
favorite  sites  of  suicidal  fire-arm  are:-A  suicidal  firearm  wound  is 
usually  a  contact  wound  situated  on  the  side  of  the  temple, 
depending on which hand was used to shoot himself, in the center of 
the  forehead,  the  roof  of  the  mouth,  in  the  chest  or  epigatrium  in 
front  or  left  side  and  sometimes  under  the  chin.  The  firearm  is 
usually  fired  at  close  range.  A  small  weapon  like  a  revolver  or  a 
pistol is held in the hand, while a rifle or a shot gun is supported on 
the  ground  or  against  the  wall.  Sometimes,  the  firing  is  done  by 
pulling  a  string  tied  to  the  trigger  by  the  big  toe.  The  skin  around 
the entry wound shows characteristics blackening.” 

Likewise,  the  Hon’ble  Sindh  High  Court  in  recent  judgment  reported  as 

2018  PCr.LJ  Note  52  (Nooro  alias  Noor  Muhammad  Sehar  VS  The  State) 

has observed that: 

“Blackening  on  entrance  wound---Effect---Principle---Blackening 
on entrance wound would show that fire shot was made from near 
range under three feet.” 

Similarly, the Hon’ble Lahore High Court had also taken a view regarding 

the  concept  of  blackening  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Riaz  reported  as 

(PLJ 1996 Cr.C (Lahore) 1789), wherein it has been held that:  

“Blackening with pistol is present when it is fired from a distance of 
one foot and not from 4 or 5 feet.” 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [25] of [38] 

Whereas,  the  Hon’ble  Sindh  High  Court  on  the  concept  of  distance  has 

taken the view in the case of Mir Muhammad reported as (1972 PCr.LJ 1108 

Karachi), wherein it has been observed that:  

“The  distance  from  which  gun  was  fired  can  be  estimated  by 
blackening,  burning,  or  the  diameter  of  the  wound  caused  by  gun 
shot.” 

31. 

The  above  referred  concepts  explained  by  John  James  Reese  and 

Jaising  P.  Modi  in  their  respective  books  as  well  as  observations  rendered 

by different superior Courts persuaded this Court to observe that statement 

of  Dr.  Nasreen  Butt  is  correct  and  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  was  shot  by 

someone  else  beyond  the  distance  of  two  feet  as  Dr.  Nasreen  Butt  has 

categorically stated that: 

“very  faint  blackening  and  charring  corresponding  with  holes  of 
shirt was present”  

Hence, it was not a case of suicide, even otherwise, Sarah Abro (deceased) 

was doing routine cooking and housekeeping on the day of incident and the 

day  earlier.  Such  state  of  affairs  clearly  establishes  that  she  was  neither 

frustrated nor depressed in any manner to commit suicide. Even otherwise, 

she  had  retained  the  pistol  for  her  own  defence  which  is  apparent  from 

statement  of  PW-9/Aleena,  who  also  stated  before  the  Court  that  Sarah 

Abro  (deceased)  needed  the  pistol  as  according  to  her  “گاےد  رما  مجھے  یسوا”.  Such 

statement  by  the  star  witness  of  this  case  stand  corroborated  with  the 

circumstantial  evidence  available  on  record  while  considering  the  medical 

evidence  as  well  as  references  of  forensic  sciences  and  it  goes  against 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  Even  otherwise,  the  statement  of  PW-

9/Aleena  contains  details  of  the  day  of  occurrence  and  other  factors, 

however she had been declared hostile but in our humble view, she has not 

stated  a  single  word  against  the  prosecution  in  her  statement  and  she  has 

been  declared  hostile  at  a  point  when  she  was  about  to  record  a  material 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [26] of [38] 

fact in her statement U/S 161 Cr.P.C. whereby she earlier stated before the 

Investigation  Officer  that  the  pistol  was  in  the  hand  of  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  but  she  was  declared  hostile  by  the  prosecution  on  this 

juncture  and  later  on  she  had  been  cross  examined.  During  the  course  of 

cross-examination  by  the  learned  counsel  for  complainant,  PW-9/Aleena 

acknowledged that: 

“When  we  picked  her  from  the  house  and  boarded  her  in  vehicle, 
she did not have anything in her hand again said, she had a pistol 
in her hand. When Awais picked her, the pistol was dropped from 
her hand.” 

Putting  up  the  statement  U/S  161  Cr.P.C.  and  cross-examination  of 

PW-9/Aleena  in  juxtaposition,  there  emerges  a  conflict  regarding  holding 

of  the  pistol  whereby  PW-9/Aleena 

in  her  statement  stated  that 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  was  holding  the  pistol  whereas  during  her 

cross-examination,  she  acknowledged  that  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  had 

nothing  in  her  hand.  This  entire  chain  of  events  imposes  a  duty  upon  the 

appellant  to  explain  his  position,  especially  when  a  vulnerable  dependent 

i.e.  Sarah  Abro  (deceased),  wife  of  appellant,  was  gunned  to  death  inside 

the confines of appellant’s house, he is then under heavy onus to explain as 

to  how  his  wife  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  met  an  unnatural  death  while 

holding a pistol in her hand, which is otherwise contradicted as per medical 

and  forensic  reasons.  Whereas,  learned  counsel  for  appellant  has  placed 

reliance  upon  PLD  2017  SC  681  (Asad  Khan  VS  The  State)  wherein  it  has 

been held that:  

It  had  been  held  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of  Arshad 
“4. 
Mehmood  v.  The  State  (2005  SCMR  1524)  that  where  a  wife  of  a 
person  dies  an  unnatural  death  in  the  house  of  such  person  there 
some  part  of  the  onus  lies  on  him  to  establish  the  circumstances  in 
which such unnatural death had occurred. In the later case of  Saeed 
Ahmed  v.  The  State  (2015  SCMR  710)  the  said  legal  position  had 
been elaborated and it had been held that an accused person is under 
some kind of an obligation to explain the circumstances in which his 
vulnerable  dependent  had  met  an  unnatural  death  within  the 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [27] of [38] 

confines of his house; It had, however, been held in the case of Abdul 
Majeed v. The State (2011 SCMR 941) that where the entire case of 
the  prosecution  stands  demolished  or  is  found  to  be  utterly 
unbelievable  there  an  accused  person  cannot  be  convicted  merely 
because  he  did  not  explain  the  circumstances  in  which  his  wife  or 
some vulnerable dependent had lost his life. In such a case the entire 
burden of proof cannot be shifted to him in that regard if the case of 
the prosecution itself collapses. The present case is a case of the latter 
category wherein the entire case of the prosecution has been found by 
us  to  be  utterly  unbelievable  and  the  same  stands  demolished  and, 
thus,  we  cannot  sustain  the  appellant's  conviction  and  sentence 
merely  on  the  basis  of  an  inference  or  a  supposition  qua  his 
involvement.” 

Similarly,  learned  counsel  for  appellant  further  placed  reliance  upon  2016 

SCMR 1628 (Nazir Ahmad VS The State) wherein it has been held that: 

“4. 
It may be true that when a vulnerable dependant is done to 
death  inside  the  confines  of  a  house,  particularly  during  a  night, 
there some part of the onus lies on the close relatives of the deceased 
to explain as to how their near one had met an unnatural death but 
where the prosecution utterly fails to prove its own case  against an 
accused person there the accused person cannot be convicted on the 
sole basis of his failure to explain the death. These aspects of the legal 
issue  have  been  commented  upon  by  this  Court  in  the  cases  of 
Arshad Mehmood v. The State (2005 SCMR 1524), Abdul Majeed v. 
The  State (2011  SCMR  941)  and  Saeed  Ahmed v.  The State (2015 
SCMR 710).” 

32.  We  have  gone  through  the  above  referred  judgments  of  the  apex 

Court whereby the apex Court has laid down a principle where part of onus 

has  been  placed  upon  the  close  relatives  of  the  deceased  to  explain  their 

position  although  the  complete  onus  is  not  upon  the  appellant  but  the 

exception created by the apex Court in the above referred judgments gives 

rise  to  the  situation  whereby  this  Court  needed  to  refer  the  medical 

evidence tendered by PW-1/Dr. Nasreen Butt regarding the injuries found 

on Sarah Abro (deceased), details of which are referred as follow:  

“There were multiple contusion/abrasion marks on lower 1/3rd and 
middle 1/3rd in front of next, which was 6x7cm above the right eye-
lid.  There  was  4x2cm  contusion  on  the  lateral  angle  of  eye. 
Contusion  mark  on  lateral  angle  of  right  eye  1/2cm.  There  were 
two contusion marks on nasal bridge, tangentially. There were two 
bruises on  right middle thigh 2x2cm. There were faint bruises on 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [28] of [38] 

both  knee  joint  interiorly,  2x2  and  1x2  respectively.  Contusion 
mark on left eye 8x1cm. Contusion mark on left side of cheek just 
below  the  left  eye.  2x1cm  contusion  mark,  middle  of  front  of 
superior  side  of  forehead.  There  was  cyanosis  on  hypotheses 
theenar of left hand on palmer aspect. There was synopsis with red 
coloured  cyanosis  on  nail  of  little,  ring  and  middle  fingers.  There 
was  fire  arm  entry  wound  middle  of  abdomen,  10cm  below 
epigestrum, 07cm above umbilicus 1x1, very faint blackening and 
charring,  corresponding  with  holes  of  shirt  but  there  was  no 
blackening mark and burning on shirt. There was no burning and 
there was no close contact of wound. Exit wound of fire arm injury 
measuring ½ x ½ cm with everted and rough margins, 38 cm from 
middle of lower end of neck posteriorly at the back of the body.” 

The  above  referred injuries  explain  the  conduct  of  appellant  who  tortured 

and assaulted Sarah Abro (deceased) prior to her death, even the same has 

been  corroborated  with  the  evidence  of  PW-9/Aleena,  although  she  was 

declared hostile, but in our humble view the status of hostile witness has to 

be seen in the light of view rendered by the apex Court. In this regard, the 

apex Court in PLD 2007 SC 249 (Dr. Javaid Akhtar VS The  State) has held 

that:  

“Court would be justified to ignore the statement of hostile witness.” 

Similarly, the apex Court in PLD 2007 SC 223 (Muhammad Suleman, etc. VS 

The State) has held that:  

“Testimony  of  hostile  witness  or  a  witness,  who  was  not  examined 
being won over was either produced by defence or was examined as 
Court witness, must not be left out of consideration for mere reason 
that he did not support prosecution rather evidence of such witness 
must  be  considered  with  utmost  care  and  caution---Testimony  of 
witness  who  speaks  in  different  tune  at  different  times  is  certainly 
not  reliable  unless  strong  confirmatory  evidence  of  independent, 
character is available on record.” 

Similarly, the apex Court in PLD 2013 SC 386 (Muhammad Sarfraz VS The 

State) has held that:  

“Prosecution  could not be permitted to confront  a witness with his 
previous statement recorded under S.161, Cr.P.C. for the purpose of 
contradicting him even after being declared hostile.” 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [29] of [38] 

Similarly, the apex Court in  PLD 2003 SC 635 (Niaz Ahmad VS The State) 

has held that:  

“Statement  of  a  hostile  witness  was  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of 
circumstances of the case and thereafter it was to be ascertained as to 
what truth actually flowed from their statements, whether favouring 
the prosecution or the defence.” 

And  similarly,  the  apex  Court  in  1995  SCMR  1144  (Rana  Muhammad 

Akram VS The State, etc.) has held that:  

“Eye-witnesses  who  had  turned  hostile  at  the  trial  did  not  support 
the prosecution case and were cross-examined by the prosecution as 
well as the defence---Courts below had rightly placed no reliance on 
the  testimony  of  said  witnesses  to  convict  the  accused  respondents 
on capital charge and their judgments acquitting them did not suffer 
from any legal infirmity.” 

The above referred view of apex Court gives rise to the principle that hostile 

witness  is  not  outrightly  discarded  unless  the  same  is  based  upon  lies,  or 

the witness is not truthful.  

33.  As per the proposition before this Court is regarding the murder of 

Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  in  the  confines  of  a  house  where  the  only  person 

available  at  that  time  was  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  and  no  other 

witness or person had seen the occurrence directly, therefore, in such type 

of  cases  the  quantum  of  evidence  is  different  as  of  normal  cases,  we  have 

seen  the  medical  evidence  which  corroborates  the  entire  scenario  that  the 

death  is  not  suicidal  rather  it  is  homicidal,  but  in  order  to  connect 

Muhammad Awais/appellant with the said incident of murder, we have to 

see  the  entire  case  with  reference  to  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984, 

whereby  Article  117  of  the  Order  places  a  burden  of  proof  upon  a  person 

who  has  to  prove  the  existence  of  any  fact.  In  such  eventuality  the 

prosecution  is  under  heavy  burden  to  discharge  its  onus  that  Sarah  Abro 

(deceased) was murdered by Muhammad Awais/appellant but at the same 

time the provisions of Article 119 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 also 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [30] of [38] 

play a significance role in this case when we consider the plea of appellant 

who has taken the defence of a particular line from day one i.e. Sarah Abro 

(deceased)  had  committed  suicide  and  the  suggestion  put  forward  by  the 

appellant  in  the  trial  is  on  the  same  line,  even  otherwise,  appellant  has 

taken  this  specific  stance  in  his  statement  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  with 

reference to Question No.9 which is as under:  

It has also come in the prosecution evidence that your 
“Q. No. 9: 
wife  deceased  Sarah  was  fired  upon  by  Bretta  9mm.  pistol  in  your 
house around 11.00 – 11.30AM on 11 August 2014 while you were 
present in your house where you lived with her as husband and wife. 
What do you say? 

No  it  is  incorrect  as  stated  in  this  question.  Mst. 
Ans. 
Sarah deceased committed suicide with the pistol and she was taken 
by  me  to  the  hospital,  where  she  was  found  dead.  I  shifted  her  to 
PIMS  Hospital,  where  doctors  prepared  her  death  certificate  with 
only one injury that too without any exit wound, which is part of the 
file and exhibited as Exh.DA. Mst. Sarah fired upon herself with the 
pistol.” 

The  above  referred  answer  confirms  that  the  plea  raised  by  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  is  regarding  act  of  suicide  of  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  and 

even  he  has  taken  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  to  the  hospital.  Similarly,  it  was 

also inquired from Muhammad Awais/appellant that whether  Sarah Abro 

(deceased)  had  told  PW-9/Aleena  that  “گاےد  رما  مجھے  یسوا”  and  as  to  why  Sarah 

Abro 

(deceased) 

committed 

suicide,  whereupon  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant answered that:   

“Deceased  Sarah  never  said  so  and  she  committed  suicide  due  to 
the attitude of her parents and family.” 

Whereas, it is admitted that Sarah Abro (deceased) had never been seen by 

her parents from the day she left  her house  as referred in the statement  of 

PW-10/Dr. Munir Abro, father of Sarah Abro (deceased), who categorically 

referred the date of departure of Sarah Abro (deceased) from the house till 

date of her death in the following words:  

 
 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [31] of [38] 

“On 14.02.2014, deceased Sarah left our house to collect her result 
from  Fatima  Jinnah  University.  Deceased  Sarah  on  14.02.2014 
went  to  Fatima  Jinnah  University  along  with  other  girls  in  the 
university van from DHA. It takes about 30 minutes on a ride to 
reach  Islamabad  High  Court  from  Fatima  Jinnah  University.  My 
daughter Sarah, never returned since 14.02.2014 to our house, and 
we received her death body on 11.08.2014.” 

The  above  referred  stance  of  complainant  Dr.  Munir  Abro  clearly 

establishes  that  neither  he  nor  his  other  family  members  were  having  any 

relationship/contact  with  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  from  the  day  when  she 

had left the house, therefore, a particular fact has to be proved by appellant 

as  to  whether  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  had  committed  suicide  and  this  can 

only  be  proved  by  appellant  in  terms  of  Article  of  119  of  the  Qanun-e-

Shahadat Order, 1984 which read as under:  

“119. Burden of proof as to particular fact: The burden of proof 
as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the Court 
to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the 
proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.” 

Similarly, Article 122  of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 is also  relevant 

in this regard which is as under:  

“122.  Burden  of  proving  fact  especially  within  knowledge: 
When  any  fact  is  especially  within  the  knowledge  of  any  person, 
the burden of proving that fact is upon him.” 

In  this  case  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  has  taken  the  plea  of  suicide  by 

Sarah Abro (deceased) and in such situation he has to discharge the burden 

under  the  exception  taken  by  the  apex  Court  in  PLD  2017  SC  681  (Asad 

Khan  VS  The  State)  and  2016  SCMR  1628  (Nazir  Ahmad  VS  The  State). 

Whereas,  the  detailed  view  has  been  rendered  in  this  regard  by  the  apex 

Court in (2015 SCMR 710 Saeed Ahmad VS The State), wherein it has been 

held that:   

“14.  That with regard to vulnerable members of society, such as 
children, women and the infirm, who were living with the accused 
or  were  last  in  his  company  the  accused  ought  to  offer  some 
explanation of what happened to them. If instead he remains silent 
or offers  a false explanation he casts a shadow upon himself. This 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [32] of [38] 

does not mean that the burden of proof has shifted onto the accused 
as it is for the prosecution to prove its case, however, in respect of 
the helpless or the weak that require protection or care it would not 
be sufficient for the accused to stay silent in circumstances which 
tend  to  incriminate  him,  and  if  he  elects  to  do  so  he  lightens  the 
burden  of  the  prosecution.  Article  122  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order too stipulates that if a particular fact is especially within the 
knowledge  of  any  person  the  burden  of  proving  that  fact  is  upon 
him.  In  the  present  case  the  prosecution  had  established  its  case 
against  the  appellant;  two  eye-witnesses  had  deposed  against  him 
and the medical evidence confirmed strangulation of the deceased. 
The  appellant  did  not  attend  to  the  last  rites  of  his  wife  who  had 
died whilst residing with him, he also did not inform the police nor 
took  his  wife  to  a  hospital  and  disappeared  for  two  months,  such 
circumstances  corroborate  the  prosecution  case  in  the  absence  of 
the  appellant  offering  a  reasonable  explanation  for  his  unnatural 
conduct.” 

34.  We  have  also  gone  through  another  judgment  of  the  apex  Court 

referred  as  2011  SCMR  941  (Abdul  Majeed  VS  The  State)  where  Abdul 

Majeed/accused  had  allegedly  committed  murder  of  his  wife  by  way  of 

strangulation, however in the said case the apex Court put emphasis on the 

principle  of  burden  of  proof  which  is  always  upon  prosecution  in  such  a 

manner and held that: 

“such  burden  remains  throughout  and  does  not  shift  to  accused, 
who is only burdened to prove defence plea.” 

Whereas,  in  the  present  case,  the  plea  of  defence  regarding  the  fact  of 

suicide  by  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  has  not  been  proved,  whereas 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  has  taken  this  plea  of  suicide  on  record. 

However,  when  we  considered  the  facts  of  present  case  with  reference  to 

the case of Abdul Majeed supra the only distinction in the instant case is the 

presence  of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  and  very  much  available  at  the 

scene  of  murder  of  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  whereas  in  the  case  of  Abdul 

Majeed supra the husband of deceased was not proved to be present at the 

scene of murder. The apex Court has also drawn the same distinction while 

considering  the  case  of  Afzal  Hussain  Shah  reported  as  1991  PCr.LJ  113 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [33] of [38] 

[Lahore] in which the conviction was maintained by the High Court where 

husband could not explain satisfactorily the circumstances of his wife death 

in his house  

35. 

The next question placed before this Court is regarding the status of 

PW-9/Aleena who was declared a hostile witness whereas it is trite law that 

evidence  of  hostile  witness  could  be  ignored  ordinarily,  however  the 

principle  has  to  be  observed 

in  the 

light  of  Article  150  of  the 

Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 which his as follow: 

“150. Question by party to his own witness: The Court may, 
in its discretion, permit the person who calls a witness to put any 
questions to him, which might be put in cross-examination by the 
adverse party.” 

The above referred Article has been placed in the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 

1984 to impeach the credit of witness by cross-examination, however Article 

151 applies at a situation where witness was guilty of prevarication or that 

he was having an animosity towards the party who called him or giving an 

unfavorable  evidence  to  the  party  calling  him  or  contrary  to  statement 

expected of him which is to be discarded by the party calling him and the 

said  witness  has  to  be  declared  hostile  with  permission  of  the  Court. 

However, in the light of provision of Article 150, we have gone through the 

statement  of  PW-9/Aleena  recorded  in  examination-in-chief  as  affirmative 

evidence but the same does not fulfill the test and criteria laid down above 

as no unfavorable fact has been brought by her on record which give rise to 

a situation in which she was declared hostile by the prosecution and at this 

stage  we  could  not  understand  what  persuaded  the  prosecution,  the 

prosecutor, or the learned Trial Court to declare such important witness as 

hostile as it amounts to destroying its own case, although nothing discredit 

PW-9/Aleena  in  this  case  and  she  remained  consistent  in  favour  of 

prosecution  as  she  is  natural,  truthful,  and  clear  witness  whose  statement 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [34] of [38] 

has neither been tainted with any malice, mala fide nor she ever stated that 

Muhammad  Awais/appellant  had  not  committed  murder,  even  such  fact 

was not available on record and the effort to make PW-9/Aleena as hostile 

is  somehow  mysterious.  In  such  like  situation,  we  are  fortified  with  the 

view  given  by  the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court  in  (PLD  2013  Lahore  178 

Muhammad Zafar VS The State), wherein it has been held that: 

“9.  Now putting the facts of the present case on the criteria as 
mentioned  above,  it  is  clear  that  P.W.11  conducted  the  entire 
investigation, he declared two persons to be innocent, placed them 
in  column-II  of  the  challan.  The  said  investigation  was  never 
challenged  by  the  complainant  before  any  forum  so  much  so  the 
prosecution  itself  summoned  the  said  witness  to  appear  as  PW. 
Whatever was said by him was exactly according to the record and 
nothing was against the record entitling the other party to get him 
declared  as  hostile,  suppressing  the  truth  or  inconsistent  in  his 
statement.  In  a  case  titled  Muhammad  Boota  and  another  v.  The 
State  and  another  reported  in  1984  SCMR  560,  the  august 
Supreme  Court  held  that  a  witness  who  is  unfavourable  is  not 
necessarily  hostile,  for  a  hostile  witness  is  one  who  from  the 
manner in which he gives his evidence, shows that he is not desires 
of  telling  the  truth  to  the  court;  that  the  witness  answered  to 
certain  question  is  in  direct  conflict  with  evidence  of  other 
witnesses  and  is  not  and  can  never  be  a  reason  for  allowing  the 
witness to be treated as hostile and permitted to be cross-examined. 

10. 
It is not denied that the opinion of the police with regard to 
the  innocence  or  guilt  of  the  accused  is  inadmissible  in  evidence. 
However,  it  is for  the  trial  Court  to  determine  this  aspect  but  for 
declaring the witness to be hostile, it is necessary to establish that 
he  had  made  the  statement  against  the  record  which  is  not  a 
position  in  the  present  case.  It  is  apparent  from  the  record  that 
P.W.11  Liaquat  Ali  only  narrated  that  fact  which  he  had  done 
during the investigation and did not add a single word to that in 
examination  in  chief  recorded  in  the  trial  court.  Whatever  the 
investigation was carried out by him before submitting the challan 
in the court that has been relied by the complainant. However, it is 
the job of the trial court to evaluate its veracity. 

After  going  through  the  said  statement,  nothing  has  been 
11. 
noticed  which  can  be  said  to  be  improvement,  deviation,  addition 
or  concealment  of  material  facts  in  the  statement  of  Liaquat  Ali 
SI/PW11.” 

The above referred judgment of the Hon’ble High Court has also relied upon 

the judgment of the apex Court in the case of Muhammad Boota supra.  

36. 

From the perusal of record it has further been observed that in order 

to  impeach  the  credit  of  witness  in  terms  of  Article  151  of  the  Qanun-e-

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [35] of [38] 

Shahadat  Order,  1984  there  are  four  ways  to  impeach  the  witness  that  is 

either by way of knowledge of the witness, witness has been bribed by way 

of  inducement  to  give  evidence,  former  statement  inconsistent  with  any 

part  of  his  evidence  which  is  liable  to  be  contradicted,  or  the  witness  has 

been prosecuted for rape or in attempt to ravish or generally of an immoral 

character.  However,  the  test  laid  down  in  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 

1984, if placed in juxtaposition with the statement of PW-9/Aleena, we have 

neither  seen  any  question  in  which  the  witness  has  been  discredited  or 

placed  by  the  prosecution  side  nor  even  in  the  cross-examination  of  the 

defence,  hence  the  act  of  declaring  PW-9/Aleena  as  hostile  witness  by  the 

Court is contrary to record.  

37. 

In  view  of  above  background,  this  Court  is  fully  convinced  that 

Mst.  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  was  murdered  with  the  help  of  9mm  Beretta 

although  its  recovery  has  no  legal  significance,  especially  when  the  same 

was  recovered  by  the  Investigation  Officer  after  11  days  of  arrest  of 

Muhammad Awais/appellant despite the fact that the Investigation Officer 

had  visited  the  place  of  occurrence  on  the  very  first  day  of  incident  and 

even he searched the entire house but the pistol was not recovered and later 

on  it  was  recovered  on  the  disclosure  of  Muhammad  Awais/appellant 

which is not believable. The other important aspect noticed by this Court is 

that  the  fire  empty  was  recovered  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PB  on 

11.08.2014 on the very first day of incident but the fire empty and the pistol 

was sent to the National Forensic Science Agency on 03.09.2014 as reflected 

in  Exh.PP,  although  the  weapon  of  offence  and  the  crime  empty  had been 

matched  in  the  test  result  but  in  our  humble  view,  it  has  no  evidentiary 

value  due  to  the delay  caused by  the  Investigation  Officer  for  not  sending 

the  9mm  fire  empty  prior  to  the  recovery  of  9mm  pistol  to  the  National 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [36] of [38] 

Forensic  Science  Agency,  therefore,  the  recovery  has  been  disbelieved 

having no legal worth to place reliance upon in this case.   

38. 

The  complainant  side  has  also  filed  an  appeal  against  acquittal  of 

co-accused  i.e.  Muhammad  Banaras  Sadozai,  the  father  of  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant, who has been charged in this case to the extent of Section 

109  r/w  302  PPC  for  abetment  in  the  murder  of  Sarah  Abro  (deceased), 

however  there  is  not  an  iota  of  evidence  placed  by  prosecution  against 

Muhammad Banaras Sadozai and we have also not seen any effort from the 

prosecution side to justify his involvement in this case.  

39. 

The  entire  background  of  the  case  proves  the  chain  of  evidence 

against  Muhammad  Awais/appellant  if  seen  in  the  light  of  evidence  of 

Dr.  Nasreen  Butt  viz-a-viz  to  the  medical  opinion,  the  place  of  sitting  of 

Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  on  sofa,  and  the  line  of  bullet  trajectory  which  is 

diagonal  and  the  same  was  directly  hit  on  the  middle  of  abdomen  10cm 

below epigestrum, 7cm above umbilicus 1x1, with very faint blackening and 

charring  and  the  exit  wound  of  firearm  injury  measuring  ½  x  ½  cm  with 

everted  and  half  margins,  38cm  from  middle  of  lower  end  of  neck 

posteriorily  at  the  back  of  the  body  clearly  establishes  that  Sarah  Abro 

(deceased) was sitting on the sofa and Muhammad Awais/appellant killed 

her with the pistol while in standing position and the fire empty was ejected 

at  the  distance  of  seven  feet  from  the  sofa  as  referred  in  the  site  plan 

Exh.PG, which is a natural distance of any firearm empty when ejected from 

the  chamber  of  the  pistol  after  its  fire  and  the  distance  referred  in  the 

Exh.PG  is  seven  feet  from  Point  No.1  where  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  was 

sitting on the sofa. All these facts confirm the involvement and commission 

of  offence  leading  towards  Muhammad  Awais/appellant.  All  these  facts 

further  confirmed  from  the  statement  of  PW-9/Aleena  who  is  natural 

witness  of 

the  chain  of  event  and  who  had  seen  Muhammad 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [37] of [38] 

Awais/appellant  at 

the  place  of  occurrence  whereas  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  has  failed  to  explain  his  stance  of  suicide  of  Sarah  Abro 

(deceased) as per his own plea. Although, the motive has not been justified 

on  record  in  any  manner,  therefore,  keeping  in  view  the  foregoing 

discussion,  we  are  of  the  considered  view  that  certain  circumstances  of 

mitigation appear on record as the recovery is not believed and motive has 

not  been  proved,  hence,  while  maintaining  the  conviction  of  Muhammad 

Awais/appellant  under  Section  302-B  PPC,  we  hereby  convert  the  death 

sentence  into  life  imprisonment  by  way  of  Tazir.  Resultantly,  the 

Criminal Appeal No.79/2016 (Muhammad Awais VS The State) as well as 

Criminal  Appeal  No.99/2016  (Dr.  Munir  Ahmed  VS  Muhammad  Awais 

Sadozai,  etc.)  are  hereby  dismissed,  whereas  the  Murder  Reference 

No.4/2016 (The State VS Muhammad Awais) is answered in negative.   

40. 

Before parting with the instant judgment, we are constrained to hold 

that  the  role  of  Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.I./Investigation  Officer  is  highly 

unprofessional  and  is  based  upon  his  illegal  action  in  the  investigation 

proceedings  whereby  he  had  taken  into  custody  PW-9/Aleena,  the  star 

witness of this case, on the day of occurrence i.e. 11.08.2014 and kept her in 

the Women Police Station for 12/13 days as  recorded in the evidence, and 

recorded her statement after 12 days which is beyond any legal and factual 

justification.  Similarly,  the  Investigation  Officer  had  not  sent  the  firearm 

empty  of  9mm  pistol  recovered  through  Exh.PB  on  11.08.2014  to  the 

Forensic  Science  Laboratory  prior  to  the  recovery  of  9mm  Beretta  pistol 

which  was  recovered  through  recovery  memo  Exh.PD  on  22.08.2014  and 

intentionally  dispatched  both  these  items  to  National  Forensic  Science 

Agency on 03.09.2014, which reflects his inability to understand the nature 

of evidence and sensitivity of such a case, even he has not investigated the 

case to the extent of Asif, the alleged cousin of Sarah Abro (deceased), who 

 
Crl. Appeals No.79 & 99/2016 and Murder Reference No.4/2016                  Page [38] of [38] 

visited  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  on  10.08.2014  as  referred  in  the  evidence  of 

PW-9/Aleena which resulted into a quarrel and fight between the husband 

and  wife,  i.e.  Sarah  Abro  (deceased)  and  Muhammad  Awais/appellant. 

The  Investigation  Officer  has  also  not  brought  any  evidence  from  the  Life 

Care Hospital where  Sarah Abro (deceased) was taken  at the first instance 

after she was injured and neither any witness was recorded nor any medical 

evidence has been taken into custody from the said hospital, even the same 

were not placed with the final report U/S 173 Cr.P.C. Such approach on the 

part  of  Investigation  Officer  speaks  volumes  about  his  conduct,  therefore, 

copy  of  this  judgment  may  be  transmitted  to  the  I.G.  of  Police,  who  shall 

consider all these factors referred above.  

(AAMER FAROOQ)                (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

                   JUDGE                                             JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on:                           May, 2018. 

                   JUDGE                                             JUDGE 

Khalid Z.  

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
