ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

C.R.No.254 of 2016 
Muhammad Mohsin Fawad 

VS          

Hina Tayyaba Khalil and others 

17.01.2018  

           Barrister Farooq Iqbal Khan, 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by:  

Mr. Muhammad Afzal Ansari, and Ch.  
Sheraz Sohail, Advocates. 

__________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB, J:- Through  the instant civil 

revision petition, the petitioner, Muhammad Mohsin Fawad, impugns 

the judgment  dated  18.04.2016,  passed  by  the Court of  the learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  petitioner’s 

appeal  against  the  order  dated  02.03.2016,  passed  by  the  learned 

executing  Court,  was  dismissed.  Vide  the  said  order  dated 

02.03.2016, 

the 

learned  executing  Court 

turned  down 

the 

petitioner’s  objections  to  the  execution  petition  dated  01.04.2015, 

instituted  by  the  respondents.  Through  the  said  execution  petition, 

the  respondents  had  sought  the  execution  of  the  judgment  and 

decree  dated  17.01.2013,  passed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family 

Court,  Lahore,  whereby  the  respondents'  suit  for  recovery  of 

maintenance  allowance  against  Dr.  Ahmad  Shahzad  Qureshi  (“Dr. 

Qureshi”), (who is not a party to this petition), was partially decreed 

to  the  extent  of  Rs.60,000/-  per  month  with  an  annual  increase  by 

10%  with  effect  from  the  date  of  the  institution  of  the  suit  i.e. 

27.02.2002.  The  said  judgment  and  decree  dated  17.01.2013  was 

subjected 

to  an  appeal.  Vide 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

03.10.2014,  the  learned  appellate  Court  modified  the  decree  by 

enhancing  the  maintenance  allowance  to  Rs.65,000/-  per  month 

from the date of the institution of the suit. 

 2. 

The record shows that Hina Tayyaba Khalil (respondent No.1) 

and Dr. Qureshi were married on 17.07.1998. Dr. Qureshi works as a 

Medical  Specialist  Consultant  in  U.S.A.  On  02.04.2000,  the  couple 

were  blessed  with  a  son,  Imran  Ahmad  Qureshi  (respondent  No.2). 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
2 

C.R. No.254/2016 

Respondent  No.2  was  born  in  U.S.A.  Thereafter,  the  relations 

between  Dr.  Qureshi  and  respondent  No.1  deteriorated.  On 

11.08.2000,  respondent No.1  left  Dr. Qureshi  and  came  to  Pakistan 

along with respondent No.2.  

3. 

On  27.02.2002,  the  respondents  instituted  a  suit  for  recovery 

of  maintenance  allowance  against  Dr.  Qureshi  before  the  learned 

Judge,  Family  Court,  Lahore.  Since  Dr.  Qureshi  was  in  U.S.A.,  he 

had appointed his brother, Muhammad Mohsin Fawad (petitioner) as 

his  special  attorney  to  inter-alia  represent  him  in  the  Courts  in 

Pakistan  and  do  all  things  necessary  and  incidental  to  the litigation 

in  Pakistan.  Vide  order  dated  27.02.2004,  the  said  suit  was 

withdrawn  to  the  extent  of  maintenance  for  respondent  No.1.  Vide 

judgment and decree dated 31.07.2010, the said suit was decreed in 

favour  of  respondent  No.2  to  the  extent  of  Rs.60,000/-  per  month 

with an annual increase of 10% from the date of the institution of the 

suit till respondent No.2 attains the age of majority or change in his 

custody.  Dr.  Qureshi  as  well  as  the  respondents  filed  appeals 

against  the  said  judgment  and  decree.  During  the  pendency  of  the 

appeals,  the  petitioner  executed  a  surety  bond  dated  11.10.2010, 

which is reproduced herein below:- 

“Know all men BY THESE PRESENT that I, Dr. Ahmad Shahzad, son 
of Ahmad Saeed Qureshi being judgment-debtor. Through Mohsin 
Fawad, as attorney, Son of Ahmad Saeed Qureshi, Resident of 
House No.138, Street No.57, Sector E-11/3, Islamabad (judgment-
debtor) and Mr. Muhammad Mohsin Fawad, Son of Ahmad Saeed 
Qureshi, Resident of House No.D-6, Street No.E-8-14, Islamabad 
(surety) do hereby and hereunder firmly bind ourselves jointly and 
severally to Mr. Shahid Rafique, Addl. District Judge, Lahore or his 
successor-in-office for the time being in the sum of Rs.81,60,000/- of 
lawful good money to be truly and faithfully paid. 

  WHEREAS a decree for maintenance was made on the 31st day of 
July, 2010 against the said Dr. Ahmad Shahazad whereas the said 
Ahmad Shahzad has preferred an appeal through his attorney 
against the said decree which is now pending before Mr. Sadiq 
Masood, Addl. District Judge, Lahore.  

AND WHEREAS an order was passed by the Court of Appeal upon 
the appellant for the furnishing of surety bond to the satisfaction of 
the court equal to the decretal amount and whereas the said 
appellant has offered the said Mr. Muhammad Mohsin Fawad, Son of 
Ahmad Saeed Qureshi, Resident of House No.D-6, Street No.E-8-14, 
Islamabad as surety he having been approved by the court subject 
to his entering into a bond for Rs.80,80,000/- creating thereunder a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

C.R. No.254/2016 

first charge on the under-mentioned property for the satisfaction of 
the said decree as may be confirmed or varied by the Court of 
Appeal.  

IN WITNESSES WHEREOF, this deed of surety bond is written and 
signed at Lahore, this 11th day of October, 2010.” 
 (Emphasis added)  

4. 

The said  surety  bond  was  submitted  to  the appellate Court.  A 

copy  of  transfer  letter  with  respect  to  Plot  No.22,  Street  No.17-B, 

Block-F  (measuring  500  sq.  yards),  Category-A,  Naval  Anchorage, 

Islamabad  (“the  Plot”),  in  the  petitioner’s  favour  was  attached  with 

the surety bond. The petitioner’s statement on oath was recorded on 

the  reverse  of  the  surety  bond.  The  said  statement  is  reproduced 

herein below:- 

ہنکس مزلام رئٰٗ اٹیر ہشیپ لاس

46 

 رمعب یشیرق دیعس دمحا دلو یشیرق داوف نسحم دمحم ںازا نایب
ابٓا۔د ملا سا E-8 رٹکیس  14،  ربمن ٹیرٹس 8-D

 ربمن ناکم 

 یک ٹن

لایپا ےس فرط یک یشیرق  دازہش  دمحا  ٹنلایپا  ںیم  ہک ایک نایب

              ۔فلحرب                                           

                                                                  ۔اگنورک 

اص مکح اک ےنارک لخاد

 اوہ رد
یٹروش یک تیلام ربارب ےک یرگڈرز ےس فرط یک روضح تلادع
 ےریم رپ سج ںوہ اترک شیپ اک ےپور
8080000
 تیلام یرگڈرز ڈناب یٹڑوش ںیم اذہل ،اھت
 ےک اذہ لیپا ہلصیفات ںیم ۔ےہ ڈناب ی ٹروش فل ہک وج ےہ یک لانک کیا دادیئاج یریم ۔ںیہ طختسد
ینپا

یسک  ےگٓادادیئاج 

ہن  تخورف 

روا 

وک 

-/

           ۔ایک میلست تسرد رکنس      
                    -sd- 
Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge 
                  11-10-10 
(Emphasis added) 

5. 

On  11.10.2010,  the  learned  appellate  Court,  passed  the 

following order:-  

“Surety is accepted subject to all objections by the other side. 
Surety shall also undertake that he shall not dispose of the property 
given in surety in any manner till the disposal of this appeal or 
decision of any objection by the other side, whichever is later. 
Record to be summoned from the Trial Court.” 
(Emphasis added) 

6. 

Vide  judgment  dated  14.12.2010,  the  learned  appellate  Court 

set-aside  the  said  judgment  and  decree  dated  31.07.2010  and 

remanded  the  matter  back  to  the  learned  trial  Court  with  the 

direction  to  recast  the  issues,  and  to  provide  both  the  parties  with 

the  opportunity  to  produce  pro and contra  evidence  and  then  to 

decide the case on merits.  

7. 

After the framing of issues and the recording of evidence, the 

learned 

family  Court,  vide 

its 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
4 

C.R. No.254/2016 

17.01.2013, decreed the suit by holding respondent No.2 entitled to 

recover maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.60,000/- per month 

with 10% annual increase from the date of the institution of the suit 

till respondent No.2 reaches the age of majority or until Dr. Qureshi 

got his legal custody.  

8. 

The  said 

judgment  and  decree  dated  17.01.2013  was 

challenged  by  Dr.  Qureshi  as  well  as  respondent  No.1  in  appeals 

before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore. 

Vide  consolidated  judgment  and  decree  dated  03.10.2014,  the 

learned  appellate  Court  modified  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  by  enhancing  the  maintenance 

allowance  in  favour  of  respondent  No.2  to  Rs.65,000/-  per  month 

from the date of the institution of the suit till respondent No.2 attains 

the age of majority or change in his custody. The record is silent as 

to  whether  the  said  consolidated  judgment  and  decree  dated 

03.10.2014 was challenged any further.  

9. 

Apparently, the respondents had filed an execution petition on 

25.02.2013  (i.e.  prior  to  the judgment and  decree dated  03.10.2014 

passed  by  the  learned  appellate  Court)  against  Dr.  Qureshi  before 

the learned Judge Family Court, Lahore. It may be mentioned that an 

amended  execution  petition  was  filed  by  the  respondents  on 

01.04.2015  for  the  execution  of  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 

03.10.2014,  passed  by  the  learned  appellate  Court.  On  16.03.2015, 

the respondents filed an application under Order XXI, Rule 12 of the 

Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (“C.P.C.”)  for  the  attachment  of  the 

Plot. In the respondents’ said application, the Plot was said to be in 

the name of the petitioner (who was Dr. Qureshi’s attorney).  

Order XXI, Rule 12 of the C.P.C. is reproduced herein below:- 

“12.  Application  for  attachment  of  movable  property  not  in 
judgment-debtor’s possession. -- Where an application is made for 
the attachment of any movable property belonging to a judgment-
debtor but not in his possession, the decree-holder shall annex to 
the  application  an  inventory  of  the  property  to  be  attached, 
containing a reasonably accurate description of the same.” 
(Emphasis added)  

10.  The transfer of the execution petition to Islamabad was sought 

by  the respondents  for  the satisfaction  of  the judgment and  decree 

 
 
 
 
5 

C.R. No.254/2016 

in  their  favour.  Order  dated  16.03.2015,  passed  by  the  learned 

executing  Court,  Lahore,  shows  that  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

decree holders/respondents appeared before the learned executing 

Court  and  recorded  his  statement 

to 

the  effect 

that  Dr. 

Qureshi/judgment  debtor  was  a  resident  of  House  No.88-E,  Allama 

Iqbal  Road,  Lahore,  and  was  currently  residing  at  House  No.20, 

Street  No.28,  Block-F,  Naval  Anchorage,  Islamabad,  and  that  his 

movable  and  immovable  properties  are  also  situated  in  Islamabad. 

Vide  certificate  dated  16.03.2015,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court, 

Lahore, certified that the execution petition filed by the respondents 

before  the  said  Court  had  not  been  satisfied;  that  the  judgment 

debtor  was  residing  at  House  No.20,  Street  No.28,  Block-F,  Naval 

Anchorage,  Islamabad;  and  that  his  movable  and 

immovable 

properties  were  situated  at  Islamabad.  On  16.03.2015,  the  learned 

executing Court at Lahore transferred the execution proceedings to 

the Court of the learned Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad under Section 

39 read with Order XXI, Rule 6 C.P.C. The said transferred order was 

not challenged by Dr. Qureshi and/or the petitioner. 

11.  Perusal  of  the order  dated  27.10.2015,  passed  by  the learned 

executing Court at Islamabad shows that the learned counsel for Dr. 

Qureshi/judgment  debtor  wanted  to  file  an  objection  petition  to  the 

execution  proceedings.  The  learned  executing  Court  in  the  said 

order  made  it  clear  that  the  objection  petition  will  be  entertained 

subject  to  the  deposit  of  surety  bond  equivalent  to  the  decretal 

amount 

in  accordance  with  Order  XXI,  Rule  23-A  C.P.C. 

Nevertheless,  on  26.11.2015  an  objection  petition  was  filed  on 

behalf of Dr. Qureshi/judgment debtor. Vide order dated 27.11.2015, 

the  learned  executing  Court  directed  Dr.  Qureshi/judgment  debtor 

to  furnish  the  surety  bond  before  the  next  date  of  hearing  (i.e., 

09.12.2015).  A  surety  bond  was  not  furnished  at  any  stage  before 

the learned executing Court at Islamabad. 

12. 

In  his  objection  petition  dated  26.11.2015,  the  petitioner 

pleaded  that  Dr.  Qureshi/judgment  debtor  was  not  residing  at 

Islamabad,  but  in  U.S.A;  that  Dr.  Qureshi  did  not  own  any  property 

 
 
6 

C.R. No.254/2016 

(movable  or  immovable)  in  Islamabad;  that  the  petitioner  was 

residing  at  the address  given  by  the respondents  in  the application 

under  Order  XXI,  Rule  12  C.P.C;  that  the  petitioner  was  not  able  to 

communicate with Dr. Qureshi for some time; that the petitioner was 

not  a  party  to  the  suit  instituted  by  the  respondents;  that  no 

judgment  or  decree  had  been  passed  by  any  Court  against  the 

petitioner  in  his  personal  capacity;  that  the  respondents  had 

mentioned  the  petitioner’s  personal  property  in  the  application 

under  Order  XXI,  Rule  12  C.P.C;  that  the  petitioner’s  personal 

property  could  neither  be  attached,  nor  could  the  decretal  amount 

be  recovered  from  the  petitioner’s  personal  property;  that  even 

though  the  petitioner  was  Dr.  Qureshi’s  special  attorney,  he  could 

not be made personally liable for the liability of Dr. Qureshi/judgment 

debtor;  that  since  the  petitioner  was  not  a  judgment  debtor,  no 

proceedings  could  be  initiated  against  him;  and  that  the  learned 

executing  Court  at  Lahore  should  not  have  transferred  the  decree 

and the execution petition to Islamabad.  

13.  The  respondents  contested  the  objection  petition  filed  by  the 

petitioner.  The  written  arguments  of  the  respondents  are  on  the 

record. The position taken by the respondents was that although Dr. 

Qureshi resides in U.S.A,  but he comes every year to Pakistan, and 

has also appeared before the Hon'ble Lahore High Court; and that in 

accordance with surety bond submitted by the petitioner before the 

learned  appellate  Court  at  Lahore,  the  decree  could  be  satisfied 

against the petitioner’s property. 

14.  Vide  order  dated  02.03.2016,  the  learned  executing  Court 

dismissed  the  petitioner’s  objection  petition.  The  last  paragraph  of 

the said order is reproduced herein below:-  

“In the light of the above discussion, the instant objection petition 
has no force. Since the petitioner is surety/special attorney of the 
judgment debtor, therefore a [coercive] method for the recovery of 
decretal amount can be adopted against him because a surety is 
presumed to be a party to a suit, resultantly objection petition is 
turned  down.  Now  to  come  up  for  further  proceedings  on 
11.03.2016.” 

15.  The  petitioner’s  appeal  against 

the  said  order  dated 

02.03.2016  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  appellate  Court,  vide 

 
 
 
7 

C.R. No.254/2016 

judgment  dated  18.04.2016.  The  said  concurrent  orders/judgments 

have  been  challenged  by  the  petitioner  in  the  instant  civil  revision 

petition.  

16.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  after  narrating  the  facts 

leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition,  made  submissions  in 

reiteration  of  the  petitioner’s  pleadings  in  his  objection  petition 

dated  26.11.2015.  Reference  to  the  said  pleadings  has  been  made 

earlier on. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that 

the decree could only be executed against Dr. Qureshi (who was the 

judgment  debtor);  that  the  petitioner  was  not  a  judgment  debtor; 

that the petitioner was not in any way liable for Dr. Qureshi’s debts; 

that  the  petitioner’s  obligations  under  the  surety  bond  dated 

11.10.2010, which was furnished before the learned appellate Court 

at  Lahore,  came  to  an  end  when  Dr.  Qureshi’s  appeal  was  allowed 

on  14.12.2010;  that  thereafter,  the  petitioner  did  not  furnish  any 

surety  bond  before  the  learned  executing  Court  at  Lahore  or 

Islamabad;  that  the  respondents  were  at  liberty  to  execute  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated  03.10.2014,  passed  by  the  learned 

appellate Court against Dr. Qureshi; that simply on account of being 

Dr. Qureshi’s attorney, the said decree could not be satisfied out of 

the  petitioner’s  personal  assets;  that  the  Plot  had  been  purchased 

by  the  petitioner  from  Col.  Muhammad  Abdal  Bala  on  04.11.2009; 

that  the  said  Plot  was  sold  by  the  petitioner  on  04.06.2013  to  Mst. 

Gul-e-Yousaf, who has further sold it to Muhammad Ahmad Nadeem 

on  23.06.2016;  and  that  a report  regarding  the sale of  the said  Plot 

had  been  submitted  by  the  Record  Keeper  of  the  Housing 

Directorate,  Naval  Headquarter,  Islamabad,  before  the  learned 

executing  Court.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  prayed  for  the 

civil  revision  petition  to  be  allowed,  and  for  the  orders/judgments 

dated  02.03.2016  and  18.04.2016,  passed  by  the  learned  Courts 

below to be set-aside. 

17.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents 

submitted 

that  ever  since  2002, 

the  petitioner  had  been 

representing  his  brother,  Dr.  Qureshi;  that  although  the  decree 

 
 
8 

C.R. No.254/2016 

dated  03.10.2014,  passed  by  the  learned  appellate  Court  had  been 

passed  against  Dr.  Qureshi,  a  special  power  of  attorney  was 

executed  on  07.08.2014  in  U.S.A.  by  Dr.  Qureshi  in  favour  of  the 

petitioner;  that  through  the  said  special  power  of  attorney,  the 

petitioner  was  also  authorized  “to  deposit  any  money  for  the 

purposes of any proceedings”;  that  on  the basis  of  the said  special 

power  of  attorney,  the  petitioner  could  be  held  personally  liable  to 

satisfy the said decree; that although Dr. Qureshi resides in U.S.A., 

he comes to Pakistan every year; that Dr. Qureshi has contracted a 

second  marriage  and  has  been  blessed  with  three  more  children; 

that  in  escaping  his  obligations  under  the  said  decree,  Dr.  Qureshi 

has been actively facilitated by the petitioner; that the petitioner has 

regularly  been  appearing  in  the  Court  on  behalf  of  Dr.  Qureshi  and 

has  also  adduced  evidence  on  his  behalf;  that  Dr.  Qureshi  also 

appeared before the Hon'ble Lahore High Court; and that the surety 

bond  dated  11.10.2010  furnished  by  the  petitioner  before  the 

learned appellate Court was enough to hold the petitioner personally 

liable  for  Dr.  Qureshi’s  obligations  under  the  said  decree.  Learned 

counsel  for  the respondents  prayed  for  the civil  revision  petition  to 

be  dismissed.  In  making  their  submissions,  learned  counsel  for  the 

respondents  placed  reliance  on  the  law  laid  down  in  the  case  of 

Muhammad Pervez VS Mst. Nabila Yasmeen (2004 SCMR 1352). 

18. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  

19.  The facts leading to the filing of the instant petition have been 

set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs No.2 to 15 above, and need 

not be recapitulated. 

20. 

It  is  not  disputed  that  the  Plot  sought  to  be  attached  by  the 

respondents  was  owned  by  the  petitioner,  and  not  by  Dr. 

Qureshi/judgment  debtor.  In  the  application  under  Order  XXI,  Rule 

12  C.P.C.,  it  has  been  clearly  mentioned  that  the  said  Plot  is  in  the 

name  of  the  petitioner.  Under  Order  XXI,  Rule  12  C.P.C.,  only 

movable  property  belonging  to  the 

judgment  debtor  can  be 

 
 
9 

C.R. No.254/2016 

attached. Since Dr. Qureshi/judgment debtor was admittedly not the 

owner  of  the Plot,  the  learned  executing  Court could  not  attach  the 

same. Furthermore, under Order XXI, Rule 12 C.P.C., only “movable 

properties”  belonging  to  the  judgment  debtor  can  be  attached. 

Therefore,  in  any  event,  the  said  Plot  could  not  be  attached  under 

Order  XXI,  Rule  12  C.P.C.  For  the  attachment  of 

immovable 

properties  in  execution  proceedings,  the  applicable  provision  is 

Order XXI, Rule 13 C.P.C., which is reproduced herein below:-  

 “13. Application for attachment of immovable property to contain 
certain  particulars.  --  Where  an  application  is  made  for  the 
attachment of any immovable property belonging to a judgment-
debtor, it shall contain at the foot -- 
(a)  a description of such property sufficient to identify the same 
and, in case such property can be identified by boundaries or 
numbers in a record of settlement or survey, a specification of such 
boundaries or numbers; and 
(b)  a specification of the judgment-debtor’s share or interest in 
such property to the best of the belief of the applicant, and so far as 
he has been able to ascertain the same.” 
(Emphasis added)  

21.  Again under the said provision, only the immovable properties 

belonging  to  the  “judgment debtor”  could  be  attached.  Since  the 

Plot did not belong to Dr. Qureshi/judgment debtor, the same could 

not be attached under Order XXI, Rule 13 C.P.C. in execution of the 

judgment  and  decree,  which  had  been  passed  against  Dr. 

Qureshi/judgment debtor. 

22.  Since  much  stress  was  laid  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

respondents  on  the judgment in  the case of  Muhammad  Pervez  VS 

Mst.  Nabila  Yasmeen  (supra);  and  the  learned  Courts  below  have 

relied  on  the  said  judgment  in  non-suiting  the  petitioner,  a  closer 

analysis  of  the  said  judgment  is  necessary.  In  the  said  case, 

respondent No.1 had filed a suit for maintenance for herself and her 

daughter  against  her  husband  (Fazal-e-Raziq)  before  the  learned 

Judge,  Family  Court,  Rawalpindi.  As  Fazal-e-Raziq  was  residing  in 

England, his attorney, Muhammad Pervez, contested  the suit on his 

behalf.  After  the  said  suit  was  decreed,  respondent  No.1  filed  an 

execution petition. It is pertinent to note that Muhammad Pervez, in 

his  capacity  as  Fazal-e-Raziq’s  attorney,  made  a  statement  before 

the  learned  Court  that  on  the  next  date  of  hearing,  Fazal-e-Raziq 

 
 
10 

C.R. No.254/2016 

would  be  produced  by  him  before  the  Court.  Muhammad  Pervez’s 

national  identity  card  was  retained  by  the  Court,  and  he  was 

directed to appear in person on the next date. Since neither Fazal-e-

Raziq nor Muhammad Pervez appeared on the next date of hearing, 

the  learned  executing  Court  issued  non-bailable  warrants  of  arrest 

against  Muhammad  Pervez.  Muhammad  Pervez  filed  an  application 

for the recall of the warrants of arrest on the ground that the power 

of  attorney  previously  executed  in  his  favour  had  been  revoked  by 

Fazal-e-Raziq. Muhammad Pervez also asserted that he was not the 

judgment  debtor  but  was  only  pursuing  the  case  on  behalf  of  the 

judgment  debtor;  and  that  no  liability  could  have  been  imposed  on 

him in his capacity as Fazal-e-Raziq’s attorney. The said application 

was dismissed by the learned executing Court. Muhammad Pervez’s 

appeal  also  met  the  same  fate.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

dismissed  Muhammad  Pervez’s  petition  by  holding  that  it  was  well 

settled  that  once  a  decree  was  passed,  the  same  could  not  be 

allowed to be set at naught through the judgment debtor’s malafide 

act of revoking the power of attorney. Furthermore, it was held that 

the  judgment  debtor/Fazal-e-Raziq  was  bound  to  satisfy  the  decree 

either  himself  or  through  the  attorney  who  had  been  throughout 

representing him in the suit.  

23. 

It ought to be borne in mind that in the abovementioned case, 

non-bailable warrants of arrest had been issued against Muhammad 

Pervez  because  he  had  breached  his  commitment  made  in  a 

statement  before  the  Court  viz  that  the  judgment  debtor  would  be 

produced  before  the  learned  executing  Court  on  the  next  date  of 

hearing. It was Muhammad Pervez’s application for the recall of the 

warrants  of  arrest  which  was  concurrently  dismissed  up  to  the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court. In the said judgment, it was not held that an 

attorney  could  be  held  personally  liable  to  satisfy  a  decree  passed 

against  the  principal.  Therefore,  it  is  my  view  that  the  case  of 

Muhammad  Pervez  VS  Mst.  Nabila  Yasmeen  (supra) 

is 

distinguishable from the one at hand.  

 
 
11 

C.R. No.254/2016 

24. 

In  the  case  at  hand,  no  statement  or  undertaking  has  been 

given  by  the  petitioner  that  the  decree  passed  against  Dr.  Qureshi 

would be satisfied by the petitioner from his own personal property. 

The surety bond that had been furnished by the petitioner before the 

learned  appellate  Court  at  Lahore  was  only  with  respect  to  the 

decree  dated  31.07.2010,  passed  by  the  learned  Family  Court  at 

Lahore.  The  said  decree  was  set-aside  by  the  learned  appellate 

Court, vide judgment dated 14.12.2010. With the setting aside of the 

said  decree  dated  31.07.2010,  the  petitioner’s  liability  under  the 

said surety bond came to an end. The said surety bond could not be 

stretched to bind the petitioner for any decree that could be passed 

against  Dr.  Qureshi  in  the  post-remand  proceedings.  It  is  after  the 

said  judgment  of  the  appellate  Court  that  the  petitioner  claims  to 

have sold the Plot.  

25.  The fact remains that the petitioner is not the judgment debtor. 

The  petitioner  was  not  a  party  to  the  suit  instituted  by  the 

respondents.  The  petitioner  happened  to  be  pursuing  the  case  on 

behalf  of  Dr.  Qureshi  before  the  Courts.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the 

Plot was owned by the petitioner and not by Dr. Qureshi. Therefore, 

the  decree  dated  03.10.2014  could  not  be  satisfied  by  attaching  or 

selling  the property  which  had  belonged  to  the  petitioner.  The  said 

decree  is  to  be  executed  against  the  judgment  debtor  i.e.,  Dr. 

Qureshi, and none other.  

26. 

I  have  gone  through  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  special 

power  of  attorney  executed  by  Dr.  Qureshi  in  favour  of  the 

petitioner,  and  do  not  find  any  clause  which  provides  that  the 

petitioner would be Dr. Qureshi’s surety.  The authority given by Dr. 

Qureshi to the petitioner “to deposit any money for the purposes of 

any proceedings”, only  authorized  the  petitioner  to  deposit  money 

for  the  purposes  of  any  proceedings  on  behalf  of  Dr.  Qureshi.  The 

said clause in the special power of attorney by no means placed the 

petitioner  under  an  obligation  to  pay  the  decretal  amount  from  his 

own coffers. In holding so, I derive guidance from the law laid down 

in the following judgments:  

 
 
12 

C.R. No.254/2016 

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Ibrar  Meran  VS  Judge  Family  Court,  District 

Gujrat (2011 YLR 206), a suit for recovery of maintenance was 

decreed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court.  Thereafter,  the 

plaintiff/decree holder filed an execution petition. The learned 

executing  Court  ordered  the  arrest  of  the  judgment  debtor’s 

brother/petitioner,  who  had  pursued  the  judgment  debtor’s 

cases as his general attorney. Since according to the terms of 

the  general  power  of  attorney,  the  petitioner  was  a  surety  of 

the  judgment  debtor  as  well  as  his  general  attorney,  the 

Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  held  that  the  learned  executing 

Court  had  rightly  adopted  the  said  coercive  method  for  the 

recovery of the decretal amount. Furthermore, it was held that 

a surety was presumed to be a party to the suit.  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Aslam  VS  Ayyan  Ghazanffar  (PLD 

2012  Lahore  392),  a  suit  for  the  recovery  of  maintenance 

allowance  was  decreed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court, 

Lahore.  The  decree  was  sought  to  be  enforced  against  the 

special  attorney  of 

the 

judgment  debtor.  The 

learned 

executing  Court  placed  liability  regarding  the  decree  on  the 

general  attorney  and  issued  non-bailable  warrants  of  arrest 

against  him.  Through  the  special  power  of  attorney,  the 

judgment  debtor  had  given  the  attorney  the  power  to  defend 

the  authority  and  power  to  defend  the  suit  on  his  behalf  and 

did not provide that in case of any decree against the judgment 

debtor,  the  same  could  be  executed  against  the  attorney.  It 

was held by the Hon'ble Lahore High Court that the attorney, in 

his 

independent  capacity,  could  not  be  booked  for  the 

satisfaction  of  the  decree  which  was  never  passed  against 

him.  Furthermore,  the  order  of  the  learned  executing  Court, 

whereby  non-bailable  warrants  of  arrest  were  issued  against 

the  special  attorney,  was  set-aside.  Paragraph-12  of  the  said 

report is reproduced herein below:- 

“12.  Whenever the question of interpretation of Power of 
Attorney is considered, it is now a consensus on the point that 
deed of power of attorney is strictly to be construed and a 

 
 
 
13 

C.R. No.254/2016 

power which has not been assigned in specific terms cannot 
be presumed to have been given by the principal to the 
attorney. The attorney in this case when extended the power 
to defend the suit on behalf of the defendant was never 
provided with any liability to the effect that in case of any 
possible  decree  against  defendant/judgment  debtor,  the 
same can equally be executable against the attorney. Even in 
Muhammad Pervez’s case (Supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court 
of Pakistan is of the view that it is the judgment debtor Fazal-
e-Haq who is bound to satisfy the decree either himself or 
through  attorney.  Keeping  in  view  such  findings  of  the 
Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  the  attorney  in  his 
independent capacity cannot be booked for satisfaction of 
decree which was never granted against him.” 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Jameel  VS  Mst.  Tahira  Bibi  (2013 

CLC  1529),  after  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower  amount, 

maintenance  etc.  was  decreed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family 

Court,  Dera  Ismail  Khan,  the  learned  executing  Court  issued 

non-bailable warrants of  arrest against the judgment debtor’s 

special attorney and directed him to pay the decretal amount. 

Although  the  special  attorney  used  to  appear  in  the  Court  for 

and  on  behalf  of  the  judgment  debtor,  but  nowhere  was  it 

undertaken  by  the  special  attorney  that  he  would  pay  the 

decretal  amount.  The  Hon'ble  Peshawar  High  Court  held  that 

mere  pursuance  of  a  case  by  an  attorney  never  warranted 

such  a  harsh  and  punitive  action  as  was  resorted  to  by  the 

learned  executing  Court.  The  Hon'ble  High  Court  allowed  the 

writ  petition  instituted  by  the  special  attorney  and  set-aside 

the abovementioned order of the learned executing Court. 

27. 

I am of the view that  the concurrent judgments passed by the 

learned  Courts  below  are  not  based  on  the  correct  appreciation  of 

the law laid down by the superior Courts. Since no decree had been 

passed against the petitioner; and since the petitioner’s obligations 

under  the  surety  bond  dated  11.10.2010  submitted  before  the 

learned  appellate  Court  at  Lahore  came  to  an  end  when  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated  31.07.2010,  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge, Family Court, Lahore, was set-aside by the learned appellate 

Court;  and  since  there  was  no  provision  in  the  special  power  of 

attorney  dated  07.08.2014  obligating  the  petitioner  to  pay  the 

 
 
 
14 

C.R. No.254/2016 

decretal  amount  from  his  own  coffers;  and  since  the  Plot  belonged 

to  the  petitioner  and  not  to  the  judgment  debtor/Dr.  Qureshi,  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated  03.10.2014,  passed  by  the  learned 

appellate  Court  could  not  be  executed  by  attaching  or  selling  the 

petitioner’s personal property. Therefore, I hold that the concurrent 

judgments of the learned Courts below suffer from a misconception 

of  the  terms  of  the  said  power  of  attorney.  On  account  of  the  said 

jurisdictional 

irregularity,  the 

instant  civil  revision  petition 

is 

allowed, and the impugned judgments passed by the learned Courts 

below are set-aside. 

28.  Before parting with this judgment, it may be observed that the 

learned  counsel  for  the petitioner  had  no  explanation  as  to  why  the 

petitioner’s  brother/Dr.  Qureshi  was  escaping  from  the  process  of 

the  law  and  was  not  showing  compliance  with  the  judgment  and 

decree  03.10.2014,  which  had  attained  finality.  It  bespeaks  of  a 

sorry state of affairs on the part of Dr. Qureshi, who happens to be a 

well  educated  person  and  is  avoiding  his  legal,  moral  and  religious 

obligation  by  not  paying  maintenance  to  his  own  child.  The 

respondents are at liberty to exercise the option of either enforcing 

the  said  judgment  and  decree  against  Dr.  Qureshi  in  U.S.A.  or 

alternatively  to  apply  to  the  learned  executing  Court  in  Pakistan  to 

issue  warrants  of  arrest  against  Dr.  Qureshi  in  the  execution 

proceedings.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2018. 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                                    (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
