ORDER SHEET 

IN THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD. 

(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT} 

Criminal Appeal  No. 157 of 2016 

Riffat Shamim 
VS
Malik Hassan Raza Agraal and another 

Appellant  by: 

Malik Mushtaq Ahmad, Advocate. 

Respondent No.1: 

Ms. Rakhshanda Younis, Advocate. 

State by 

Mr. Hammad Saeed Dar, State counsel 
alongwith Shahid Khan, A.S.I. Police 
Station Margalla, Islamabad. 

Date of  hearing: 

18.09.2020 

Ghulam Azam  Qambranl. J.:-  Appellant  (Riffat  Shamim) 

seeks setting aside of impugned order dated  11.06.2016, passed by 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad-West,  whereby 

respondent  No.1  (hereinafter be referred to  as "respondent ")  was 

acquitted  from  the  charge  in  case  F.l.R  No.592  dated  28.11.2012 

under  Section  506  (ii)  P.P.C  25-0,  Telegraph  Act,  registered  at 

Police Station Margalla, Islamabad. 

2. 

Briefly stated facts of the prosecution case are that the instant 

F.l.R/  EX.P-B  was  lodged  on  direction  of  the  learned  Justice  of 

Peace, Islamabad, with the facts as narrated by the complainant are 

that  on  25.10.2012  at  about  02:00/  03:00  p.m.,  the  appellant/ 

complainant  was  sitting  in  her  car  in  front  of  NADRA  office, 

Islamabad,  and  the  respondent/  accused  came  there  with  pistol, 

extended  her 

life 

threats, 

thereby  criminally 

intimated  her. 

Respondent also used obnoxious cellular calls to the appellant. 

3. 

After  registration of F.l.R, the investigation was conducted and 

report  under  Section  173 Cr.P.C  was  submitted  before  the  learned 

Judicial  Magistrate,  Islamabad-West. After taking  cognizance  by the 

learned  trial  Court/  Magistrate  1st  Class,  Islamabad,  and  after 

2 

"Cr/. Appeal  No. l57 of 20l6" 

fulfilling  codal 

formalities,  charge  was 

framed  against 

the 

respondent,  which  was  denied,  upon  which,  the  prosecution  was 

directed  to  produce  witnesses.  In  order  to  proof  its  case,  the 

prosecution produced the following witnesses:- 

•  PW-1  Mst. Riffat Shamim (Complainant), 
•  PW-2  Muhammad  Ashfaq  (Sub-Inspector/investigation 

officer). 

After  closure  of  the  prosecution  evidence,  the  respondent/accused 

was  examined  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C  wherein  he  denied  the 

whole  accusation  and  pleaded  innocence.  However,  in  reply  to 

question  No. 7  that  will  you  produce  evidence  in  your  defense,  he 

has replied as under:- 

"Yes  documentary  evidence  which  demonstrate 
the 
successive fabrication  and  preparation  of  the forged  public 
documents  in  order  to  grab  the  Quranic share  of  the  legal 
heirs of Azhar Hussain which speaks volume of the conduct of 
the  complainant  as  I  am  perusing  the  interest  of  the  legal 
heirs of the deceased Azhar Hussain being their  attorney  and 
the complainant  took me as  a stumbling  block in her designs 
and this prompted  her to lodge FIR." 

On completion of the trial, after hearing arguments of the parties, the 

learned  Judicial  Magistrate  vide 

judgment  dated  24.03.2016 

convicted  the  respondent  for  the  commission  of  offence  under 

Section  506  P. P. C  with  fine  of  Rs.15000/-  as  punishment  and  in 

case  of  default  in  payment  of  the  fine,  he  shall  further  undergo  15 

days as simple imprisonment. 

4. 

The  respondent feeling  aggrieved from  the  conviction filed  an 

appeal  before  the  Court  of  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad.  In  the  meantime, the  appellant/ complainant  also filed  a 

criminal  revision  against  the  respondent  before  the  same  Court  for 

enhancement  of the  sentence. The  learned appellate  Court allowed 

the appeal filed by the respondent by acquitting him, while dismissed 

the  revision  petition  filed  by  the  appellant,  vide  consolidated 

judgment  dated  11.06.2016, therefore, the appellant has filed instant 

appeal against acquittal of respondent. 

3 

Neri. Appeal No. 151 of 2016H 

5. 

The  learned counsel for the  appellant  has contended that the 

impugned  judgment  dated  11.06.2016  passed  by  the  learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad,  is  illegal,  against  the  facts 

and  manifestly  wrong;  that  the  judgment  passed  by  the  learned 

appellate  Court  is  perverse  and  arbitrary.  Further  contended  that 

sufficient  evidence  is  available  against  the  respondent/  accused  to 

connect  him with  the  alleged offence.  Next contended  that  accused 

is  nominated  in  the  F.l.R,  it  was  a  broad  day  light  occurrence;  that 

the  case  was  proved  against  the  respondent  but  the  learned 

appellate  authority  ignored  the  material  evidence  and  passed  the 

impugned judgment,  therefore,  the  same  is  not  sustainable.  Lastly, 

urged for setting aside the impugned judgment. 

6. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  accused/  respondent 

opposed  the  contentions  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant  contending  that  no  such  incident  has  ever  occurred;  that 

no  evidence  with  regard  to  obnoxious  phone  call  was  brought  on 

record; that  witnesses  namely  Raja Qayyum  and  Raja Abdul  Sattar 

were  not  produced  by the  complainant  in  support  of  the  allegation; 

that  the  alleged  place  of  occurrence  is  a  thickly  populated  area, 

where  the  office  of  S.S.P  is  also  situated  in  the  said  premises; that 

there  is  dispute  on  the  property  of  deceased  Azhar  Hussain, who 

was the ex-husband  of the appellant; that the respondent is  attorney 

of  co-sharer  in  the  property,  who  is  pursuing  the  civil  cases  with 

regard  to  the  said  property, therefore,  he was  malafidly  involved  in 

the  instant  case.  The  learned  State  counsel  also  supported  the 

arguments of the learned counsel for appellant. 

7. 

I  have  heard the arguments of learned counsel for the  parties 

and have perused the material available on record. 

8. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  F.l.R  was  lodged  on  the 

direction  of  learned  Justice  of  Peace.  On  the  written  application, 

Ex.P-A,  F.l.R  Ex.P-8  was  registered  by  Sub-Inspector,  lshtiaq 

Ahmed.  The  allegation  against the  respondent was  that  he  used to 

make obnoxious calls to the appellant through different  persons and 

different 

telephone  numbers.  During 

the 

investigation, 

the 

4 

"Cr/. Appeal  No. 157 of 2016" 

Investigation  Officer  failed  to  produce any  such  evidence  on  record 

on  the  basis  whereof,  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  acquitted the 

respondent  under Section 25-D, Telegraph Act. The other allegation 

against the  respondent was  that  on  the fateful  day,  at  about  02:00/ 

03:00  p.m.,  when  complainant  was  sitting  in  her  car,  in  front  of 

NADRA  Office  situated  at  F-8  Markaz  Islamabad,  adjacent  to  the 

Sessions  Courts,  Islamabad-West,  the  respondent/  accused  came 

there with  pistol  and  extended  her life threats  but on  intervention of 

Raja Qayyum  and  Raja Abdul  Rashid, she was  rescued.  During the 

trial,  the  prosecution  failed  to  produce  the  above  said  witnesses  in 

support  of  the  allegation,  although,  the  statement  of  Raja  Abdul 

Qayyum was  recorded under Section  161  Cr.P.C.  During the trial, in 

her  cross-examination, 

the  appellant  has  admitted 

that  she 

contracted  marriage  with  Azhar  Hussain, who  is  maternal  uncle  of 

the  respondent.  She  also admitted that  the  relations with  deceased 

Azhar  Hussain  were  strained,  therefore,  a  family  suit  was  also 

pending in  between them.  She  has also admitted that  a  defamatory 

suit  was  also  filed  by  her  against  the  present  respondent.  That 

admittedly, the  alleged  place of occurrence was  nearby the office of 

S.S.P,  where  the  security  personal  remained  present.  The  non  

examination  of  the  above  said  witnesses  i.e.  Raja  Abdul  Qayyum 

and  Raja Abdul  Rashid,  by the  prosecution,  creates  a  presumption 

under  Illustration  (g)  of  Article  129  of  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order, 

1984 that had the said witness examined in  the Court, their evidence 

would  have  been  unfavorable  to  the  prosecution.  Although,  the 

prosecution was  not  bound to  produce each  and  every witness,  but 

the  above  witnesses  were  those  persons,  who  could  support  the 

allegations  leveled  against  the  respondent  and  who  were  central 

figures and all the story revolved around them. The non-examination 

of  the  said  witnesses  has  created  doubts  in  the  prosecution  story. 

Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  on  the  case  of  "Huner  Shah 

aliasAnar  Shah  and  another  VS  Khan  ZadGu/  and  another"  (2014 

YLR 1180). The relevant portion is  reproduced herein below:- 

"The  inference  regarding  non-production  of  this  important 
independent  witness  would go  against  the  prosecution  that 

5 

"Cr/.  Appeal  No. 157 of 2016" 

had  he  been  produced  his  statement  wouldn't  have  been 
favourable 
that 
prosecution  wanted  to suppress material evidence." 

It  would  also  reflect 

to  prosecution. 

9. 

Even otherwise, the general principle in  criminal jurisprudence 

is  that  the  prosecution  is  to  prove  its  case  beyond  doubt  and  this 

burden does  not shift from  prosecution, even  if the  accused  person 

takes up any particular plea and fails in  it. 

10. 

The  scope  of  interference  in  appeal  against  acquittal  is  most 

narrow  and  limited,  because  in  an  acquittal  the  presumption  of 

innocence  is  significantly  added  to  the  cardinal  rule  of  criminal 

jurisprudence,  that  an  accused  shall  be  presumed  to  be  innocent 

until  proved  guilty;  in  other words,  the  presumption  of  innocence  is 

double.  The  courts  shall  be  very  slow  in  interfering  with  such  an 

acquittal  judgment,  unless  it  is  shown  to  be  perverse,  passed  in 

gross  violation  of  law, suffering from  the  errors  of  grave  misreading 

or non-reading of the evidence; such judgments  should not be lightly 

interfered  and  heavy  burden  lies  on  the  prosecution  to  rebut  the 

presumption  of  innocence  which  the  accused  has  earned  and 

attained on account of his acquittal.  It  has been categorically  held in 

a  plethora of judgments that interference in  a judgment  of acquittal is 

rare and  the  prosecution  must show that  there  are  glaring  errors of 

law and fact committed by the Court in  arriving at the decision, which 

would  result into grave miscarriage of justice;  the acquittal judgment 

is  perfunctory  or wholly  artificial  or a  shocking  conclusion  has  been 

drawn.  Moreover,  in  number  of  dictums  of  this  Court,  it  has  been 

categorically  laid down that such judgment  should  not be interjected 

until the findings are perverse, arbitrary, foolish, artificial, speculative 

and  ridiculous.  The  Court  of  appeal  should  not  interfere  simply  for 

the reason that on re-appraisal of the evidence a  different conclusion 

could  possibly  be  arrived  at,  the  factual  conclusions  should  not  be 

upset,  except  when  palpably  perverse,  suffering  from  serious  and 

material factual  infirmities. 

11. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  an  appeal  against  acquittal  has 

distinctive features and the approach to deal with the appeal against 

6 

"Cr/. Appeal  No. 157 o/ 2016N 

conviction 

is  distinguishable  from  appeal  against  acquittal,  as 

presumption  of  double  innocence  is  attached,  in  the  latter  case 

Reliance in this regard is  placed upon the case of "lnavatullah  Butt v. 

Muhammad  Javed  and  2  others"  [PLO  2003  SC  562].  Until  and 

unless the judgment  of the trial  Court  is  perverse, completely  illegal 

and  on  perusal  of  evidence,  no other  decision  can  be given  except 

that the  accused  is  guilty or there  has been complete  misreading of 

evidence leading to miscarriage of justice, the Court will not exercise 

jurisdiction  under section 417 Cr. P. C. 

12. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  failed  to  advance 

any  ground  to  justify  the  setting  aside  of  the  acquittal  judgment. 

There  is  neither  misreading,  non-reading  of  evidence  nor  the 

findings  of the  learned appellate trial  Court  are  patently  illegal. The 

findings of acquittal, by no stretch of imagination, can be declared as 

perverse,  shocking,  alarming  or  suffering  from  errors  of jurisdiction 

and misreading or non-reading of evidence. 

13. 

For what has been discussed above, the instant appeal having 

no force is  hereby dismissed. 

~eHttOUe• AZAM QAMBRANI) 
JUDGE 

J 

Announced  in  open Court on 29th  day of September, 2020. 

_ 

f1"'"'11'Qfl OGE 

