Form  No:  HOD/C-121 
JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. 
ISLAMABAD. 

Writ Petition No.4039 of 2019 

Usman Bashir. 

VS

Dr.  Sadia  Rasheed Khan and 04 others. 

Petitioners By 

Ms.  Shabnam Nawaz, Advocate. 

Respondents By 

Mr.  Muhammad Kowkab Iqbal, Advocate. 

Date of  Decision 

16.01.2020 

***** 

AAMER  FAROOQ.  J.  -  Through  the  instant  petition,  the  petitioner 

has  challenged order  dated  29.10.2019,  whereby  the  learned Trial  Court  fixed 

the interim  maintenance as  Rs.25,000/- per minor per month. 

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  respondents  No.1  to  3  filed  a  suit  for 

maintenance and  recovery  of  dower  through  respondent  No.4.  In  the  referred 

suit,  application  for  interim  maintenance was  also filed  in  which  the  order  has 

been passed, whereby  the  interim  maintenance has  been fixed  as  Rs.25,000/- 

per month per child. 

3. 

Learned counsel for  the  petitioner,  inter-alia,  contended that  suit has 

been filed  incompetently as  it  has  been done so on behalf of  respondents No.1 to 

3  through  respondent  No.4.  It  was  contended  that  the  power  of  attorney 

appended with  the  suit  clearly  shows that  it  is  only  for  a  specific property  and 

-2- 

Writ Petition No.4039of2019 

not for  filing  the  instant  suit.  It  was further  submitted  that  under the  facts and 

circumstances the fixation  of the  interim  maintenance is  arbitrary  and excessive. 

4. 

Learned counsel for  respondents No.1  to  4,  inter-alia, contended that 

fresh  power  of  attorney  has  been  executed  by  respondent  No.1, who  filed  the 

suit  on  behalf  of  respondents  No.2  and  3  as  they  are  minors,  through  her 

attorney  respondent  No.4.  It  was submitted that  in  the  latter  power of  attorney 

the  filing  of  the  suit  on the  basis  of  earlier power of  attorney  has  been  rectified, 

hence there  is  no lacuna as  such.  It was further  contended that  in  the  facts and 

circumstances sum of  Rs.25,000/- as  interim  maintenance is  appropriate. 

5. 

Arguments  advanced by  learned counsel for  the  parties  have  been 

heard and the documents placed on record examined with  their able assistance. 

6. 

The petitioner  has  not substantiated his  plea  regarding the fixation of 

the 

interim  maintenance  as  excessive  or  not  tenable 

in 

the 

facts  and 

circumstances.  It  is  trite  law  that  an  interim  order  cannot  be  interfered  with 

unless  it  is  without  jurisdiction  or  patently  illegal.  In  any  case,  the  fixation  of 

interim  maintenance is  tentative  and can  always be  varied  by  the  learned Trial 

Court  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial.  In  so  far  as  objection  of  the  petitioner 

regarding  the  maintainability  of  the  suit  is  concerned,  learned  counsel  for 

respondents No.1  to 4 categorically submitted that  a  fresh  power of attorney  has 

been  submitted  in  which  filling  of  the  suit  has  been  rectified  and  respondent 

No.4  has  specific  authorization 

to  pursue  the  suit. 

In 

the 

facts  and 

circumstances, the  impugned  order  does  not  warrant  interference  as  there  is 

nothing on record to  establish that  there  was no  jurisdiction  to  pass  the order  in 

question or the  same was done in  violation of any law. 

7. 

For  what  has  been  stated above, the  instant  petition  is  without  merit 

and  is  accordingly  dismissed,  however,  the  learned Trial  Court  is  directed  to 

-3- 

Writ Petition No.4039of2019 

deal with  the  objection  regarding the  maintainability  of  the  suit  as a  preliminary 

one. 

*M.  Zaheer Janjua* 

(AAMER  FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

