Form No: HCID/C-121
JUDGMENT  SHEET.

IN THE ISIAMABAD HIGH COURT,
ISLAMABAD.

l,lr.P. No. 4461 of 2019

Muhammad  A'rjaz Haroon

Vercus
The  State through National Accountability Bureau,  Islamabad  and another

Petitioner by

Respondents By

Mr. Shah  Khawar  and Barrister Qasim
Nawaz  Abbasi, Advocates.

Barrister Rizwan Ahmed, Special
Prosecutor,  NAB.
Mudassar Hussain, I.O, NAB.

Date of Hearing

28.01.2020.

AAMER  FAROOQ,  T. -  The petitioner,  namely Muhammad Aijaz

Haroon seeks bai! after arrest in the inquiry initiated  against  him and others. The

petitioner  was serued grounds  of arrest and was arrested  on 21.11.2019  from

Karachi.  After obtaining transit remand,  he was presented for physical remand

on 25.11.20L9, which was allowed for 10 days by the Administrative  Judge,

Accountability Court,  Islamabad. On L2.t2.20L9, the petitioner  was sent on

judicial  remand.
2. 

Learned  counse! for the petitioner,  inter  alia, contended that case

against  the petitioner  is without justification  or basis; that the allegations  as

levelled  in the grounds of arrest are without any substance;  that at the time

when allotments were  made of the plots in question, the petitioner  was not even

member of the Society;  that allotment letters and list of allottees  clearly  show

that allotments were made in the year 1983 and thereabout;  that plots

subsequently were transferred/sotd  to Omni Group which per se is no offence

and the money  received  was deposited  in the accounts  of petitioner  and his

family.  Learned  counse!  further contended that the plots  had been in existence

W.P.  No. 4461  of 2019

2

since  inception of the Society and were not created bylor on the order  of

petitioner. It was fufther submitted  that investigation  against  the petitioner

stands concluded  and he is not required for the same. Learned counsel  also

submitted  that bail is not to be withheld as a punishment  in light of the dictum

laid down by the Hontle  Supreme Court of Pakistan in case reported as

Manzoor  and 4 otherc  VS The State  (PLD 1972 SC 81). It was further

contendedthatcaseofTaIlatIshaqrepoftedaSWdoesnot

oust jurisdiction  of this Court, but provides  guidelines for exercise of the

discretion. It was further  submitted  that grounds of arrest which is an executive

action  is amenable to judicia! review under Afticle  199 of the Constitution;  that

bare  perusal  of the grounds of arrest  shows  that Executive Authority namely

Chairman,  NAB has exercised the power  of issuance of grounds of arrest without

application of mind and going  through the record,  hence  the same is irrationa!

and unreasonable  in the facts and circumstances.
3. 

Learned Special Prosecutor, NAB,  inter alia, contended that the

petitioner  is involved  in money  Iaundering inasmuch as he had connection with

Omni Group as he received sum of Rs.lzt4  Million in the garb of sale

consideration  from the Omni Group which sum was deposited  in his accounts

and in the bank  accounts maintained  by his family  members.  It was fufther

contended  that allottees of 12 plots recorded statements  under section  tU

Cr.P.C that allotments  were made  to them  much later in time in the year 2002;

that the propefi  owned by the Society has been usurped  by the petitioner as

fake allotment  letters were  issued, which subsequently  were  purchased from the

referred allottees  and subsequently  were sold to the Omni  Group.
4. 

Arguments advanced  by the learned  counsel  for the pafties have

been heard and the documents placed on record  examined with their able

assistance.
5. 

As noted above, the petitioner  is facing inquiry  with respect  to fake

bank account scam regarding  illegal allotment of plots in Overseas  Cooperative

W.P. No.  446t of 2019

3

Housing  Society (Kidney Hill) Limited and its payment from fake bank accounts.

The grounds of arrest issued and serued upon the petitioner  are dated

2L.LL.20L9.  For the sake of brevity, same are reproduced  below:-

c) 

b) 

*a)  That you being Chairman  and Secrctary  of Overseas  Cooperative
Housing  Society's Management  committee  misused  your authority
by creating  12 X fake plot ltles in the name of fictitious allottees.
That you have conspired  with other  accused  persons  for laundering
of illegaUunexplalned  money  of OMNI  Grcup in garb of 12 X fake
plot files and reeived  lllegal pecunialy advantages/unlawful  gains
(Rs.144  M approximately) fiom two fake bank accounts  namely
M/s Lucky International  and M/s A-One Internationa!.
That you received illegal  pecuniary advantage to the tune of Rs.
14,4 Yl and the same was misappropriated through your  own bank
account  as well as thrcugh  the bank accounts of your  associates.
That you being custodian of rccotd  have maneuvered  memberchip
and allotment  details of Society and illegally oeated  various  plot
files to benefit yourcelf and our associates.
That you have  falsified  Soclety's record and created  and transferred
various  plot files in favour of your assoclates for your  personal
benefits  through  illegal and unlawful  exercise of Powens of
Managing Committee."

d) 

e) 

Reading  of the above grounds shows that primarily the allegation  against  the

petitioner  is that as Chairman  and Secretary,  Overseas  Cooperative  Housing

Society,  he created 12 fake plots in the names  of fictitious  allottees  and then  sold

the same  to Omni Group for sum of Rs.  1214 Million,  hence obtained  pecuniary

advantage to the tune of said sum thereby causing loss to the Society.  During

the course of arguments,  it was inquired  from the learned  Special Prosecutor,

NAB  as to whether  the plots  were created by the petitioner  and the candid reply

was in the negative;  it was submitted that it is not the case of physica! creation

of the plots rather allotments of the same were made. Learned  Special

Prosecutor, NAB placed  on record list of allottees  who allegedly  are fictitious.

Scrutiny of the allotment letters and share certificates clearly show that

allotments were made in the year 1983;  though it was argued on behalf of NAB

that all 12 allottees have  made statements  under  section 164 Cr.P.C. that

allotments were  not made  in the year 1983 but much later in time i.e. 2002. It is

W.P.  No.  446L of 2OL9

4

trite law that in order  to rebut  documentary  evidence, cogent  proof is required.

There is nothing  on record yet which establishes  version of allottees  that

allotments were not made in the year 1983 and admittedly,  at the relevant  time,

the petitioner was not even member  of the Society. The referred aspect does not

make case  against the petitioner one making allotments of plots to fictitious

allottees  as al! the 12 allottees  exist.
6. 

Apparently, the said allottees entered  into an agreement  with the

petitioner's Company for development  of the said plots for consideration,

however, referred arrangement could not materialize  and resultantly the referred

allottees  sold the plots through  open file transaction  to the petitioner. No

illegality  as such exists  in the said transaction  or was pointed  out by NAB.  The

plots in question  were sold to Omni Group through open transfer arrangement

again  for total consideration of Rs.144 Million and the amount  was deposited in

the bank  accounts  of the petitioner and his son/family.  The Omni Group  is under

investigation  for fake bank accounts and money laundering.  It seems  that the

petitioner  has been roped  into this inquiry  due to the fact that he sold propefi

to the Omni Group  and received  consideration  therefrom. Nothing  exists  on

record  yet which establishes that the petitioner  is also involved in fake bank

accounts and is beneficiary  of the same as such. One time transaction for sale of

the plots to the said Group does not make  him paft of the said inquiry as nothing

exists to the effect on record or was brought to the attention of the Couft.

Investigation  to the extent  of petitioner  is concluded  as he is on judicial remand.

The evidence  in question is entirely  documentary  which the NAB has already

taken into custody.  Though  it was submitted  by Special Prosecutor,  NAB that not

the entire  record of the Society is in custody  yet no specific document was

pointed out nor it was argued that why fufther custody of the petitioner  is

required. It is pertinent  to obserue that the Society has not lodged  any complaint

nor the allotment of tZ plots has been  found to be in favour of fictitious

employees  in the audit of the Society.

W.P.  No. 4461  of 2019

5

7. 

The offences provided  in the Nationa! Accountability Ordinance, 1999

are non-bailable and sections  497 and 426  Cr.P.C are excluded.  However, since

in the case of Khan Asfandyar  Wali repofted  as PLD 2OO1 SC 607, it has been

held by the august Apex Couft that the Hontle  Supreme Court of Pakistan  as

well  as the High Courts have jurisdiction  under Afticle 199 of the Constitution to

release an accused,  being investigated by NAB, on bail. The  principles/guidelines

for grant of bail were revisited by the august  Apex  Couft  in case repofted as

Tallat Ishaq VSNAB through Chairman  and otherc (PLD 2019  SC

112). It is also an admitted  position  that system  of inquiry and investigation

envisaged  in Nationa! Accountability  Ordinance,  1999 is quite different  from  other

criminal investigations and inquires.  The system  of arrest  is based on sanctioning

or authorizing  the arrest of accused facing  investigation  or inquiry by Chairman

NAB. In this behalf, the relevant  provisions  are Sections  18(e) and 24(a) of

National  Accountability  Ordinance,  1999.  For the ease  of convenience, Sections

18 and 24 are reproduced  below:-

o18. Cognizance  of offences:

(a)  The  Court  shall not take cognizance  of any offence under
this Ordinance except on a refercnce  made  by [the Chairman
NAB or an officer of the NAB duly  authorized by himl.
(b)  A rcference  under  this Ordinance  shall be initiated by the

National  Accountability  Bureau  on-
(l)  a  rcfercnce recelved fiom  the  apprcprlate

governmen$ 
(ia)  reeipt  of a complaintl  or
(lii) 
[its] own accord,

or

(c)  Wherc the Chairman  NAB, or an officer of the NAB  duly
authorized  by him, is of the opinion  that it is, or may be,
necessalT  and apploprlate  to inltiate proceedings against
any person, he shall refer the matter for inquiry  or
invesUgaUon.

(d)  The rcsponsibility for lnquily  into and investigation of an
offence  alleged to  have been committed under this
Ordinance  shal! rest on the NAB to the erclusion  of any
other agency  or authority, unless  any such  agency  or
authority is required  to do so by the Chairman  [NAB] [ or by
an officer of the NAB duly authorized by him].

W.P.  No. 4461  of 2019

6

(O 

(e)  The Ghairman  NAB  and such members,  officerc  or seruants
of the NAB shall have  and exercise,  for the puryoses  of an
inquiry  or investigaUon  the power to arrest any person, and
all the powers of an officer-in-charge of a Police  Station
under  the Code, and for that purpose  may cause the
attendance  of any penson,  and when and if the assistance of
any agency,  pollce officer  or any other offlcia!  or agency, as
the case may be, ls sought by the NAB such official  or
agency shall  rcnder such  assistance provlded  that no penson
shall be arrested  without  the permission  of the Chairman
INABI or any officer [of NABI duly authorized by the
Ghalrman  NAB.
Any Inqulry [or] Investigation  under thls Odinance  shall  be
completed  expedltlously as may  be practical  and  feasible.
(g)  The Chairman NAB, [or by an officer of the NAB duly
authorized  himr] shall  appraise the material  and the
evidence placed before him during the inquiry and the
investigaUon,  and if he decldes that it would be proper and
just to proceed  furtlrer  [and there  is sufficient  material  to
Justify  filing  of a rcfercnce],  he shall rcfer the matter  to [a]
Coutt.
If a complaint  is inquired  into and investigated  by the NAB
and it is concluded  that the complaint received was prima
facie frivolous  or has been filed with intent  to malign or
defame any person,  the Chalrman  INABI or  Deputy
Chalrman  NAB or [an officer of the NAB duly authorized  by
the Chairman NABI,  may rcfer the matter to the Couft and if
the complainant  ls found guilty he shall  be punishable  with
imprisonment  for a term which may extend  to one  year, or
with fine or with both.'

(h) 

"24.

(b) 

[Anest.-l
(a)  The Chairman  NAB shall have  the power,  at any stage of the
[inquiry or] investigaUon  under this Ordinanoe, to direct
that the accused,  if not already arrested,  shall  be arrested.
If  the Chairman, NAB, [or an officer of the NAB duly
authorized by himrl  decldes to refer the case to a Couft,
such reference  shall ontaln the substance of the [offence or
offences as the case may ber] alleged to have been
committed  by the accused  and  a copy of such reference  shall
be fortarded  to the Registrar  of the Court to which the case
has been sent to tra the accused,  and  another  oopy  shall be
delivered  to the aeused.

(c)  The provisions of sub'section  (a) shall  also apply to cases,

which have aheady  been  rcferred to the Couft.

W.P.  No.  446L ot 20L9

7

(d)  Noturithstanding anytlring  contained in the Code, where the
holder  of a public office  or any other penson  accused of an
offence is arrcsted  by NAB under  this Ordinance,  NAB shall,
as soon  as may ber inform  him of the grcunds and substance

on the basis of which he has been  arrested  and produce  hlm
before the Couft within a pedod of twenty four hourc of
arrest excluding  the time  necessaly for the Journey from the
place of arrest to the Cout and such person shall, having
regard  to the facts and cirrumstances of the cases,  be liable
to be detained in the custody  of NAB for the purpose of
inquiry and investigation  for a period  not exeeding  nlnety
days, and the Court may nemand  an accused  percon to
custody  not exceeding  fifteen  days  at a time and for evety
subsequent  remand the Couft  shall recod  neasons  in wriUng

copy  of which shall be sent to the High Couft.

(e)  All percons prcsently  in custody  shall immediately  upon
coming into force of this sub-section, unless  prcviously
produced  before a Gourt be produced  before such  Couft  as
provided in sub-section  (d) and the Order  authorizing
rctention  of custody  by NAB shall  be deemed to rclate to the

(f) 

date of arrcs$  and
The Chairman,  NAB may declare and notify any place  as a
Polie Station or a sub-Jail  at his discrction.'

The interpretation  was rendered  to the referred provisions  by way of comparison

with Section 54 of Code  Crimina!  Procedure, 1898 by the august  Apex Couft in

aa

Cabinet  Division, Islamabad  and others'(PLD 2001  SC 607). The Hon'ble

Supreme Couft at Page 929 in paragraph-258  obserued as follows:-

*The above contention  ls without any forre. We arc lnclined  to agree
with Mr. Mlnto  that the powens conferred by the impugned  prcvision
are part of normal powets  relating  to inquiries and lnvestigation.
Similar powens arc conferred  upon  Police Officerc  by the Criminal
Prccedurc  Code under  section 54 thereof. However,  we have no
doubt in our minds that while exercising  powens under  section  24(a)
of the impugned  Ordlnance,  the Chairman NAB shall consider the
facts and circumstances  of each case Justly, fairly, equitably,  in
acordance with  law and ln conformity with the prcvisions  of section
24A ol the General Clauses  Act,  1897 and not in a discriminatola
manner. Any such order passed by him is subject to conection  in
apprcprlate  cases  by the Superior  Courts in the exercise  of their
ConsUtutional  Jurisdiction. It is, thelefore, difricult to hold that
section za@) is ex facie  ultra vires Afticle  25 of the ConstituUon."

W.P. No.  446L of 20t9

8

Detailed interpretation  of Sections  in question was again made  in judgment
repofted as *

Accountability Bureau,  Islamabad and otherc'(PLD  2007 Karachi  243).

It was obserued as follows:-

30. A barc reading  of section  18(b), (c), (d) and (e) of the Ordinance
leveals the scheme of the Ordinance. It provides that after the
receipt of information  of the commission  of the offence  through  any
sounce  as mentioned  in clause  (b) if the Chairman  NAB or any officer
of the NAB duly authorized by him forms  opinion  to initiate
prcceedlngs  against  any peron,  then he is requircd  and duty bound
to refer the matter for inquiry or invesUgation.  The sole
responsibility  to conduct  such  inquity  or investigatlon  rests  upon the
NAB authority. However, the Chairman NAB or any ofricer  of the NAB
duly authorized can refer it to any other agency or authority  for
doing  the needful. In conducting  such inquiry or investigation,  the
Chairman  NAB,  member  of any other agencY  or authorlty  or officer
or seruant of NAB  arc requircd and authorized  to exercise all the
powens of arrest, whlch ale exelrcised  by an officer-in-chalge of a
Police Station under  the Code. Under the provisions  of section  54 of
the Code any police offtcer  can make  arrest without order frcm
Magistrate  and without a warrant  of arrcst. Thus such officer  of NAB
or authorlzed  officer can make arrest without  the order of
Accountablla$  Court  and wlthout  warrant of arrest.  Nevert{reless,
ercept the Chairman  NAB such powerc  of officerc of other  agency  or
authority or officers or serants  of NAB have been cuftailed  as they
cannot make such arrest wiUrout  the permission of the Chairman
NAB or any offtcer of the NAB duly authorized by the Chairman  NAB.
It follows  that if any other officer,  except  Chairman  NAB,  during the
oounie  of inquiry or investigatlon after collecting  material  forms
opinion that the accused  is to be arrested,  then such officer  shall
produce the material before the Chalrman NAB to seek  permission  to
anest the accused. The Chairman  NAB after perusing the material
collected  by the inquiry  or lnvestlgaUng officer  forms the opinion
within the scope of first clause  of section  54 of the Code, he shall
grant such permission  so as to implement  the intentlon  of the
teglslature.  If he cannot  form such opinlon then he shall defer to
grant  such permission  till sufficient  material  is collected. No form of
such permission  is prcvlded  under the Ordinance, therefore,  the
Chairman  NAB, may grant such permission  in any form but it should
be in wrlting.  After receipt of such permlssion  the concerned  officer
can make  arrest.

31. As rcgards  the powerc of the Chairman  NAB, after receipt of
information  through any soutlce  as provided  under  section  l8(b), the

W.P. No.  446L of 2Ot9

9

Chairman  NAB, ftnds sufricient  material  in such information,  he can
arrest the accused person without  the older of Accountabllity  Couft
or warrant of arrest.  However,  if he finds no sufficient material  but
merely  a suspects that the penson is involved then he can defer the
anest of such penson.  Nevettheless, after collectlng  sufficient
material  he shall  make  arl€st  within the scope of section 54 of the

Code.
32. The legislature  might  have visualized  that if for any reason, the
Investigating  Officer  did not apprcach the Chairman NAB to grant
hlm permission to arrest the accused, would it  mean that the
accused  should move freely in spite of the fact that sufficient
materia!  was collected against hlm justifying his arrcst, the
legislature  has taken carc of lt by giving new and additional power
to the Chairman  NAB ln the shape of section 24 ta get the accused
arrested. Under section 24(a)  of the Ordinance,  if the Chalrman  NAB
finds that during  the inquiry  or investigation an accused has not
been anested  then he has been given power to issue direction  that
the accused shall be anested.  The words 'shall be arrested'clearly
demonstrates the intention of legislature  that the accused must  be
arrested,  of cource  on fulfillment of the conditions  of arrest and if
the accused is not already  arrested under the general powerc  of
arrest as provided  under secffon f8(e) of the Ordinance.  However,
to issue direction  of arrest, the power  of the Chairman  NAB  appearc
to be discretionary.  How a discrctlonatT  Power can be exercised? It
wilt be discussed in the fofthcoming  part of the otder, for exercise of
such power only condition  precedent  to it is that the accused is not
already  arrested.  If such condition is fulfilled then the Ghairman NAB
is rcquired  to lssue  such dlrectlon.  No form of such direction  is
mentioned in the Ordinance, therefore,  such direction  can be issued
in any form but it should be in writing  to the authority or percon to
comply  with  the direcdon.  This additional  power has to be exercised
by the Chairman  NAB only.

33. Undcr  clause (b), if the Chairman  NAB  decides to send the case
to the Court for tria! then a copy of the Reference containing
substance  of the offence or offences  is required to be forurarded  to
the Court through  its Registrar  and another copy of the Reference is
requircd  to be handed to the accused.  The word  'deliver'appearing
in the clause  has been defined ln the American Heritage dictionary
as "To put into anther's  possession  or Power;  surrcnder;  hand over;
to take to the intended  recipient." Thus, for rcceiving  the copy  of the
reference  fiom the Chairman  NAB or an officer of the NAB  duly
authorlzed by him, the presence  of accused  is necessa\, it he is
present,  Refercnce  is to be filed and if there  is sufficient  material
against the aeused  iustifying his arrcst, then at this stage  also he
shatl be arrested.  This  provision  fudrer  supPorts that the accused  is

W.P. No. 446L of 2OL9

10

required  to be in custody  at the Ume of filing Refenenoe,  hence he is
rcquired to be fonralded  in custody to the Couft.

34. Under clause (c) the Chairman  NAB  can exelcise  the power of
issuing direction  that the accused  shall be arrcsted,  lf he is not
alrcady  arrested  even  after fillng the Refercnce in appropriate cases.

35. The Hon'ble  Suprcme  Couft of Pakistan  ln the case of Asfandyar
Wali (supra)  has obserued in para. 257 at page 929 that the power
of arrest  conferred  under the prcvisions are paft of normal  Powens
conferred upon a police officer under the Code under section 54
thereof.

36. It wltl be noticed  that in section  24(a)  the phrase "shall have  the
power"  has been used whlch appearc  to have given power  to the
Chairman  NAB of discretlonaty nature. The said phrase  has been
interpreted  in the book "Principles  of statutoly  InterpretaUon"  by
Iustice G.P.  Singh.  The author after relying upon the decisions by
the Supreme Coutt of India in the cases of Madasslal Fakir  Chund  v.
S. Changdeo Sugar  Mills AIR 1962 SC 154, Chinnamar  Kathiam  v.
Ayyayoo AIR 1982 SC 137  and Commissioner of Police v. Godhandas
Bhauji AIR 1952  SC 16 interpreted the words 'May'i 'It  shall be
lawful'; 'shall have  power'and  obserued  as under:--

"Ordinarily,  the words 'May'and 'It shall be lawful'are
not words  of compulsion.  They are enabling  wolds and
they only confer  capacity,  power  or authority  and imply  a
discretion.  They are both used in a statute  to indicate
that something may be done which prior to it could not
be done.  The use of wotds 'shall have power'  also
connotes the same  idea."

37. It is pointed  out that under the powerc of arrcst the Chalrman
NAB can deprive the liber{ of citizens,  therefore, it is to be
safeguarded jealously and citizen  should not be arrcsted without
fulfilling  the conditions menUoned in any clause of section 54 of the
Code. Further, the conditions prcscribed  for the exercise  of such
powens, including procedural  rcquirements  must be strictly
fotlowed.  At the same  Ume the discrction  does not mean  that the
Chairman NAB  should  conduct  himself in a discriminatory manner
but he should  erercise  such powerc  in a uniform manner  keeping  in
vlew the facts, circumstances,  evldence collected or material  placed
beforc  hlm. Thus he should  conduct hlmself iustly,  fairly,  equitably,
for the advancement  of the purposes of the Oldinance  in accotdance
with law and in conformity  of the provisions  of section  24'A oJ
General Clauses Act, 1897. It will be fufther noticed that the Power
of arrest,  no doubt, apparently,  is a discretionalT  polYer  with the
Chairman  NAB but at the same time a duty is cast upon him to act in

W.P. No.  4461of 2Ol9

1l

the manner,  lt is intended  to achieve the objective of the Ordinance,
lntention  of the legislaturc and to advance  the cause of JusUce.

38. From the plain reading  of section 24(a) of the Ordinance  and  54
of the Code an lmpression  would  be gathered that the police  officer
or the Chairman NAB  is under an obligation  and duty bound to arrest
a peneon if he is involved  in a non-bailable  offence  subject to the
condition that the requircments of  section 54 ane fulfilled.
Nevertheless,  if the Chairman  NAB  merely suspects  of involvement
of an accused  he can keep it as secret  and if therc  is no risk of
absconding  the accused, the Chairman  NAB may defer making the
arrest until the investigation is sufficiently  completed but if any
inteilerence wlth the libefi of the accused  penson  is necessaty  to
prcvent him from absconding  and the facts JusUfy  arrcst, the
Chairman  NAB shall arrest him. The police offioer has also such
powens  to defer the arest  of a percon  merely on suspicion  but can
arrest him lf there is apprehension  of his absoondence.  Such  powerc
are avaitable to a police offlcer under  Rule 26.2 Chapter Xl/I, Volume
III  of Police Rules,  1934. It will be noUced that arrest can be
deferred in the case wherc the competent  authority merely  suspecB
without any tanglble  evidence  against the accused.  But onoe some
evidence  is collected  and susplcion turns  into leasonable  grcund
then  the concerned  officer is requircd  and duty bound  to arrest the
accused  as the law puts obligation  upon him to do so by maklng  the

offence  non-bailable.

The decision  regarding arrest of accused by all means  is an executive  action

which the Chairman, NAB is to take on the basis of material or evidence placed

before him by the investigation team. It is trite law that this Couft under Afticle

199 of the Constitution  has jurisdiction to judicial review all the executive

actions.  The settled  principles  for scrutinizing  the executive actions under Afticle

199 ibid are reasonableness of executive decision;  irrationality  and/or

impropriety/illegality.  Where decision taken violates referred  principles  of Judicial

Review,  the Couft under Article 199 of the Constitution  could interuene.  In the

instant  case as well the Chairman  NAB sanctioned  the arrest by issuance of

grounds of arrest. It seems that executive action  has been  taken without  going

through the record  and scrutinizing the same.  In the facts and circumstances,

decision cannot be regarded  as rational or reasonable.  The cases  investigated

and inquired by NAB are generally  referred  as white-collar  crimes;  investigation

W.P. No.  446t ot 20L9

t2

and procedure  for handling such cases is way different from run of the mill

offences. Most of the evidence  against  any person  facing  inquiry  or investigation

is documentary and generally it is the document or such  evidence  which  is to be

confronted to him. No doubt,  physical  remand is sanctioned  in cases where

documents  are to be recovered  or confronted,  however, other than that the

arrest or detention of the person facing inquiry or investigation  is uncalled for

inasmuch  as unless there is cogent  and strong evidence;  there  is no rationale  for

arresting any person. It is to be kept in mind that under the Constitution,  liberty

of any individua! is protected. It is settled  principle  that even under the Code of

Criminal  Procedure, 1898, the law governing  criminal  justice system  in our

country is that not in every case filed against  any person,  arrest is to be effected,

though in case  of serious offences which  are termed as cognizable  offence,  the

police has the power  to arrest without even  warrants  (Section  54 Cr.P.C.) but no

such  power is to be exercised  even under Section  54 ibid if there is no sufficient

evidence.  No such powers are provided  to NAB and in every  arrest,  same is

sanctioned  by NAB  which  power/discretion  is to be exercised  keeping  in view the
facts and circumstances  inasmuch aS libefi of  person facing

inquiry/investigation.  Likewise,  where a person  is in incarceration  facing trial  and

conclusion  of the matter  seems  to be a far cry, bail is not to be withheld  only for

the reason that the ultimate punishment  involves  14 years maximum

imprisonment.  Keeping  such perils of arrest  and trial and denial of bai! in view,

the Hon'ble  Supreme  Court of Pakistan in case repofted  as Manzoor and 4

otherc VSThe State (PLD 1972 SC 81) obserued as follow:-

'It  is important  to remember that bail ls not to be wlthheld as a
punlshment. Thcre  ls no legal or moral compulslon to keep people in Jail
merety on the attegaUon that they have committed offences  punishable
with death  or transpoltation,  unless  rcasonable  grcunds appear to exist to
disclose their compliclty. The  ulUmate conviction  and incarceration  of a
guilty  pemon  can rcpair  the wrong  caused by a mistaken rclief of interim
bail granted to him but no satisfactory  reparatlon  can be offercd to an
innocent man for his unjustified  incarceration  at any stage of the case
albeit his acquittal  in the long run.'

W.P. No. 4461  of 2019

t3

In view of above, since investigation/inquiry to the extent of petitioner is

concluded  and he is on judicial  remand and also for the reasons  on merit

mentioned hereinabove,  the petitioner is entitled to concession of bai!.
8. 

For the above reasons,  the instant  petition  is allowed  and the

petitioner is enlarged  on bail after arrest  in the above inquiry/investigation

pending against him subject to furnishing  bail bonds  in the sum of Rs. 1 Million

with one surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of Deputy Registrar

(Judicial) of this Couft. As was argued  by the Iearned Special Prosecutor, NAB

that the petitioner  may be required for confronting  ceftain documents;  if such is

the case, they may calUsummon  him whenever  required  and in case he fails to

do so, they may make an appropriate application before this Court for

cancellation  of bail. The petitioner  shal! also surrender  his passport  with Deputy

Registrar (Judicial)  of this Court.

AZAM
JUDGE

(AAMER FAROOQ)
JUDGE

Announced  in open  Court this l3ll^ day of February,  2020.

,UDGE

JUDGE

M.Shah/.

