ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 144 OF 2022 

FARRUKH SHAHZAD. 

VS    

MEHREEN SAJJAD QAZI, ETC. 

Petitioner by       : 

Mr. Shakir Javed, Advocate 

Respondents by  : 

Mr. Junaid Jahangir, Advocate 

Date of hearing     : 

01.04.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.    

Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

Petitioner  (Farrukh  Shahzad)  assailed  Judgment  dated  13.11.2021  (Impugned 

Judgment)  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad, 

whereby his appeal against Order dated 28.10.2021 (Impugned Order) passed by 

learned  Family  Court,  Islamabad  has  been  dismissed  and  consequently  the 

Impugned Order dismissing the Petitioner’s application under Section 12(2), CPC 

was upheld.  

2. 

Brief  facts  as  per  Memo  of  Petition  are  that  Respondent  No.1  [Mehreen 

Sajjad  Qazi]  filed  Suit  for  Dissolution  of  Marriage  through  Khula,  Recovery  of 

Dowry  Articles  and  Maintenance  Allowance,  which  was  decreed vide  Judgment 

and  Decree dated 06.09.2019, whereby,  inter alia,  Respondents No. 2 & 3 were 

held entitled to get Rs. 28,000/- each per month including their school fees from 

June 2018 till decision of the case. Said Respondents were further held entitled to 

get  Rs.  33,000/-  each  per  month  including  their  school  fees  from  the  date  of 

decision of the case till their legal entitlement with 10% annual increase. Whereas, 

Respondent/Plaintiff No.1 was held entitled to recover Rs. 25,000/- per month for 

her  Iddat  period.  Thereafter,  the  Respondents  No.  1  to  3/Decree  Holders  filed  

Execution  Petition  on  26.01.2021,  during  the  pendency  of  the  Petitioner  filed 

application under Section 12(2) CPC on the ground that the learned Family Court 

lacked the territorial jurisdiction and was coram non judice and the Respondents 

obtained the decree through fraud, misrepresentation and concealment of fact by 

mentioning  that  Respondent  No.1  is  resident  of  Islamabad,  whereas,  she  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P. No. 144/2022 

resident of  House  No.2, Street No.5  East, Sector-D, DHA-1 which is situated  in 

District Rawalpindi.  

3. 

The  learned  Family  Court,  after  hearing  the  arguments,  dismissed  the 

Petitioner’s  application  under  Section  12(2)  CPC  vide  the  Impugned  Order,  the 

relevant portion of which is reproduced herein below:- 

“… on the other hand, learned counsel for decree holder has assisted the 

Court  and  also  referred  the  DHA  Act,  2013  by  the  parliament  on 

19.03.2013, as per the preamble of the said act it was enacted to establish 

the  Defence  Housing  Authority  Islamabad  and  it  was  termed  as  Defence 

Housing Authority Islamabad Act, 2013 and the area mentioned in the act 

is Islamabad Capital Territory, according to the preamble DHA-I falls in 

Islamabad, the area is also explained in the same act as “specified area” 

means all land owned, purchased or procured by or vested in or leased to 

the  Army  Welfare  Housing  Scheme  or  the  Defence  Housing  Authority, 

Islamabad constituted under any law before the commencement of this Act 

in Islamabad Capital Territory and such other land as may, from time to 

time, be purchased or procured by or leased to the Authority in Islamabad 

Capital Territory and notified by the Government.”  The allotment letter in 

the  name  of  the  father  of  the  decree  holder  is  also  submitted  during  the 

arguments by counsel for decree holder according to which this is clearly 

mentioned that Sector-D, DHA-I falls in Islamabad, moreover the CNIC of 

decree  holder  depicts  her  same  address  of  Islamabad  given  in  suit.”  

[Emphasis added]. 

4. 

 Being  aggrieved,  Petitioner  filed  appeal  before  Respondent  No.4 

[Additional  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad],  however,  the  appeal  also  met  the 

same  fate  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment  the  relevant  portion  of  which  is  also 

reproduced herein below: 

“7.  During the course of arguments, respondent No.2 also produced her CNIC 

as  well  as  allotment  letter  of    her  house  on  which  it  is  mentioned  that  Phase-I 

DHA is situated in Islamabad. It clearly depicts from the record that during the 

execution petition at the time when the executing court was pressing the appellant 

for the payment of outstanding decretal amount instant application u/s 12(2) CPC 

was  filed  just  to  deprive  the  respondents  from  the  fruits  of  judgment.  From  the 

 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 3 
W.P. No. 144/2022 

day first appellant participated in the court  proceedings, therefore, it cannot be 

said that decree was passed on the basis of fraud and misrepresentation.” 

5. 

The Petitioner has now filed and instituted the present petition to challenge 

the Impugned Order and Impugned Judgment. 

6. 

The learned counsel for the  Petitioner argued  that the application u/s 12(2) 

as well as appeal were wrongly dismissed in view of the fact that both the Courts 

below  failed  to  appreciate  that  according  to  Form-II  A,  Final  List  of 

Constituencies  for  Tehsil  Taluka,  Potohar  Town,  District  Rawalpindi  Ward  6, 

DHA  Phase-1  falls  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Rawalpindi  and  not  Islamabad, 

whereas, Respondents No. 1 to 3 being residents of DHA Phase-1 wrongfully and 

fraudulently  showed  their  addresses  as    Islamabad  in  the  title  of  the  plaint  and 

filed the proceedings in Islamabad. In view of the aforesaid position, according to 

the Petitioner, the Courts in Islamabad lacked jurisdiction in view of Rule-6 of the 

West Pakistan Family Courts Rules, 1965.  

7. 

On the other hand, the learned counsel for Respondents No. 1 to 3 drew my 

attention  towards  allotment  letter  in  respect  of  Plot  No.  2,  Street  5,  Sector  D, 

Phase-I, Defence Housing Authority, Islamabad, where the said Respondents are 

residing which was filed along with a C.M. for additional documents in the instant 

Petition.  According  to  such  allotment  letter  the said  property  is  located  in  DHA 

Phase-1, Islamabad. The learned counsel also stated that the Respondent No. 3’s 

CNIC also reflects that DHA, Phase -1 is located in Islamabad.   

8. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  also  perused  the 

available record including the Impugned Order and Judgment. 

9. 

It is noted first and foremost that the Petitioner did not raise any objection 

with regard to jurisdiction before the Family Court and in fact submitted himself 

to its jurisdiction.  In the case of Malik Khan Muhammad Tareen VSM/s Nasir 

and Brother Coal Company through Proprietor and others, 2018 SCMR 2121, the 

Honorable Supreme Court held as follows: 

“…Section 21, C.P.C. reads as follows: 

"21. Objections  to  jurisdiction. No  objection  as  to  the  place  suing  shall  be 
allowed by any appellate or revisional Court unless such objection was taken 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 4 
W.P. No. 144/2022 

in  the  Court  of  first  instance  at  the  earliest  possible  opportunity  and  in  all 
cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, and unless there 
has been a consequent failure of justice." 

13. On  the  bare  reading  of  section  21  ibid;  it  is  manifestly  clear  that  the 
objections  as  to  territorial  jurisdiction  unless  raised  before  the  Court  of 
first instance "at the earliest possible opportunity" are not even considered 
by  the  appellate  or  Revisional  Court.  The  Appellate  or  Revisional  Court 
would  only  consider  such  objections  provided  all  three  conditions  as  set 
down  in  section  21,  C.P.C.  are  met  viz  firstly,  objection  as  to  territorial 
jurisdiction was raised in the Court of first instance, secondly such objection 
is raised at the earliest opportunity and in case the issues are settled, before 
settlement  of  issue  and  most  importantly  and  thirdly,  there  has  been 
consequent failure of justice.” [Emphasis added]. 

10.  The learned counsel for the Petitioner claimed that they filed the application 

under Section 12(2), C.P.C., as soon as they became aware of the material facts.  

However,  fact  remains  that  the  requirements  under  Section  21,  C.P.C.,  have  not 

been satisfied.    Objection was not taken before the Court of first instance at all, 

therefore the question of earliest possible opportunity does not arise and Petitioner 

has utterly failed to show how it has resulted in failure of justice.  

11.  Even otherwise, the learned counsel for the Petitioner was unable to show 

as to how the Respondents committed fraud or misrepresentation while stating to 

be  residents  of  Islamabad  in the  title of the  Plaint  filed  by  them  for  the  Suit  for 

Dissolution of Marriage through Khula and Recovery of Dowry and Maintenance 

when the Respondent No. 3’s CNIC shows her as a resident of Islamabad and the 

allotment letter in respect of her residence shows the same. Furthermore as noted 

in  the  Impugned  Order  of  the  learned  Family  Court  according  to  the  Defence 

Housing Authority Islamabad Act, 2013, DHA Phase-1 falls within the territorial 

jurisdiction of Islamabad.  In absence of fraud or misrepresentation an application 

under Section 12 (2) CPC does not lie.  

12.  Last  but  not  least,  whether  the  Respondents’  residence  falls  within  the 

jurisdiction  of  Rawalpindi  or  Islamabad  is  essentially  a  factual  dispute.    The 

learned  counsel  for  the  Appellant  was  specifically  asked  as  to  how  a  factual 

dispute  of  this  nature  can  be  adjudicated  upon  by  this  Court  in  exercise  of  its 

constitutional jurisdiction to which he had no answer.  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
P a g e  | 5 
W.P. No. 144/2022 

13.  For the foregoing, I am of the opinion that both the Courts below came to 

the correct conclusion and as such the titled petition is devoid of merit.  

14. 

It  is  clear  that  the  Petitioner  has  dragged  the  Respondents  to  this  Court 

unnecessarily,  which  is  an  abuse  of  the  process  of  this  Court.    It  is  all  the  more 

regrettable  given  that  the  Petitioner  is  the  father  of  the  Respondents  No.  2  &  3 

whose  maintenance  is  not  only  the  Petitioner’s  moral  obligation  but  which  has 

been  decreed  by  the  learned  Family  Court  and  upheld  by  the  learned  appellate 

court as well as this Court.  Yet the Petitioner is raising frivolous objections and 

instituting baseless proceedings causing undue harassment to the Respondents. In 

such  circumstances,  while  taking  guidance  from  the  cases  of  S.M.  Sohail  VS

Mst. Sitara Kabir ud Din, PLD 2009 SC 397. Muhammad Anwar VSMst. Ilyas 

Begum,  PLD  2013  SC  255;  and  Major  (R)  Ahmad  Nadeem  Sadal  VS

Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Sports,  Pakistan,  2015  CLC  34,  I 

impose a  cost of Rs. 50,000/-  upon the Petitioner.  The  Petitioner  will deposit the 

same  with  the  Deputy  Registrar  (Judicial)  of  this  Court  within  30  days  from  the 

date  of  announcement  of  this  Judgment  who  shall  pay  the  same  forthwith  to  the 

Respondent No. 1. 

15.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  petition  being  devoid  of  any 

merit is hereby dismissed. 

Announced in open Court on 07th April, 2022.  

(SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

adnan 

    JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
