JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

W.P.  No.  4044/2018. 

Arfa  Nadeem  and  another 

VS

Subass  Ahmed  Chohan,  etc. 

Petitioners  by: 

Rana  Abdul  Latif  Khan,  Advocate. 

Respondent  No.1  by: 

Ms. Shabana  Murad  Shah,  Advocate. 

Date  of Decision: 

14.02.2019. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI, 

I:  Through 

this  writ  petition, 

the 

petitioners  have  assailed 

the  judgment  dated  02.03.2018,  passed  by  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  appeal  filed  by  respondent 

No.1  was  allowed  against  Guardian  Court's  order  and  matter  was  remanded 

to 

the  trial  Court. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  contends  that  respondent  No.1  filed  a 

Guardian  Petition  under  Guardians  & Wards  Act,  1890, which  was  dismissed  by 

learned  Guardian  Court  vide  order  dated  06.11.2017  while  considering 

the 

background  of earlier  petition  for  custody  in  terms  of Section  25 of Guardians  & 

Wards  Act, 1890 which  was  dismissed  by  the  Guardian  Court  at Jhang  and  order 

was  upheld  up  to  the  Appellate  level  and  as  such  respondent  No.1  has  no  right 

to  re-agitate 

the  matter  before  the  Guardian  Court  at  Islamabad; 

that  learned 

Appellate  Court  without  considering  the  fact  and  law  has  set  aside  the  order  and 

remanded 

the  same  while  observing 

that  petitioner  No.1  Arfa  Nadeem  has 

contracted 

second  marriage  and  under 

these  change  circumstances 

second 

guardian  application  is maintainable;  that  view  taken  by  learned  Appellate  Court 

rs  contrary  to  law  as  petitioner  No.1  has  not  entered  into  any  such  relationship 

W.P.  No.4044/2018 

2 

and  as  such  the  facts  were  verbally  submitted  before  the  Appellate Court 

without  any  basis  and  question  of  custody  has  already  been  settled;  that 

petitioners are  settled in  United Kingdom, even before the  filing of guardian 

application  and  as  such  Guardian  Court,  Islamabad  has  not  territorial 

jurisdiction to entertain the matter under the law. 

3. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.1 contends that petitioner 

No.2 Almas (daughter, aged  about 5-1/2  years) is  not  allowed to  remain in 

custody of petitioner No.1 as mother has entered into second marriage and this 

fact could be verified only through evidence and as such the welfare of minor 

could be  adjudicated  only  after recording of  evidence on  this  new  cause of 

action; that Appellate Court has rightly remanded the matter while considering 

each and  every  aspect of the  case and  no  prejudice has  been  caused  to  the 

petitioner. 

4. 

5. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1 were 

married to  each other  on  28.02.2009 at  Jhang and  after  marriage they  started 

living in  London, during  the  subsistence of marriage, Almas/ petitioner No.2 

(daughter) was born on 15.01.2012 in U.K and later on dispute arose between the 

parties  and  different  complaints  have  been  filed  with  the  London  Police 

department and petitioner No.l has filed a petition for separation. As per record, 

petitioner came to Pakistan and  started living at Jhang when respondent No.l 

has filed an application for custody of the minor daughter Almas, however, the 

said custody application was dismissed due  to lack of evidence on the part  of 

respondent No.l/father  vide  order  dated  22.10.2015, as  such no  adjudication 

took place on merit. As such petitioner and minor are living in U.K and they only 

visit Pakistan in vacations. 

6. 

Respondent No.1 filed a custody application in terms of Section 25 of the 

Guardians & Wards Act, 1890 for the custody of Almas/petitioner No.2 before 

W.P.  No.4044/2018 

3 

the Guardian Court at Islamabad on the basis of changed circumstances with the 

contention that petitioner No.l has got decree for dissolution of marriage on the 

basis of khulla from the Court of Family Judge (West), Islamabad and petitioner 

No.1 has entered into second marriage whereas minor/petitioner No.2 has been 

left at  the  mercy  of  irrelevant person  who  is  stranger 

(r ~Li) 

to  the  minor 

daughter and as such he is entitled for custody. The application was contested by 

the  present  petitioner  before  the  trial  Court  at  Islamabad,  the  same  was 

dismissed vide  judgment  dated  06.11.2017, however, respondent  No.1 feeling 

aggrieved with the said judgment filed the appeal which was allowed by learned 

Additional  District Judge  (West), Islamabad  vide  judgment  &  decree  dated 

02.03.2018 with the following observations:- 

Appellant  contended  that  at  the  time  of filing  of  the  first  petition,  the 

marriage of  the  parties  was  intact  while at  the  time  of filing  the  instant 

petition,  the  divorce  was  affected between  the  parties and  the  mother had 

contracted second  marriage  which  is  again  a  ground  for  reconsideration 

since it  has  change  the  complexion of the  case.  Therefore,  keeping in  view 

the welfare of the minor which is a paramount consideration, the same can 

be changed subsequently for good reason,  therefore, even if the order of the 

Guardian  fudge  ]hang, 

is  considered  to  be  an  order  of  competent 

jurisdiction  passed after full  deliberation it  can  be  reviewed/changed due 

to some material change has taken place. 

Therefore,  keeping  in  view  the  aforesaid  reasons,  the  appeal  in  hand  is 

allowed  and  the  impugned  order  dated  06.11.2017  is  set  aside  and 

guardian  petition  of  the  appellant is  restored  in  its  original  number.  No 

order  as  to  costs.  Parties  are  directed  to  appear  before  the  learned 

Guardian  Court  on  12.03.2018.  Copy  of  this  judgment  be  sent  to  the 

learned  trial  Court forthwith.  File  be  consigned  to  record  room  after  its 

due completion /compilation. 

7. 

Learned  counsel for  the  petitioner has  been  confronted  regarding  the 

settlement of issue on the basis of evidence or disputed  allegations referred by 

respondent No.1 in his application U/S 25  of the Guardians &  Wards Act, 1890, 

whereby petitioner's counsel contends that no evidence has been recorded and 

the allegations could only be justified after recording of evidence, however, at 

W.P.  No.4044/2018 

4 

this  stage  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  raised  question  of  territorial 

jurisdiction  mainly  on  the  ground  that  minor  petitioner  No.2  is  residing  in  U.K 

and  as such  the  Guardian  Court,  Islamabad  lacks  territorial  jurisdiction. 

8. 

I  have  gone  through  the  entire  record  with  the  able  assistance  of both  the 

counsel,  however,  from  the  perusal  of  record,  it  transpires 

that  the  question  of 

ordinary  place  of  residence  of  minor  has  not  been  determined 

from  any  record 

appended  with this  petition  nor  even  the  same  has  been  reflected  in  any  order  of 

the  Courts  below.  The  grounds  argued  by  the  petitioner's 

side  could  only  be 

resolved  if  the  matter  is  adjudicated  on  merit  while  considering 

the  question  of 

territorial  jurisdiction  as well  as law  by  the  learned  Guardian  Court. 

9. 

In  view  of  above  situation  order  of  remand  of  case,  passed  by  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  is in  accordance  with  law  as all these 

issues  raised  by  both  the  parties  are  based  upon  factual  disputes  which  could 

only  be  resolved  after  recording  of  evidence,  however,  question  of  territorial 

jurisdiction 

is  of  prime 

importance  which  should  be  adjudicated  at  the  first 

instance,  therefore,  instant  writ  petition  is  misconceived  and  the  same  is hereby 

dismissed. 

10. 

Before  parting  with  this  judgment, 

learned  Guardian  Judge  seized  with 

the  matter  is  directed  to  decide  the  fate  of pending  application  within  period  of 

04 months  under  intimation  to this  Court,  however,  Guardian  Court  shall  decide 

the  question  of territorial  jurisdiction  on  the  basis  of evidence  at  the  first  instance 

and  if it  has  been  proved  that  the  minor  is resident  of  Pakistan  within  territorial 

jurisdiction  of this  Court,  only  then  the  Guardian  Court  shall  proceed  further  on 

merit  for  determination  of welfare  of minor. 

Zahid 

(MOHSfNAidlTARf<'A~I) 
JUDGE 

