ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Appeal  No.194/2015 
Bahar Rafique 
VS
The State 

Appellant  by: 

Mr. Mehar Jabir Abbas, Advocate. 

State by: 

Barrister Ayesha Siddique  Khan, State Counsel. 
Tahir Khan Niazi, S.I., P.S. Aabpara,  Islamabad. 

Date of Hearing: 

31.01.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR KA YANI, J: Through  the instant  criminal appeal,  the 

appellant  has  called  in  question  judgment  of  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  22.09.2015, whereby  the  appellant  after  being 

tried in case FIR No.201, dated  28.05.2012, under  Sections 365-B, 376, 34 PPC, P.S. 

Aabpara,  Islamabad  has been convicted  under  Section 365-B PPC and  sentenced 

to  life  imprisonment  alongwith  fine  of  Rs.10,000/-,  whereas  in  default  of 

payment  of  fine,  the  appellant  has  to  further  undergo  six  (06)  months  simple 

imprisonment.  The appellant  has also been convicted under  Section 376 PPC and 

sentenced  to undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for ten  (10) years alongwith  fine of 

Rs.10,000/-,  in  default  whereof,  the  appellant  has  to  further  undergo  six  (06) 

months  simple  imprisonment.  The appellant  has been  granted  benefit  of Section 

382-B Cr.P.C. 

2. 

Brief facts  referred  in  the  instant  appeal  are  that  on  26.05.2012, when 

Abdul  Haq  Masih  (complainant)  reached  his house  late from his  duty  at a hotel, 

his daughter  namely  Mst. Atiqa Bibi was not  present  there,  upon  which  he tried 

to  trace  her  in  the  locality,  but  to  no  avail  and  consequently,  he  made  a 

telephonic  call to Rescue 15 Police. On the next day, he filed complaint  (Exh.PA) 

to  S.H.O. P.S.  Aabpara  with  the  allegations  of having  apprehension  that  Bahar 

Rafique/ appellant  in  connivance  with  Rofan  Masih,  Mst. Shabana  Masih,  Mst. 

Parveen, Mst. Razia and  Mst. Elizabeth abducted  his daughter  Mst. Atiqa Bibi for 

Crl. Appeal No.194/2015 

Page  I  2 

the purpose of committing rape, whereupon case FIR No.201/2012 (Exh.PB)  was 

got  lodged  against  the  said  accused  persons.  The  learned  trial  Court  charge 

sheeted all the  said  accused persons  on 07.01.2014, to  which they  pleaded  not 

guilty and claimed trial.  In order to bring guilt of the accused persons home, the 

prosecution  produced  evidence  of  ten  (10)  prosecution  witnesses  while  the 

learned  trial  Court  after  recording  of  prosecution  evidence,  recorded  the 

statement of accused persons  under  Section 342 Cr.P.C. and  pursuant  thereof, 

acquitted Rofan Masih, Mst.  Shabana Masih, Mst. Parveen, Mst. Razia and  Mst. 

Elizabeth  of  the  charge  by  extending  benefit  of  doubt,  whereas  Babar 

Rafique/ appellant  has  been convicted under  Sections 365-B  and  376 PPC, and 

sentenced  to  life  imprisonment  and  ten  (10)  years  rigorous  imprisonment, 

respectively, alongwith  fine of Rs.10,000/- in  each offence. In default  whereof, 

the  appellant  has  to  further  undergo  six  (06)  months  simple  imprisonment, 

however  benefit  of Section 382-B  Cr.P.C.  has  been  extended  to  the  appellant. 

Hence, the instant appeal. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  appellant  contended  that  the  impugned  judgment 

passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad is against the 

law and facts available on record, thus not tenable in the eyes of law; that from 

the bare reading of the FIR together with cross-examination of PWs, Section 365- 

B  PPC does  not  attract  to  the  appellant;  that  impugned  judgment  is  entirely 

based on misreading and non-reading of evidence and is found on surmises and 

conjectures; that  the  prosecution  story  is contradictory on  material  points  and 

thus  liable to  be discarded  in  toto, therefore,  the  impugned  judgment  may  be 

set-aside and appellant may be acquitted of the charge. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  while  opposing  the  instant  appeal 

supported  the  impugned  judgment  by  contending that  the  learned  trial Court 

has  rightly  appreciated  the  evidence produced  by  the  prosecution  witnesses, 

which  is  free  from  any  illegality  or  contradiction,  rather  the  prosecution 

Crl.  Appeal  No.194/2015 

Page  I  3 

witnesses remained  consistent in their testimony; that  the appellant  has rightly 

been linked with the commission of offence as sufficient material is available on 

record to believe that the appellant is guilty of offences under Sections 365-B and 

376 PPC,  under  which  he  has  rightly  been  convicted  and  sentenced  by  the 

learned trial Court vide impugned judgment, which is liable to be maintained. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  appellant  Bahar  Rafique  has  been 

convicted in  case  FIR No.201, dated  28.05.2012, under  Sections 365-B,  376, 34 

PPC, P.S.  Aabpara,  Islamabad  and  sentenced to  life imprisonment  along with 

fine of Rs.10,000/-, whereas  in default of payment  of fine, the appellant has to 

further  undergo  six (06)  months  simple imprisonment. The appellant  has  also 

been  convicted  under  Section 376  PPC  and  sentenced  to  undergo  rigorous 

imprisonment  for  ten  (10)  years  along  with  fine  of  Rs.10,000/-, in  default 

whereof,  the  appellant  shall  further  undergo  six  (06)  months  simple 

imprisonment. The appellant  has been granted  benefit of Section 382-B  Cr.P.C. 

The  complaint  was  filed  by  Abdul  Haq  Masih/PW-3  vide  Exh.PA  dated 

27.05.2012 with  the allegation that  he  is resident  of G-7 Markaz Sitara Market, 

Islamabad and  working  in  a  Hotel  in  Blue Area, Islamabad. On  26.05.2012 at 

about 12:00 a.m night, when he came to home from his duty, he found out that 

his  daughter  aged  about  16/17  years  was  missing, he  immediately  informed 

Rescue 15  police regarding  missing of her daughter,  however, he apprehended 

that his daughter has been abducted by the present appellant Bahar Masih, Rofan 

Masih, Mst. Shabana Masih, Mst. Parveen Bibi and  Mst. Razia Bibi, who  have 

abducted  his  daughter.  The  complaint  was  converted 

into  F.l.R 

No. 201/2012 as Exh.PB, however, Mst. Atiqa Bibi was recovered, who recorded 

her statement U / s 164 Cr.P.C as Exh.PD dated  04.06.2012 before the Magistrate 

Malik  Farrukh  Nadeem/PW-10  and  has  taken  categorical  stance  that  on 

26.05.2012 at  about  12:00 a.m  at  night,  her  neighborer  Mst.  Shabana  Masih 

Crl.  Appeal  No.194/2015 

Page  I  4 

accused  came  to  her  house  and  took  her  to  her  house  and  offered  her  tea, 

whereafter  she  became  unconscious  and  when  she  came  into  senses,  she found 

out that  she was  in Narowal,  where  Bahar Rafique/ appellant  took her  to a hotel 

and  committed  rape  and  when  they  came back from  Narowal  to Islamabad  and 

reached  near  Zero  Point,  Fire  Brigade,  Islamabad,  they  were  arrested  by  the 

Islamabad  Police. During  the said incident  Bahar Rafique did  not marry  with  the 

abductee  Mst.  Atiqa  Bibi/PW-6.  The  Doctor  Asma  Ehsan,  Medical  Officer, 

Polyclinic Hospital,  Islamabad  /PW-7  has examined  Mst. Atiqa Bibi abductee  on 

31.05.2012 at  about  04:10 p.m.  and  gave  her  opinion  by  performing  two  fingers 

test. During  the  course  of cross-examination,  she acknowledges  that  victim Mst. 

Atiqa Bibi, who  was  17 years  of age, and  stated  that  she could not find any mark 

of violence  on  the  body  of the  victim.  The OPD tickets  have  been  exhibited  as 

Exh.PC while the medical report  has been referred  as Exh.PE. 

7. 

The  complainant  Abdul  Haq  Masih/PW-3  appeared  in  support  of  his 

version  and  reiterated  his stance referred  in Exh.P A, who  was cross-examined  at 

length  and  acknowledged  that  he  had  earlier  informed  the  misdeeds  of  Bahar 

Rafique/ appellant  to  his family  members,  who  (Bahar Rafique) is residing  with 

aunt  Elizabeth. The victim  Mst. Atiqa  Bibi appeared  as PW-6 and  stated  that  on 

26.05.2012, at  about  12:00 a.m.  night,  the  accused  Mst.  Shabana  Masih,  who  is 

neighborer  came  to  her  house  and  took  her  to  her  own  house  and  offered  tea, 

after 

taking 

tea,  she  became  unconscious,  however,  after  regaining  of 

consciousness, she saw a woman  who told her that she is in Narowal.  She further 

stated  that  accused  Bahar Rafique took her to a hotel with  the assurance  that  she 

will meet with  her parents  in a hotel, but  after reaching  the hotel for one day the 

accused  committed  rape.  Thereafter  accused  Mst.  Elizabeth,  Aunt  of  Bahar 

Rafique,  who  is  residing  of  the  same  area,  brought  her  and  Bahar  Rafique  to 

Islamabad and  they boarded  in the Taxi, when  they reached  near Zero Point, Fire 

Brigade, Islamabad,  the  police  arrested  them,  whereafter  she  was  examined  by 

Crl. Appeal No.194/2015 

Page  I  5 

the lady police who brought  her to the Polyclinic Hospital. She also stated that 

she has  recorded  her  statement  under  Section 164 Cr.P.C referred  as  Exh.PD. 

During the course of cross-examination, she acknowledges that she was primary 

pass  and  further  acknowledges  the  different  disputes  with  accused  persons, 

which were  pending  in  the  different Courts. The appellant  Babar Rafique has 

separately  cross-examined  the  victim/PW-6,  however, 

the  victim/PW-6 

acknowledged that  Mst. Shabana Masih took her to her own house and she has 

failed to establish friendship with the accused Bahar Rafique/ appellant, she has 

also  failed  to  prove  the  place,  where  she  was  found  in  Narowal  and  she 

acknowledged  that  she  did  not  raise  any  hue  and  cry,  when  Bahar Rafique 

committed rape  with  her,  but  she had  explained that  Bahar Rafique/ appellant 

threatened her, if she raised any hue and cry, Rofan will kill her parents. She also 

acknowledges that  she  has  recorded  her  statement  under  Section 164 Cr.P.C., 

where she admitted  that  she has not informed any other persons while coming 

from Hotel to Bus Adda and during journey from Narowal to Islamabad nor she 

raised  any  hue  and  cry  while  accompanying the  accused. The important  fact, 

which she admits  is that  the accused Bahar Rafique did  not marry  her and  the 

said explanation was given on the question of the Magistrate. 

8. 

The last  important  witness brought  by  the  prosecution  is  PW-8 Hakim 

Khan Niazi, Inspector, who stated that he investigated the matter on registration 

of  FIR and  arrested  Rofan  Masih  on  31.05.2012 and  after  receiving  the  spy 

information, he has arrested Bahar Masih/ appellant and recovered the abductee 

Mst. Atiqa Bibi.  The abductee has been sent to Darulaman,  Rawalpindi and  she 

has been again called before the City Magistrate, Islamabad on 04.06.2012, who 

recorded her statement. During the course of cross-examination nothing has been 

recovered in favour of the appellant. 

9. 

The  prosecution  has  also produced  Munawar  Ahmad,  Inspector/PW-9, 

second Investigation Officer of the case, who  has  submitted  the  challan in the 

Crl.  Appeal  No.194/2015 

Page  I  6 

Court after the conclusion of the investigation and denied that the accused were 

found  innocent.  The  prosecution  has  also  produced  Malik  Farrukh  Nadeem, 

Magistrate, 1st  Class,  Islamabad/PW-10, who  recorded  the  statement  of  Mst. 

Atiqa  Bibi vide  statement  Exh.PW-10/ A,  but  he  was  not  cross-examined on 

material points. 

10. 

The appellant Bahar Rafique has recorded his statement under Section 342 

Cr.P.C, whereby  he denied  the entire incident for abduction and  rape  and  has 

taken  a  specific stance  that  the  alleged  abductee  has  recorded  her  statement 

referred  as  Exh.PD after  the  delay  of  4/ 5  days  with  the  consultation  and 

guidance of her parents  as well as police and  he was not given opportunity  for 

cross-examination. The  appellant  has  also  explained  the  circumstances while 

answering the question No. 9  and referred the constrained relationship with the 

complainant's family. 

11. 

The  above  referred  position  suggests  that  Mst.  Atiqa  Bibi/PW-6 was 

abducted  after  administering  the  intoxicant tea  on  26.05.2012 with  the  help  of 

Mst.  Shabana  Masih  accused,  who  have  been  acquitted  from  the  charges, 

similarly all other accused persons have also been acquitted in the instant case, 

except the present appellant Babar Rafique, who was charged under Section 365 

(b)  and  376  PPC,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  go  through  the  minimum 

requirements of Section 365(b), PPC, which is as under:- 

"Kidnapping,  abducting  or inducing  woman  to  compel  for  marriage 
etc.  Whoever  kidnaps  or  abducts  any  woman  with  intent  that  she  may  be 
compelled,  or knowing  it  to be likely that she will be compelled,  to marry  any 
person  against  her  will,  or  in  order  that  she  may  be forced,  or  seduced  to 
illicit  intercourse,  or  knowing,  it  to  be  likely  that  she  will  be  forced  or 
seduced  to  illicit  intercourse,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  for  life, 
and  shall  also  be 
to  fine;  and  whoever  by  means  of  criminal 
intimidation  as  defined  in  this  Code  or  of abuse  of authority  or  any  other 
method of compulsion,  induces  any  woman  to go from  any  place  with  intent 
that  she  may  be,  or  knowing  that  it  is  likely  that  she  will  be,  forced  or 
seduced  to  illicit  intercourse  with  another person  shall  also  be punishable  as 
aforesaid." 

liable 

12. 

The above referred requirements are found to be fulfilled, when abduction 

and kidnapping  has been committed in terms of Section 362 PPC, whereby any 

Crl.  Appeal  No.194/2015 

Page  I  7 

person compelled by force or by any deceitful means by way of inducement to go 

from any place, the same is known as abduction, however, in this case Mst. Atiqa 

Bibi/PW-6 was  given  a  tea  by  Mst. Shabana  Masih accused,  whereafter  she 

became unconscious and  when  she  regained  her  senses, she was  in  Narowal, 

however,  first  part  of  the  offence  regarding  abduction  is  apparent,  but 

surprisingly  the  second  important  element  of Section 365(b) PPC  "she  will  be 

compelled, 

to  marry  any  person  against  her  will  is  not  proved  nor  is  the  case  of 

prosecution",  however,  the  second part  of the  offence "in  order  that  she  may  be 

forced,  or seduced  to  illicit  intercourse,  or knowing,  it  to  be  likely  that  she  will  be forced 

or  seduced  to  illicit  intercourse"  is visible from the  statement  of the  victim Mst. 

Atiqa Bibi recorded her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. referred as Exh.PD, 

therefore, it is necessary to corroborate the statement from the medical evidence 

referred  as  Exh.PE, which  was  prepared  by  the  Doctor Asma Ehsan, Medical 

Officer/PW-7, but as such there is no sign of violence nor any fresh injuries have 

been referred, but this does not mean that Mst. Atiqa Bibi is a consenting party to 

a sexual intercourse. At this stage, this Court truly believes that non-appearance 

of mark of violence in any sexual intercourse will not be considered, especially 

when PW-7 Doctor Asma Ehsan, Medical Officer has conducted two fingers test, 

however,  the  said  stance  of  the  Medical Officer has  to  be  seen  in  light  of 

Chemical Examiner Report, which  states that,  11 the  high  vaginal  swab  mentioned 

above  is  stained  with  semen,  while  the  perineal  swab  is  not  stained  with  semen."  As per 

semen identification test conducted on the high vaginal swab, the same has been 

declared 11 positive", while the perinea! swab has the result of 11 negative". 

13. 

The  other  offence with  which  the  appellant  has  been  charged  is  under 

Section 376 PPC, in  which  appellant  was convicted and  sentenced to  undergo 

rigorous  imprisonment  for  ten  (10)  years  along  with  fine  of  Rs.10,000/- for 

commission of offence of rape with  Mst. Atiqa Bibi, which is  justified from the 

medical evidence  as  well  as  from  the  statement  of victim/ abductee  recorded 

under Section 164 Cr.P.C. 

Crl. Appeal  No.194/2015 

Page  I  8 

14. 

The  entire  evidence  is  silent  qua  the  motive  and  the  direct  role  was 

attributed to present  appellant Babar Rafique, although the same was with the 

help of Mst. Shabana Masih accused, who was acquitted from the same charges, 

as such the mitigating circumstances have been surfaced on record, which entail 

some  benefit  of  lesser  punishment  to  be  given  to  the  appellant  in  these 

circumstances. 

15. 

The prosecution has proved its case as the victim Mst. Atiqa Bibi /PW-6 

remained consistent in her testimony and no discrepancy has been noted, even 

the appellant's side has failed to cause any dent in the testimony of the victim. 

16. 

The  statement  of  the  victim/PW-6  has  to  be  seen  in  the  light  of 

requirement of Section 365(b) PPC, although the statement partly  substantiates 

the  kidnapping  and  abduction,  but  Mst. Atiqa  Bibi/PW-6 was  raped  by  the 

appellant  in  a  hotel, however  she had  not  made  any  hue  and  cry, even from 

Narowal to Islamabad on public transport neither she raised any alarm during 

the entire journey, such conduct gives a different impression, which causes doubt 

on the charges of abduction, rather  it seems that  she has been compelled with 

different  pretext  by  way  of  an  inducement,  especially when  the  element  of 

intoxicant tea,  which  was  administered  to  the  victim  has  not  been  justified 

through  any  evidence, in  this situation, the  charges under  Section 365(b) PPC 

seem  to  be  doubtful,  although  the  Magistrate/PW-10 has  asked  the  specific 

question from the victim regarding her marriage with appellant, wherein she has 

taken  a  specific stance  that  Babar Rafiqe did  not  marry  her,  this  aspect  left 

nothing in favour  of prosecution to justify the conviction under  Section 365(b) 

PPC. 

17. 

The second charge under  Section 376 PPC for committing rape has to be 

seen  in  the  light  of  testimony  of  Doctor Asma  Ehsan  /PW-7  with  chemical 

examiner report, which corroborates with the testimony of the victim recorded 

under  Section 164 Cr.P.C. as well as before the Court, therefore, no  exception 

Crl.  Appeal  No.194/2015 

Page  I  9 

could be taken  to that  effect. In view of what  has been discussed,  the prosecution 

has successfully  proved  the  offence under  Section 376 PPC without  any  shadow 

of  doubt  against  the  appellant,  the  sentence  awarded  to  the  appellant  by  the 

learned  Trial  Court  under  Section 376 PPC is  upheld,  while  the  offence under 

Section 365-B  PPC has  not  been  proved  by  the  prosecution,  benefit  of which  is 

extended  to the appellant  and  he has been acquitted  of the offence under  Section 

365-B PPC. 

18. 

Resultantly,  the  instant  criminal  appeal  stands  DISMISSED  in  above 

terms. 

(MOHSIN AKHTARKAYAN,l) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in open Court on. __  1_1_·_0_2-_·_UJ __ zo __ 

RAMZAN 

JUDCE 

- 

