ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition No.4052/2021 

Muhammad Waqar Wasi. 
VS
Mst. Amber Abid & others. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 
(01) 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 
16.11.2021  Mr.  Mohammad  Munir  Paracha,  Advocate  for 

Order with signature of Judge and that of 
parties or counsel where necessary.  

the petitioner. 

The petitioner has impugned (i) judgment and 

decree  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court 

(West),  Islamabad  dated  20.03.2018,  (ii)  judgment 

and decree passed by the learned Additional District 

Judge 

(West), 

Islamabad 

in 

appeal 

dated 

03.05.2018,  pursuant  to  which  the  appeal  of  the 

petitioner  was  dismissed,  and 

(iii)  execution 

proceedings  pursuant  to  such  judgment  and  decree 

in  which  the  petitioner’s  objection  regarding  dowry 

articles has been dismissed. 

2. 

The 

learned  counsel 

for 

the  petitioner 

submitted that the impugned judgments and decrees 

had  been  passed  in  breach  of  principles  of  natural 

justice  and  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence.  He 

further submitted that the judgment and decree was 

passed  pursuant  to  an  oath  sworn  by  the  mother  of 

respondent  No.1  and  on  the  basis  of  such  oath  only 

two  of  the  issues  framed  by  the  learned  Judge 

Family Court ought to have been decided and not the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

entire  suit  and  consequently,  the  judgment  and 

decree suffers from legal infirmity. 

3. 

When 

inquired  how 

this  petition  was 

maintainable in view of the principle of laches, given 

that  the  judgment  and  decree  being  challenged  was 

passed two and half years back, the learned counsel 

for the petitioner submitted that laches could not be 

equated  with  the  bar  of  limitation  and  in  the  event 

that the Court came to conclusion that the party has 

been  meted  out  injustice,  such  aggrieved  person 

ought not be non-suited on grounds of laches. 

4. 

The  subject-matter  of  the  petition  involves 

dispute  between  former  spouses  regarding  recovery 

of  maintenance,  gold  ornaments,  dower,  dowry  and 

the wari articles in face of an acrimonious breakup of 

their  marriage.  Respondent  No.1  had  filed  a  suit  for 

recovery  of  maintenance,  gold  ornaments,  dower, 

dowry  and  the  wari  articles  on  23.11.2013,  which 

was 

contested 

by 

the 

petitioner. 

Interim 

maintenance  was  fixed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court  on  16.02.2014,  which  was  challenged  by  the 

petitioner  before  this  Court  and  the  petition  was 

dismissed.  After  dismissal  of  the  petition  an  I.C.A. 

was filed by the petitioner, which was also dismissed 

by this Court. The suit to the extent of maintenance 

of  the  minors  was  decreed  on  02.07.2015.  To  the 

extent  of  the  remaining  issues,  the  proceedings  in 

the  suit  continued,  issues  were  framed  and  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-3-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

matter  was  at  the  stage  of  recording  of  evidence 

when  on  18.01.2018, 

the  petitioner 

filed  an 

application for settlement of the dispute pursuant to 

provisions  of  the  Oath  Act,  1873  (“Oath  Act”),  in 

the event that the mother of respondent No.1 swore 

an  oath  on  the  Holy  Quran  in  relation  to  fourteen 

questions, which have been reproduced in the memo 

of  the  petition.  The  relevant  part  of  the  application 

dated 18.01.2018 stated the following:- 

2.  That both the families being respectable 

the  applicant/defendant 

is 

trying  his 

utmost  right  from  the  beginning  of  the 

dispute  to  settle  the  same  amicably,  for 

this proposal is an under:- 

The prayer in the application was as follows: 

It  is  therefore,  respectfully  prayed  that 

the oath and proposal as stated above may 

kindly be offered to the plaintiff and matter 

be  disposed  off  in  accordance  with  law  in 

the best interest of justice. 

5. 

Respondent No.1 accepted the proposal of the 

petitioner  on  31.01.2018,  when  the  petitioner’s 

father and counsel reiterated that they stood by their 

offer  to  have  the  said  dispute  resolved  pursuant  to 

an  oath  in  terms  of  provisions  of  the  Oath  Act,  as 

recorded  in  order  dated  31.01.2018.  The  learned 

Judge Family Court appointed a local commission for 

purposes  of 

the  oath,  which  was  sworn  on 

20.03.2018.  The  report  of  the  local  commission 

appointed  for  oath  proceedings  was  reproduced  in 

the  judgment  and  decree  dated  20.03.2018,  which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-4-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

reflects  that  the  oath  had  been  administered  in  the 

Masjid  situated  in  the  Sessions  Court  parking  in  the 

presence  of  counsels  of  the  parties.  And  the  report 

stated that respondent No.1’s mother swore an oath 

to the satisfaction of the petitioner in relation to  the 

entire  contents  of  the  application  filed  by  the 

petitioner.  The  local  commission  report  also  noted 

that no objection to the oath proceedings was raised 

by  any  party.  Pursuant  to  the  oath  sworn  by 

respondent  No.1’s  mother,  in  accordance  with  the 

proposal  made  by  the  petitioner  in  his  application 

dated  18.01.2018, 

the  suit  was  decreed  on 

20.03.2018. 

6. 

The  appeal  against  the  judgment  and  decree 

was  dismissed  on  03.05.2018  and  in  the  said 

judgment the learned Additional District Court noted 

the following:- 

9. 

I  have  perused  the  record  with  the 

respective contention of the counsel for the 

appellant  wherein  no  such  objection  was 

raised  before 

the  Court 

that 

the 

proceedings  of  oath  could  not  be  carried 

out  on  20.03.2018,  rather  the  record 

reveals that father of the appellant namely 

Muhammad  Wasi  Zafar  and  the  appellant 

Muhammad  Waqar  Wasi  himself  were 

present 

in  person  and 

joined 

the 

proceedings  of  oath  which  is  evident  from 

the report of local commission and indicate 

that  none  of  the  parties  had  raised  any 

objection  of  oath  proceedings  in  Mosque 

and  both  were  satisfied  with  oath 

proceedings.  Therefore,  same  cannot  be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-5-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

brushed  aside  on  the  mere  assertions  that 

said agreement was not made by them. 

10.  Even otherwise it is now trite law that 

one  offer  is  made  by  one  party  and 

accepted  by  other,  then  party  making  the 

offer  cannot 

resile 

from 

the  same. 

Moreover,  an  offer  of  a  party  to  a  suit 

whereby  it  undertakes  to  be  bound  by  the 

statement made on oath by the other party 

on  being  accepted  by  the  party  is  in  the 

nature of a binding agreement. Reliance in 

this regard is placed on PLD 2010 Lahore 

484. 

7. 

In  view  of  the  aforementioned  facts,  the 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  failed  to 

convince this Court that the impugned judgment and 

decree  suffer  from  any  illegality  and  have  been 

rendered  in  breach  of  provisions  of  natural  justice. 

The  proposal  to  settle  the  dispute  that  formed  the 

subject-matter  of  the  suit  filed  by  respondent  No.1 

on  the  basis  of  an  oath  sworn  by  the  mother  of 

respondent No.1 upon the Holy Quran and the heads 

of her two sons was made by the petitioner himself. 

And such proposal was accepted by respondent No.1 

and the requested oath was sworn by her mother in 

the  presence  of  the  parties  and  consequently,  the 

suit  was  decreed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court 

in  accordance  with  the  request  made  by  the 

petitioner.  The  learned  Additional  District  Court 

rightly  concluded  that  the  judgment  and  decree 

passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  suffers 

from  no  infirmity  as  the  petitioner  could  not  be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-6-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

allowed  to  approbate  and  reprobate  simultaneously. 

The  petitioner’s  application  dated  18.01.2018,  as 

reproduced  in  Para-4  above,  reflects  that  it  sought 

the  resolution  of  the  entire  subject-matter  of  the 

dispute  pursuant  to  an  oath  and  not  merely  the 

determination  on  any  one  or  two  of  the  issues 

framed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court.  The  application 

filed  by  the  petitioner  to  settle  the  dispute  that 

formed  the  subject-matter  of  the  suit  filed  by 

respondent  No.1  pursuant  to  an  oath  sworn  under 

provisions  of  the  Oath  Act  was  acted  upon  and  thus 

bound 

the  petitioner,  once 

the  dispute  was 

adjudicated  in  accordance  with  the  petitioner’s 

proposal.  The 

learned  Additional  District  Court 

therefore  concluded  that  the  petitioner  could  not  be 

allowed  to  resile  from  the  representation  made 

before  the  Court.  The  proposal  by  the  petitioner  in 

the  form  of  the  application  for  resolution  of  the 

matter pursuant to provisions of the Oath Act was a 

representation  to  the  Court  and  once  the  suit  was 

decided  in  accordance  with  the  representation,  the 

principle  of 

judicial  estoppel  applied  and 

the 

petitioner could not be allowed to wriggle out of such 

representation.  The  reliance  can  be  placed  on 

Amanullah  VS  Kashmir  Khan  (2008  SCMR  152) 

and  Abdul  Sattar  VS  Judge  Family  Court,  Toba 

Tek  Singh  and  02  others  (PLD  2016  Lahore 

482). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-7-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

8. 

In  view  of 

the  aforementioned 

facts 

(appreciated in the context of provisions of the Oath 

Act), the learned counsel for the petitioner has been 

unable  to  convince  this  Court  that  the  impugned 

judgment and decree have been passed in breach of 

provisions  of  natural  justice  and  consequently  the 

instant  petition  does  not  fall  within  the  exception  to 

the  principle  of  laches,  where  a  constitutional  Court 

ought to exercise its equitable jurisdiction in order to 

undo  any  injustice  being  meted  out  to  a  party.  The 

judgment  and  decree  was  passed  by  the  learned 

Additional  District  Court  on  03.05.2018  and  the 

instant  petition  has  been  filed  after  a  delay  of  two 

and half years. It is evident that the petitioner seeks 

to  have 

the  enforcement  of 

the  execution 

proceedings  in  relation  to  the  impugned  judgment 

and  decree,  which  has  attained  finality,  suspended. 

But  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  failed 

to establish sufficient cause as to why the petitioner 

slept  on  the  matter  in  the  event  that  he  was 

aggrieved  by  the  judgment  and  decree  passed  in 

2018. 

9. 

In  view  of  the  conduct  of  the  petitioner,  as 

evident  from  the  record  adduced  before  this  Court, 

no  case  is  made  out  for  exercise  of  the  equitable 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  to  interfere  with  the 

judgment and decree that has attained finality. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-8-                W.P. No.4052/2021 

10. 

In  view  of  the  above,  this  petition 

is 

dismissed in limine. 

A. RahmanAbbasi 

(BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE             

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
