W.P. No.945-2018 

1 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.  : 

W.P. NO.945-2018 

Tehreem Aamir 

VS    

The Additional District Judge-III, (West) Islamabad etc. 

Petitioner by          :  Malik Muhammad Zubair, Advocate  

Mr. Muhammad Akram, Advocate  
Respondents by     :  Raja Muhammad Akbar, Advocate  
Amicus Curiae       :     Mr. Muhammad Ali Raza, Advocate  
                                 Raja Khalid Mahmood Khan, Advocate  
                                 Mr. Kashif Ali Malik, Advocate 
Date of hearing      : 

02.02.2021 

AAMER FAROOQ J.   The  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3 

contracted  marriage  on  13.06.2014.  Both  the  parties  belong  to  Fiqh 

Jafaria and the dower, mentioned in the Nikah Nama, was in the sum of 

Rs.5000/- along with expenses to be incurred in the shape of Ziarat of 

the  sites  in  Iraq,  Iran  and  Syria  and  performance  of  Hajj.  Due  to  the 

dispute between the parties, the relationship could not continue for long, 

hence  respondent  No.3  divorced  the  petitioner  on  26.11.2014.  The 

petitioner  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower  amount  in  the  sum  of 

Rs.12,00,000/-  as  expenses  for  performing  Ziarat  and  Hajj;  dowry 

articles in the sum of Rs.2,29,600/- and maintenance @ Rs.10,000/- 

per  month  as  well  as  5-Tola  ornaments  at  the  prevailing  market  rates. 

The  suit  was  decided  on  26.11.2016  by  the  Judge,  Family  Court, 

whereby  the  claim,  to  the  extent  of  dower,  was  turned  down  on  the 

 
 
   
 
W.P. No.945-2018 

2 

basis  that  promise,  to  take  the  spouse  for  Ziarat,  is  not  dower  and  is 

actionable  before  the  courts  of  plenary  jurisdiction;  the  claim,  to  the 

extent of dowry articles, was also turned down partially; maintenance for 

the  Iddat  period  was  awarded  and  recovery  of  5-Tola  gold,  was  also 

decided  in  favour  of  petitioner.  The  petitioner  preferred  appeal  against 

judgment  and  decree  dated  26.11.2016,  which  was  dismissed  vide 

judgment and decree dated 02.05.2017, hence the petition.  

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner inter alia contended that promise, 

to take the petitioner on Ziarat and Hajj, was part of dower, hence fell 

within the jurisdiction of Family Court and ought to have been granted. It 

was  contended  that  since  the  petitioner  now  cannot  travel  alone  without 

mehram,  the  cost  of  travelling  for  two  persons,  is  approximately 

Rs.12,00,000/-.  It  was  also  submitted  that  claim  of  dowry  articles  has 

been denied unjustifiably, as cogent evidence was presented in the Court.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3  inter alia  contended  that 

judgments  by  the  learned  trial  court  as  well  as  the  learned  appellate 

court  do  not  suffer  from  any  infirmity.  In  this  behalf,  it  was  submitted 

that  promise  to  provide  a  service  or  an  undertaking  of  the  same,  does 

not constitute dower, but merely a promise, which was actionable in the 

courts of plenary jurisdiction.  

4. 

Keeping  in  view  the  nature  of  proposition,  this  Court  sought 

assistance from three different lawyers by appointing them amicus curiae. 

In  this  behalf,  Mr.  Ali  Raza,  Advocate  Supreme  Court,  as  an amicus, 

W.P. No.945-2018 

3 

submitted  that  dower  is  not  confined  to  tangible  goods  but  can  also  be 

intangible  in  the  form  of  services.  He,  in  support  of  his  contentions, 

placed reliance on various Surahs of Holy Quran, in particular, Surah Al-

Baqra  (Ayat  2:237),  Surah  An-Nisa  (Ayat  4:19),  Surah  An-Nisa 

(Ayat 4:24), Surah An-Nisa (Ayat 4:4) and Surah Al-Ma’idah (Ayat 

5:5).  Reliance  was  also  placed  on  Sahih  al-Bukhari  Volume-I,  Pages 

727,  1149  and  95,  Chapter  50  &  135.  Learned  counsel  also  placed 

reliance  on  judgments  of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  cases 

reported  as  ‘Saadia  Usman  and  another  VS  Muhammad  Usman  Iqbal 

Jadoon  and  another’  (2009  SCMR  1458).  ‘Saleem  Ahmad  and  others 

VS Government of Pakistan through Attorney General of Pakistan and 2-

others’  (PLD  2014  Federal  Shariat  Court  43)  and  ‘Abdul  Rafay  Butt 

VS Additional District Judge and others’ (PLD 2015 Lah. 258). 

5.  Raja  Khalid  Mahmood  Khan,  Deputy  Attorney  General  for  Pakistan 

also assisted the Court in the matter and submitted that dower need not 

be  only  a  tangible  item  but  can  be  intangible.  He  placed  reliance  on 

various sources in support of his contentions, which are the same, as on 

which,  reliance  was  placed  by  Mr.  Ali  Raza,  ASC.  He  submitted  that 

marriage is a social contract and dower is consideration for the same. In 

support of his contentions, he placed reliance on cases reported as ‘Mst. 

Samina  Ali  VS  Station  House  Office’  (PLD  1995  Lahore  629),  ‘Mst. 

Shaista  Shahzad  and  another  VS  Additional  District  Judge  and  others’ 

(PLD 2012 Lahore 245) and ‘Mannan Feroz VS Shomaila’ (2015 YLR 

W.P. No.945-2018 

4 

1235). He also submitted that there is some authority albeit from Indian 

Jurisdiction  that  a  Muslim  person  is  bound  to  maintain  his  ex-wife  till 

rest  of  her  life  or until  she  contracts  marriage.  Reliance  was  placed  on 

case  reported  as  ‘Mohd.    Ahmed  Khan  VS  Shah  Bano  Begum  and 

others’ (AIR 1985 Supreme Court 945). 

6.  Mr. Kashif Ali Malik, Advocate Supreme Court inter alia contended 

that  marriage  in  Islam  is  a  legal  contract  between  two  parties  on  the 

terms  and  conditions  agreed  between  them;  that  no  amount  has  been 

fixed in Shariah for the dower and it is upon the norms of  the society 

and  the  affordability  of  male.  He  placed  reliance  on  various  Surahs  of 

Holy  Quran,  which  are  same,  as  cited  above.  He  also  referred  to  the 

Ahadees on the subject to substantiate that it is not essential that dower 

is only a tangible item or something which can be quantified in money. 

He  placed  reliance  on  cases  reported  as  ‘Muhammad  Tariq  VS  Mst. 

Shaheen and 2-others’ (PLD 2006 Peshawar 189), ‘Abdul Rashid and 

Another VS Mst. Shaheen Bibi and 2-others’ (PLD 1980 Peshawar 37) 

and  ‘Mst.  Shazia  and  another  VS  Muhammad  Nasir  and  2-others’ 

(2014 YLR 1563). He also referred to the correspondence available at 

the site https://aboutislam.net/counseling/ask-the-scholar/hajj/dowry-hajj-

pay-divorce, whereby one of the scholars, answered the questions similar 

to  the  ones  raised  in  the  instant  petition  regarding  the  promise  to  take 

the wife on Hajj as part of dower.               

W.P. No.945-2018 

5 

7. 

Arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties as well as 

the amicus curiae have  been  heard  and  the  record  perused  with  their 

able assistance.  

8. 

The facts, leading to filing of instant petition, have been mentioned 

hereinabove hence need not be reproduced.  

9. 

The  claim  of  the  petitioner,  to  the  extent  of  recovery  of 

Rs.12,00,000/-  as  dower  amount,  has  been  turned  down  along  with 

sum of dowry articles.  

10.  Under  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  a  Family  Court  has  the 

jurisdiction in the matters, which are provided in Schedule to the Act. In 

this  behalf,  at  Sr.  No.2  of  the  Schedule,  dower  falls  within  the 

jurisdiction of Family Court.  

11.  The  pertinent  question,  in  the  instant  controversy,  is  whether, 

promise  of  respondent  No.3  to  take  the  petitioner  for  Ziarat  as  well  as 

for Hajj, if he has the ability, forms part of dower.    

12.  The dower is consideration for marriage under the Islamic Law. In 

this behalf, reliance is placed on case reported as ‘Mst. Shaista Shahzad 

and another VS Additional District Judge and others’ (PLD 2012 Lahore 

245), wherein it was observed as follows:- 

‚15.  Before proceeding further it may be useful to remind that according to 

Mohammedan Law Nikah is not a Sacramento but a civil contract between a 

Muslim man and woman which is entered into for procreation and legalization of 

children and the spouses after consenting it are bound to respect it and to live 

within the limits of Allah. The contract of Nikah under the Mohammedan Law 

may be dissolved by the husband at his will without any intervention of a 

Court or by mutual consent of the husband and wife without intervention of a 

Court or by a judicial decree at the suit of husband or wife. In the 

W.P. No.945-2018 

6 

Mohammedan Law a wife cannot divorce herself from her husband without his 

consent except under a contract whether made before or after marriage. 

16. In view of the above legal position, it is understandable that if a 

Mohammedan wife can lawfully stipulates for a divorce under a contract then 

she can also stipulate for future claim in case of divorce apart from the dower 

fixed at the time of Nikah. Any such stipulation, therefore, cannot be termed as 

against public policy of the Mohammedan Law. Any claim on the basis of such 

stipulation arising out of the civil liability can be safely termed as "actionable 

claim". Any right within the meaning of "actionable claim" is prima facie alien 

to the "personal property and belonging of the wife" incorporated in Entry No.9 

of Schedule II to Section 5 of the Family Courts Act, 1964‛. 

 Similar  views  were  expressed  in  case  reported  as  ‘Mannan  Feroz  VS 

Shomaila’  (2015  YLR  1235)  as  well  as  ‘Mst.  Samina  Ali  VS  Station 

House Office’ (PLD 1995 Lahore 629). 

13.  In  case  reported  as  ‘Sohail  VS  Mst.  Nazia  Amin  and  3-others’ 

(2015  CLC  1374),  the  Hon’ble  Division  Bench  of  Baluchistan  High 

Court, observed as follows:- 

‚Dower or Mehr under Muhammadan Law is the sum of money or other 
property which the husband is obliged to pay to his wife as mark of respect to 
the wife. Quranic commandant shows that no marriage can take place without 
fixing dower, therefore, dower is the consideration of marriage contract and it is 
also a token of respect for wife, therefore, the dower range is a debt and the 
wife is entitled to receive the same as a creditor of her outstanding dues 
against her husband, thus, it becomes an obligation of the wife's consent to 
Nikah in such view under the domain of Almighty Allah the dower becomes 
due soon after the marriage is consummated or the Nikkah is solemnized. It is 
undisputed that under Muslim law dower is a debt which is owned by the 
husband to the wife. Accordingly the ordinary principle of payment of debt 
should also govern the case relating to realization of dower debt. The Article 
285 of the Muhammadan Law is relevant in this behalf which provides as 
under:- 

"Dower or Mehr under the Muslim Law is the sum of money or other 
property which the wife is entitled to receive from the husband in 
consideration of the marriage. Under Muhammadan Law dower is an 
obligation imposed upon the husband as a mark of respect to the wife. 
The consideration had been compared to the price in a contract of sale 
because marriage is a civil contract and sale is a typical contract to 
which Muhammadan jurists are accustomed to refer by way of analogy. 
Thus, the wife is entitled to receive the dower as incident of the 
contract of marriage and as a token of respect, even the injunction of 
Islam makes it mandatory of such an incident where the husband has 
been died without payment of dower/Haq-e-Mehr to his wife/wives, his 

 
W.P. No.945-2018 

7 

estate cannot devolve upon his legal heirs before recovery of Haq-e-
Mehr from the deceased's property and in all intents a widow is entitled 
to recover her debts of dower like other creditors of her deceased 
husband." 

 14.  The  question,  whether  dower  can  only  be  in  the  form  of  tangible 

items or even be in the form of service, can be discerned from various 

Aayaats of Holy Quran, which are as follows:- 

Surah Al-Baqrah 

237.  And  if  ye  divorce  them  before  consummation  but  after  the  fixation  of  a 

dower for them then the half of the dower (is due to them) unless they remit 

it.  Or  (the  man's  half)  is  remitted  by  him  in  whose  hands  is  the  marriage 

tie;  and  the  remission  (of  the  man's  half)  is  the  nearest  to  righteousness. 

And do not forget liberality between yourselves. For God sees well all that ye 

do.  

238.  Guard  strictly  your  (habit  of)  prayers  especially  the  middle  prayer  and 

stand before God in a devout (frame of mind).  

239.  If  ye  fear  (an  enemy)  may  on  foot  or  riding  (as  may  be  most 

convenient) but when ye are in security celebrate God's praises in the manner 

He has taught you which ye knew not (before). 

Surah An-Nisa 

3. If ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans marry 

women of your choice two or three or four; but if ye fear that ye shall not be 

able to deal justly (with them) then only one or (a captive) that your right 

hands possess. That will be more suitable to prevent you from doing injustice.  

4. And give the women (on marriage) their dower as a free gift; but if they 

of  their  own  good  pleasure  remit  any  part  of  it  to  you  take  it  and  enjoy  it 

with right good cheer.  

5.  To  those  weak  of  understanding  make  not  over  your  property  which  God 

hath made a means of support for you but feed and clothe them therewith and 

speak to them words of kindness and justice. 

18. Of no effect is the repentance of those who continue to do evil until death 

faces one of them and he says ‚Now have I repented indeed‛; nor of those 

who  die  rejecting  faith:  for  them  have  We  prepared  a  punishment  most 

grievous.  

19.  O ye who believe, ye are forbidden to inherit women against their will. 

Nor  should  ye  treat  them  with  harshness  that ye  may  take  away  part  of  the 

dower  ye  have  given  them  except  where  they  have  been  guilty  of  open 

lewdness; on the contrary live with them on a footing of kindness and equity. 

W.P. No.945-2018 

8 

If ye take a dislike to them it may be that ye dislike a thing and God brings 

about through it a great deal of good.  

20.  But  if  ye  decide  to  take  one  wife  in  place  of  another  even  if  ye  had 
given the latter a whole  treasure for dower take not the least bit of it back: 
would ye take it by slander and a manifest wrong? 

24.  Also  (prohibited  are)  women  already  married  except  those  whom  your 

right  hands  possess.  Thus  hath  God  ordained  (prohibitions)  against  you: 

except  for  these  all  others  are  lawful  provided  ye  seek  (them  in  marriage) 

with  gifts  from  your  property  desiring  chastity  not  lust.  Seeing  that  ye  derive 

benefit from them give them their dowers (at least) as prescribed; but if after 

a  dower  is  prescribed  ye  agree  mutually  (to  vary  it)  there  Is  no  blame  on 

you and God Is All- Knowing All-Wise.  

25. If any of you have not the means wherewith to wed free believing women 

they  may  wed  believing  girls  from  among  those  whom  your  right  hands 

possess:  and  God  hash  full  knowledge  about  your  faith.  Ye  are  one  from 

another: wed them with the leave of their owners and give them their dowers 

according  to  what  is  reasonable:  they  should  be  chaste  not  lustful  nor  taking 

paramours: when 

Surah Al-Maidah 

4. They ask thee what is lawful to them (as food): say: Lawful unto you are 

(all)  things  good  and  pure:  and  what  ye  have  taught  your  trained  hunting 

animals  (to  catch)  in  the  manner  directed  to  you  by  God;  eat  what  they 

catch for you but pronounce the name of God over it: and fear God; for God 

is swift in taking account.  

5. This day are (all) things good and pure made lawful unto you. The food 

of the People of the Book is lawful unto you and yours is lawful unto them. 

(Lawful  unto  you  in  marriage)  are  (no  only)  chaste  women  who  are 

believers  but  chaste  women  among  the  People  of  the  Book  revealed  before 

your  time  when  ye  give  them  their  due  dowers  and  desire  chastity  not 

lewdness nor secret intrigues. If anyone rejects faith fruitless is his work and in 

the  Hereafter  he  will  be  in  the  ranks  of  those  who  have  lost  (all  spiritual 
good). 

15.  The  matter  is  further  elucidated  from  Hadees  in  Sahih  Al-Bukhari 

Sharif in the following words:- 

 ےہول

ی لم 
ی 

ھٹوگنا
 کی 
  پآ

 کی 
 ہن ےہول
 یدا ےہ

ھٹوگنا
 ےن

امرفیا ؤاج رگا
ھچک

 ہن لام روا
تروس

 ےن
اہک ےھجم
 ےھجم
 دای

 ہنیں پآ
 رکآ
 ہو لاوب
 تیےر نآرق

 ہو لاوب
 کیا روا
 یدا ےہ

 لام ھبی ےہ
رکاج
ھچک
 ھجت

 شلات
 نآرق
 ےس بسن

 ےن

ھچک
 ےن
 کیا ےھجت
 اک حاکن
 سا

امرفیا تیےر ساپ
 رک ول سا
اھچوپ
اج میں ےن

پآ
کسے وت شلات
۔یئاپ
 پآ
امرفیا 

 ےن

 ںلاف
 ےک

 ںلاف
 ےنوہ

درکیا۔

16.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  also  highlighted  the 

concept of ‘dower’ in case reported as ‘Saadia Usman and another VS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.945-2018 

9 

Muhammad  Usman  Iqbal  Jadoon  and  another’  (2009  SCMR  1458)  by 

observing  that  dower  is  gift  given  by  bridegroom  to  bride  and  the  Holy 

Quran  is  silent  on  two  types  of  dower  i.e.  prompt  and  deferred  dower; 

where part of dower is described as ‘Mu’wajjal i.e. deferred but not time 

limit  is  fixed  for  its  payment,  the  time  of  such  payment  is  either  death 

or divorce.  

17.  In  the  Book  of  Marriage  (Chapter  29-30),  on  the  dowry  being 

some actions that a person has to perform, the following is mentioned:- 

2111.  Sahi bin Sa'd As-Sã'idi narrated that a woman came to the Messenger 

of Allah ﷺ and said: "0 Messenger of Allah, I have given myself to you as 

a  gift."  She  remained  standing  for  a  long  time,  until  a  man  stood  up  and 

said: "0 Messenger of Allah, marry her to me, if you do not desire her." The 

Messenger  of  Allah ﷺ  said:  "Do  you  have  any  dowry  to  give  her?"  He 

replied: "I have only this Izar of mine." The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said: "If 

you give her your Izar, you will be confined (to your house), having no Izãr! 

So go find something else." He said: "I can't find anything." He replied: "Go 

find (something), even if it be an iron ring!" So he searched, but could not 

find  anything.  The  Messenger  of  Allah ﷺ  then  said  to  him:  "Do  you  have 

anything of the Qur'an (memorized)?" He replied: "Yes, this Sürah, and this 

Sürah," and others that he named. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said: "I have 

married her to you with what is with you of the Qur'an." (Sazih). 

2125.  It was reported from Ayyub, from 'Ikrimah, from Ibn 'Abbas, who said: 
"When  'All  married  Fätimah,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ﷺ  said:  'Give  her 
something:' He replied: 'I don't have anything!' He said: 'Where is your Hutami 
coat of mail? ... (Sahih)  

2126.  It was reported from Muhammad bin 'Abdur-Rahmãn bin Thawban, from 
a  man  among  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  ﷺ,  that  when  'All  married 
Fätimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, and he wanted to go 
to her, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ forbade him, until he gave her something. 
He  said:  "O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  don't  have  anything.";  The  Prophet ﷺ 
told him: "Give ) her your coat of mail," so he gave it to her, then went to 
her. (Da'if) 

18.  D.F.  Mullah,  in  the  Book  Principles  of  Muhammadan  Law,  has 

stated that dower is an obligation imposed upon a husband as a mark of 

 
W.P. No.945-2018 

10 

respect  to  the  wife  and  where  a  claim  is  made  under  a  contract  of 

dower, the Court should, unless it is otherwise provided by any legislative 

enactment, award the entire sum provided in the contract.  

19.  In  case  reported  as  ‘Haji  Ajab  Gul  and  3-others  VS  Rahim  Gul 

and  28-others’  (1991  SCMR  2500,  the  august  Apex  Court  observed 

that dower can be fixed in the form of life interest in the property.  

20.  The  Hon’ble  Peshawar  High  Court,  in  case  reported  as  ‘Abdul 

Rashid  and  Another  VS  Mst.  Shaheen  Bibi  and  2-others’  (PLD  1980 

Peshawar 37), observed that dower may either be in cash or kind or in 

form of rendition of personal service.  

21.  The  crux  of  the  matter  derived  from  the  Holy  Quran  as  well  as 

Sunnah  and  the  case  law  is  that  dower  need  not  be  in  the  form  of 

tangible  goods  but  also  can  be  in  the  form  of  services.  In  the  instant 

case,  in  the  Nikah  Nama,  along  with  sum  of  Rs.5000/-  as  dower,  it 

was mentioned that respondent No.3 shall take the petitioner for Ziarat to 

different countries, if he has the ability to do so and for performance of 

Hajj. The factum of taking of spouse for Ziariat and Hajj falls within the 

concept  of  ‘dower’ per se,  however,  it  can  be  seen  from  Nikah  Nama 

that  a  rider  has  been  added  that  if  husband/respondent  No.3  ought  to 

have the ability for the same.   

22.  The dower cannot be a conditional promise or consideration; it has 

to  be  absolute,  even  though  it  may  be  deferred  or  Mu’wajjal.  In  the 

instant  case,  respondent  No.3  has  led  the  evidence  that  he  is  not  a 

W.P. No.945-2018 

11 

person of means and no evidence even was led by the petitioner as to 

the conditionality that respondent No.3 has the means to pay the same. 

The  conditional  aspect  of  the  promise  takes  the  clause  out  of  ambit  of 

‘dower’  and  as  has  been  rightly  observed  by  the  trial  court  as  well  as 

appellate court that it is an  actionable claim. Even-otherwise, even it is 

regarded  that  it  is  dower,  even  then,  the  petitioner  has  not  led  any 

evidence  as  to  the  means  of  respondent  No.2  in  support  of  her  claim. 

Likewise,  there  is  no  jurisdictional  or  legal  defect  in  respect  of  findings 

rendered  by  respondents  No.1  &  2  regarding  partial  dismissal  of  claim 

pertaining to gold. 

23.  In  view  of  foregoing,  no  interference  is  required  in  the  judgments 

impugned before this Court. 

24.  For  the  above  reasons,  instant  petition  fails  and  is  accordingly 

dismissed.          

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
   JUDGE  

   JUDGE  

Announced in Open Court on 29.04.2021 

Approved for reporting  

Zawar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
    
 
 
