Form No: HCJD/C-121 
JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 

Criminal Original No. 01 of 2017 

The State 

VS

Maheen Zafar and another. 

Petitioner’s by    :  Mr.  Tariq  Mehmood  Jahangiri,      Learned 

Advocate General for Islamabad. 
Malik Awais Haider, State Counsel. 
Muhammad Rafiq, Inspector. 
Raja  Zahoor-ul-Hassan,  Advocate 
Complainant. 

for 

Respondent’s by :  Raja  Muhammad  Farooq,  Advocate  for 

accused/respondent No.1. 
Raja  Rizwan  Abbasi,  Sohail  Akhtar,  Naila 
Noreen and Raaz Ali Shah, Advocates for 
accused/respondent No.2. 
Raja 
accused/Respondent No.2 in person. 

Khurram 

Khan, 

Ali 

Date of hearing   :  26.03.2018    

******** 

AAMER FAROOQ, J. -  Mst. Maheen Zafar and Raja Khurram 

Ali  Khan  are  imputed  in  case  F.I.R.  No.483/2016,  dated  29.12.2016, 

under Sections 342, 506, 328-A, 201, 337-A(i), 337-F(i), 34 P.P.C., Police 

Station Industrial Area, Islamabad. 

2. 

The  case  of  the  prosecution  against  the  above  mentioned 

accused persons is that they employed Mst. Tayyaba Bibi, aged less than 

10 years at the relevant time as a maid servant in the house and used to 

hit her because  of which she sustained injuries and  also at the relevant 

time closed her quarter and used to lock her in a store near water tank. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

2 

3. 

The above mentioned accused persons were charged with the 

aforementioned  offences  on  16.05.2017.  For  the  sake  of  brevity,  the 

charges against the accused persons are reproduced and are as follows:- 

“Firstly: 

That  you  accused  persons  wrongfully  confined  minor 

Tayyaba, in your House No.50, Street No.12, Sector I-8/1, Islamabad and 

she was recovered by the police, thus you both accused persons have 

committed an offence punishable u/s 342 P.P.C., which is triable by this 

Court. 

Secondly:  That you Mst. Maheen Zafar accused within the area of 

House No.50, Street No.12, Sector I-8/1, Islamabad caused injuries 

(multiple small healed wounds on cheek and below angle of mandible 

(contact burn) to minor Tayyaba, thus you have committed an offence 

punishable u/s 337-A(i) P.P.C., which is triable by this Court. 

Thirdly: 

That you Mst. Maheen Zafar accused within the area of 

House No.50, Street No.12, Sector I-8/1, Islamabad caused injuries 

contact burn healed wounds on right arm, right wrist and right hand on 

left mid arm over deltoid area, dorsum of left index finger extended upto 

MP joint of left hand, left little finger and left lower arm, right thigh and 

right buttock to minor Tayyaba, thus you have committed an offence 

punishable u/s 337-F(i) P.P.C., which is triable by this Court. 

Fourthly:-  That you Mst. Maheen Zafar accused within the area of 

House No.50, Street No.12, Sector I-8/I, Islamabad extended threats of 

dire consequences to minor Tayyaba not to disclose her maltreatment to 

anyone, thus you have committed an offence punishable u/s 506(ii) 

P.P.C., which is within the cognizance of this Court. 

Fifthly:- 

That you Mst. Maheen Zafar and Raja Khurram Ali Khan 

accused within the area of House No.50, Street No.12, Sector I-8/1, 

Islamabad willfully assaulted, ill-treated, neglected, abandoned, harmed 

and injured minor Tayyaba, who was under your care, thus you both 

have committed an offence punishable u/s 328-A P.P.C., which is within 

the cognizance of this Court.  

Sixthly:- 

That you Raja Khurram Ali Khan accused within the area of 

House  No.50,  Street  No.12,  Sector  I-8/1,  Islamabad  caused 

disappearance of minor Tayyaba in order to screen your co-accused Mst. 

Maheen Zafar from the legal consequences, thus you have committed an 

offence punishable u/s 201 P.P.C., which is within the cognizance of this 

Court.  

AND I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court. 

====== 

 
 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

3 

4. 

The  prosecution  in  support  of  their  case  produced  Tayyaba 

Bibi as PW-1, Maria  Hayat as PW-2, Naila Khizar as PW-3, Ms. Humaira 

Haroon as PW-4, Dr. Muhammad Naseer as PW-5, Dr. Tariq Iqbal as PW-

6,  Ms.  Nishaa  Ishtiak  as  PW-7,  Ghulam  Hussain  as  PW-8,  Muhammad 

Naseem  as  PW-9,  Shakeel  Ahmad  as  PW-10,  Asghar  Ali  as  PW-11, 

Guldaraz Khan as PW-12, Muhammad Azam as PW-13, Azhar Hussain as 

PW-14,  Gulzar  Ahmed  as  PW-15  and  Khalid  Mehmood  Awan  as  PW-16. 

The  prosecution  also  tendered  in  evidence  various  documents  and 

articles. 

5. 

The  accused  tendered  their  statements  under  Section  342 

Cr.P.C  and  also  produced  documentary  evidence  by  way  of  various 

orders which were passed by Raja Khurram Ali Khan as Additional District 

and Sessions Judge.  

6. 

Learned  Advocate  General 

for 

Islamabad,  inter-alia, 

contended  that  the  prosecution  has  proved  its  case  beyond  reasonable 

doubt.  In  this  behalf,  learned  Advocate  General  took  the  Court  through 

the evidence tendered by the prosecution. It was also contended that the 

statements of Mst. Tayyaba Bibi, PW-1, as well as PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4 

establishes  clearly  that  the  accused  persons  used  to  beat  up  Mst. 

Tayyaba  Bibi  and/or  abandoned  her  by  failing  to  take  care  of  her  by 

providing  food  and  proper  clothing.  It  was  further  contended  that  the 

medical  report  fully  corroborate  the  ocular  account  that  Mst.  Tayyaba 

Bibi  received  injuries  which  squarely  falls  under  Sections  337-A  (i)  and 

337-F  (i)  P.P.C.  It  was  further  submitted  that  the  defence  has  failed  to 

cast doubt on the case of the prosecution which is un-impeached and the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

4 

accused persons are guilty of all the offences with which they have been 

charged.      

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  accused,  inter-alia, contended  that 

the complaint on the basis of which F.I.R. was registered was not signed 

by  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi,  therefore,  the  F.I.R.  registered  has  no  sanctity 

under  the  law.  Reliance  was  placed  on  cases  reported  as  “Dr. Baber 

Yaqoob Sheikh VS Haris Hafeez and 02 others”  (2014 YLR 2176), 

“Director General EPA VS Messrs Sultan Industries Sialkot” (2017 CLD 

1117).  It  was  also  contended  that  during  the  course  of  evidence  Mst. 

Tayyaba Bibi denied the contents of the F.I.R. thus it has lost its sanctity. 

Reliance  was  placed  on  cases  reported  as  “The State VS Syed Aamir 

Shabbir” (2016 P Cr. L J 286), “Ghulam Rasool and 2 others VS The 

State” (1988 P Cr. L J 995). Learned counsel for the accused persons 

further  contended  that  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  its  case.  In 

this  behalf,  attention  was  drawn  towards  the  cross-examination  of  Mst. 

Tayyaba  Bibi,  wherein,  she  said  contrary  to  what  she  had  deposed  in 

examination in chief. It was contended that cross-examination is a more 

important part of statement of the witness. It was further contended that 

the statement  of child witness is to be  appraised with caution. Reliance 

was  placed  on  cases  reported  as “Allah Ditta and others VS The State 

and others” (2017 P Cr L J 789), “Muhammad Feroze VS The State” 

(NLR 2003 Criminal 474)  and  “Panchhi & others VS State of U.P.” 

(AIR 1998 SC 2726)  as  well  as “Mst. Saira Bibi VS Muhammad Asif 

and others” (2009 SCMR 946).  It  was  further  contended  that  one  of 

the  prosecution  witnesses  i.e.  Ms.  Humaria  Haroon  (PW-4)  made 

improvement inasmuch as her statement in examination-in-chief contains 

substance  which  was  not  in  the  statement  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C., 

 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

5 

hence, the same is not to be relied upon. Reliance was placed on cases 

reported  as  “Noor Muhammad and others VS The State and others” 

(2017 P Cr. L J 479)  and “Sarfraz VS The State” (2017 YLR Note 

220).  It  was  further  argued  that  the  witnesses  appearing  on  behalf  of 

the  prosecution  in  support  of  the  medical  report  i.e.  PW-5  and  PW-6, 

have  categorically  stated  that  the  injuries  can  be  either  accidental  or 

homicidal; that burn marks are old. In this behalf, it was contended that 

the medical evidence is only corroborates or supports the ocular account 

and cannot form the basis for conviction  solely. Reliance was placed  on 

cases reported as “Javed Iqbal and 2 others VS The State” (2014 YLR 

529)  and  “Hashim Qasim and another VS The State”  (2017 SCMR 

986).  It  was  further  submitted  that  the  alleged  occurrence  is  unseen 

inasmuch  as  no  witness  has  deposed  that  the  accused  persons  caused 

injuries to Mst. Tayyaba Bibi.      

8. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  accused  persons  further  contended 

that the alleged articles recovered to substantiate that they were used to 

cause  injuries  to  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  cannot  be  relied  upon  in  evidence 

inasmuch as they are not sealed. It was contended that the case against 

the  accused  persons  is  based  on  malafide  and  ulterior  motives  at  the 

behest  of  the  person  against  whom  Raja  Khurram  Ali  Khan  passed 

various  orders  /  judgments  while  adjudicating  matters  as  Additional 

District  &  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad.  Learned  counsel  took  the  Court 

through  the  referred  documents  which  have  been  tendered  in  evidence 

as exhibits.  It was further contended that any matter which cast doubt 

has  to  be  resolved  in  favour  of  the  accused.  Reliance  was  placed  on 

cases reported  as “State VS Ali Asghar” (2017 P Cr. L J 349), “Saleh 

Muhammad and another VS The State and another” (2017 P Cr. L J 

 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

6 

1391)  and “Muhammad Akram VS The State” (2009 SCMR 230).  It 

was also argued that the  media hype has also been created because  of 

various  non-governmental  organizations  and  their  nexus,  and  had  the 

same  not  been  done  the  case  would  not  have  been  registered.  It  was 

further  contended  that  the  alleged  statement  of  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  was 

recorded before Pw-7 without any justification or basis, when she had no 

authority,  nor  was  she  the  duty  judge  in  the  case.  Similarly,  it  was 

contended that the photographs of Mst. Tayyaba Bibi which became viral 

on social media cannot be said to have been proved in accordance with 

law. 

9. 

Arguments advanced by the parties have been heard and the 

evidence examined with their able assistance. 

10.    

Before  proceeding  to  decide  the  merits  of  the  case,  since 

great emphasis was laid on the fact that the complaint which culminated 

into  F.I.R.  was  not  signed  by  the  complainant  i.e.  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi, 

therefore, the F.I.R. was not validly registered, hence, the merits of the 

said  arguments  be  determined.  Under  Section  154  of  the  Code  of 

Criminal  Procedure, 1898,  every  information  relating  to  the  commission 

of a cognizable offence if given orally to an officer in charge of a police 

station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be 

read over to the informant, and every such information, whether given in 

writing or  reduced to writing as  aforesaid shall be signed by the person 

giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept 

by  such  officer.  In  the  instant  case  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  after  being 

recovered by the police was brought to the office of Chief Commissioner, 

I.C.T, Islamabad and made a statement  before Ms. Nishaa Ishtiak  (PW-

7) who reduced the statement of Mst. Tayyaba Bibi and instead of taking 

 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

7 

her  signature  or  thumb  impression  signed  the  same  herself  (Ex.PW-

7/A)  on  the  basis  of  the  referred  statement/complaint  the  F.I.R.  in 

question  (F.I.R.  No.483/2016,  dated  29.12.2016)(EX-PW-14/B)  was 

lodged.  In  this  behalf,  the  complaint  drafted  by  Shakeel  Ahmed,  ASI  is 

PW-14/A. Learned counsel for the accused have placed reliance on case 

reported  as “Dr. Baber Yaqoob Sheikh VS Haris Hafeez and 02 others” 

(2014 YLR 2176) to substantiate his arguments that if the complaint is 

not signed then it is defective. The referred case is not applicable in the 

facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  inasmuch  as  in  the  same  it  was  a 

complaint  under  Illegal  Dispossession  Act,  2005  and  the  Court  was 

considering the essential requirements of a compliant under Section 200 

Cr.P.C and it was observed that if it is not signed then the matter cannot 

be  proceeded  with.  Likewise,  the  other  judgment  relied  upon  by  the 

accused was “Director General EPA VS Messrs Sultan Industries Sialkot” 

(2017 CLD 1117). In the said case as well the Court was dealing with 

the  complaint  as  envisaged  under  Punjab  Environmental  Protection  Act, 

1997. Likewise, another case relied upon by the accused i.e. “The State 

VS Syed Aamir Shabbir” (2016 P Cr. L J 286) is distinguishable in the 

facts and circumstances as in the same.  Nature and scope of F.I.R. and 

the  effect  of  not  signing  of  the  same  has  been  elaborated  in  various 

pronouncements of our jurisdiction as well as from the jurisdiction across 

the border. In case reported as “Mst. Razia Sultana VS Deputy Inspector 

General of Police and others” (1999 P Cr. L J 694), the Hon’ble Lahore 

High  Court  observed  that  the  F.I.R.  recorded  on  complaint  of  minor 

daughter of owner of the house having not been cancelled, law could be 

set  in  motion  according  to  version  of  complainant  and  affected  family. 

Similarly, in the case reported as “Ghulam Abbas and 03 others VS The 

State and another”  (1997 P Cr. L J 2091)  the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

8 

Court observed that the F.I.R. was not an encyclopedia so as to include 

each and every detail of the incident  reported therein. Similar view was 

expressed  by  the  Hon’ble  Division  Bench  of  Baluchistan  High  Court  in 

“Capt. Dr. Munir Ahmed Khan VS The State” (1997 P Cr. L J 348) and 

it was observed that it is not an essential that each and every detail must 

be  incorporated  in  the  F.I.R.  which  is  a  simple  device  to  set  the  law  in 

motion.  Similar  view  was  expressed  in  “Ghulam Abbas alias Mazhar 

Abbas VS The State” (1997 P Cr. L J 432), “Muhammad Ramzan VS 

The State” (1997 P Cr. L J 376).  In  “Muhammad  Asif  and  others  VS 

The State and others” the Shariat Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir in 

case reported as “2006 P Cr. L J 1191” observed that the mere defect 

in  recording  F.I.R.  or  even  recording  of  F.I.R.  after  investigation,  would 

not make the  entire trial illegal as F.I.R.  was not a substantive piece of 

evidence and even if an F.I.R. was recorded after commencing of formal 

investigation,  it  would  not  destroy  the  whole  trial  and  it  would  not 

materially affect main case of prosecution.  

11.   

In  Criminal  Appeal  Nos.1492  and  1587  of  1983  titled “Durab 

and others VS State of U.P.”  the  High  Court  of  Allahabad  observed  as 

follows:- 

“46.  Moreover,  mere  absence  of  signature  of  the  traumatised 

informant (whose brother was murdered before him) over written report 

(Ext. Ka-1) would not affect the sanctity of the written report as well as 

F.I.R. Section 154 Cr.P.C. provides that F.I.R. can be lodged orally as 

well. In this case, the scribe (P.W.-3) has proved on oath that he had 

prepared the written report (Ext. Ka-1) on the spot on the dictation of the 

informant and had written his name as a writer.” 

Likewise  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.266  of  1990  (J)  titled  “Rajoo 

VS State of M.P.”  the  High  Court  of  Madhya  Pradesh  observed  as 

follows:- 

 
 
 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

9 

The real purpose of the F.I.R. is to set the criminal law in motion and to 

confront for the purpose of finding out any contradiction. We may refer 

with profit to the decision of the Apex Court in this regard. Hasib VS The 

State of Bihar MANU/SC/0180/1971 : AIR 1972 S.C. 283. Thus, merely 

the F.I.R. was not signed, is in itself no ground, to discard it. 

Non-obtaining of signature is a procedural irregularity, but, it cannot 

over-turn prosecution. This proposition was specifically dealt with by the 

Division Bench of Calcutta High Court in the case of A.W. Khan VS The 

State MANU/WB/0139/1962 : AIR 1962 Cal. 641 in which Their Lordships 

in para 7 of the judgment has held that absence of signature to the First 

Information Report by the informant is not necessary to the extent that 

its absence will vitiate and nullify such report. If there is an information 

relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, it falls under Section 

154 of Cr. P.C. and becomes admissible in evidence as such, even though 

the Police Officer may have neglected to record it in accordance with law. 

Now, the admissibility of first information report depends not on the fact 

that it is signed by the person making it, but on the fact a first 

information report given in writing or taken down by a police officer 

would be a part of the official record as the substance of such information 

is to be entered in a book kept by the station officer in the form 

prescribed and that may attract the operation of the provisions of S.35 of 

the Indian Evidence Act. The condition as to its being reduced to writing 

and that it shall be signed by the person giving it seems to us to be mere 

matter of procedure and failure to observe the procedure as to signature 

would not make the information given, if it is reduced to writing, 

inadmissible.”  

Finally,  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.324  of  1961  case  titled  “A.W. 

Khan VS The State” the High Court of Calcutta observed as follows:- 

“The second answer to Mr. Mitter’s argument is that absence of signature 

to the First Information Report by the informant is not necessary to the 

extent that its absence will vitiate and nullify such report. A Division 

Bench of Lort Williams and S.K. Ghose, JJ. in the case of Mani Mohon 

Ghose v. Emperor MANU/WB/0247/1931 : AIR 1931Cal745 lays down 

that:- 

“If an information ‘relates to the commission of a cognizable offence’ it is 

a first information admissible in evidence as such although the police 

officer may have neglected to record it in accordance with law.” 

At p. 628 (of Cal WN):(at p. 748 of AIR) of the report the learned Judge 

delivering the decision of the Division Bench observed: 

‘The conditions as to writing in Section 154 of the Code are 

merely procedural. If there is an ‘information relating to the commission 

 
 
  
 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

10 

of a cognue able offence’ it falls under Section 154 and becomes 

admissible in evidence as such, even though the police officer may have 

neglected to record it in accordance with law. Owing to this neglect in 

particular cases, the Courts have laid down from time to time that the 

information which starts the investigation is the real first information 

under Section 154 and should be treated in evidence as such. It does not 

depend on the sweet will of the police officer, who may or may not have 

recorded it. But the condition as to the character of the statements is 

really two-fold; first, it must be an information and, secondly, it must 

relate to a cognizable offence on the face of it and not merely in the light 

of subsequent events. It was never meant to be laid down that any sort 

of information would fall under Section 154, so long as it was the first in 

point of time.”   

12.   

In light of the above case law, it is clear that the nature of an 

F.I.R. is that it sets the law in  motion upon which the investigation in a 

cognizable case commences. In case there is any procedural irregularity 

including  not  signing  of  the  complaint  that  will  not  vitiate  the  criminal 

trial  or  tarnish  the  case  of  the  prosecution  in  any  way.  Hence,  the  fact 

that  the  Tayyaba  Bibi  never  signed  the  complaint  made  before  Ms. 

Nishaa  Ishtiak  is  not  consequential  and  not  fatal  to  the  case  of  the 

prosecution. 

13.   

Before  appreciating  the  rival  contention  of  learned  counsels 

for  the  parties  and  appraisal  of  the  evidence  it  is  relevant  to  mention 

certain  important  facts  and  evidence.  It  is  the  case  of  the  prosecution 

that  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  was  employed  as  maid  servant  at  the  house  of 

Raja  Khurram  Ali  Khan  and  Ms.  Maheen  Zafar  and  the  police  recovered 

the minor, aged less than 10 years, at the relevant time and took her in 

custody and after the initial medical examination brought her before Ms. 

Nishaa  Ishtiak,  Assistant  Commissioner  (PW-7),  who  after  reducing  the 

statement of the minor committed her to Child Protection Bureau. Minor 

was  examined  twice  by  the  medical  experts.  Firstly,  she  was  examined 

 
 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

11 

by  Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer,  PW-5,  who  examined  her  on  29.12.2016  at 

11:16 A.M. The referred witness in his statement spelt out the nature of 

injuries  recorded  in  the  report  on  30.12.2016,  which  was  tendered  in 

evidence  as  Ex.PW-5/A.  The  second  medical  examination  was 

conducted  by  Medical  Board  which  examined  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  on 

09.01.2017; the board consisted of Dr. Hameed-ud-Din, Dr. S.H. Waqar, 

Dr. Rizwan Taj and Dr. Maqbool Hussain. The Board examined the minor 

and  the  findings  were  recorded  in  the  report  which  was  tendered  as 

Ex.PW-6/A and Ex.PW-6/B. During the course of investigation and in 

trial evidence was tendered by Maria Hayat, PW-2, who deposed that she 

saw  the  minor  in  destitute  condition  on  26.12.2016  out  in  the  cold  and 

gave her food and warm clothing. Similar statements were made by Naila 

Khizar,  PW-3  and  Ms.  Humaira  Haroon,  PW-4.  Minor  Tayyaba  Bibi 

appeared  in witness box  as PW-1 and stated that Ms. Maheen Zafar hit 

her  and  burned  her  hand  and  also  provided  the  details  of  how  the 

injuries  were  reflected.  She  corroborated  the  statements  of  PW-2  and 

PW-3  and  submitted  that  Maria  Hayat  gave  her  food  and  provided 

blanket. However, in cross-examination she stated that she has not been 

hit  by  anyone.  It  is  pertinent  to  observe  that  a  note  was  made  by  the 

Court that in cross-examination the minor Tayyaba Bibi has answered all 

questions in affirmative 

ںاہ یج
)

. The prosecution also adduced evidence 
(

of Ms. Nishaa Ishtiak, who provided details of recording the statement of 

Mst. Tayyaba Bibi, however, in extensive and lengthy cross-examination 

the  defence  sought  to  question  the  authority  under  which  Ms.  Nishaa 

Ishtiak  recorded  the  statement  of  Tayyaba  Bibi  and  as  to  why  she  was 

brought before her. Formal witnesses i.e. police officials corroborated the 

case of the prosecution. In this behalf, Ghulam Hussain, PW-8, produced 

the  items  Wiper  and  Dohi  etc.  which  were  not  sealed.  Muhammad 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

12 

Naseem,  who  remained  with  the  investigation  for  a  short  while  and 

Shakeel Ahmad appeared as PW-9 and PW-10 and deposed about initial 

investigation  and  how  the  child  was  recovered.  PW-11,  is  the Moharar 

and  deposed  about  the  Mobile  Phone  which  was  sent  to  the  Forensic 

Laboratory for recovering the photographs taken from the mobile phone 

of  Maria  Hayat.  The  Investigation  Officer,  Khalid  Mehmood  Awan, 

appeared  as  PW-16,  who  provided  the  details  of  the  investigation  and 

about  various  reports.  He  was  re-called  and  re-examined  by  the 

prosecution and in the same, he tendered in evidence Rupt No.24, dated 

28.12.2016  (Ex.PW-16/B).  The  two  important  witnesses  are  Guldaraz 

Khan  PW-12,  who  worked  as  a  cook  in  the  adjacent  house  and  stated 

that  he  gave  food,  tea  and  medicine  to  Tayyaba  Bibi  and  father  of 

Tayyaba  Bibi  namely  Muhammad  Azam,  PW-13,  who  was  called  by  the 

prosecution,  however,  during  the  course  of  his  examination-in-chief 

request  was  made  to  declare  him  hostile,  which  was  accordingly  done. 

The prosecution asked questions and he was also cross-examined by the 

defence. He admitted that he had sent Tayyaba Bibi for employment and 

Raja Khurram Ali Khan had given him sum of Rs.18,000/- as salary for six 

months. He also admitted  that a compromise was effected between the 

accused  persons  and  him.  In  cross-examination  he  stated  that  Mst. 

Tayyaba Bibi informed him that she has  never been  ill-treated. Accused 

tendered  statements  under  Section  342  Cr.  P.  C.  and  some  orders  and 

other documents as mentioned above, in their defence.    

14.   

The first charge on the  accused persons  is that they wrongly 

confined Mst. Tayyaba Bibi and she was recovered by the police from the 

House  No.50,  Street  No.12,  Sector  I-8/1,  Islamabad,  therefore,  they 

have  committed  an  offence  under  Section  342  P.P.C.  Admittedly,  Mst. 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

13 

Tayyaba  Bibi  was  working  as  a  maid  servant  at  the  residence  of  Raja 

Khurram  Ali Khan and Ms. Maheen Zafar, however, the prosecution  has 

not produced any evidence which goes on to show that she was wrongly 

confined  at  the  aforementioned  residence  of  the  said  person.  The  sole 

evidence  tendered  by  the  prosecution  in  this  behalf  is  the  statement  of 

Kahlid  Mehmood  Awan,  SHO,  PW-16,  who  stated  that  he  was  informed 

that  a  child  namely  Tayyaba  Bibi  was  working  at  the  residence  of  Raja 

Khurram Ali Khan and has been tortured, therefore, he visited the House 

No.50, Street No.12, Sector I-8/1, Islamabad and contacted the accused 

by phone and thereupon the custody of Tayyaba Bibi was handed over to 

him, whereupon, she was taken to PIMS Hospital. Even, the statement of 

the  minor  i.e.  examination-in-chief,  does  not  divulge  anything  to  the 

effect  which  goes  to  establish  wrong  confinement.  Even  though,  she 

stated  in  her  examination-in-chief  that  when  she  got  injured  then  they 

(accused  persons)  had  hidden  her,  however,  the  fact  that  she  was 

recovered without any resistance and as she was handed over to PW-16 

shows  that  there  was  wrongful  confinement  as  nothing  was  stated  in 

specific by the Investigation Officer. In view of the referred evidence the 

prosecution has failed to prove the referred charge  against the accused 

persons. 

15.   

Ms.  Maheen  Zafar  has  been  charged  with  causing  injuries 

which are multiple in nature i.e. small healed wounds on cheek as well as 

contact burn under Section 337-A(i) P.P.C. Likewise, the referred accused 

was  also  charged  with  causing  multiple  injuries    by  way  contact  burn 

wounds  on  right  arm,  right  wrist  and  right  hand  on  left  mid  arm  over 

deltoid  area,  dorsum  of  left  index  finger  extended  upto  MP  joint  of  left 

hand,  left  little  finger  and  left  lower  arm,  right  thigh  and  right  buttock 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

14 

under  Section  337-F(i)  P.P.C.  Admittedly,  there  is  no  ocular  account  of 

causing injuries by Ms. Maheen Zafar to Mst. Tayyaba Bibi, however, the 

victim  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  in  her  examination-in-chief  specifically  stated 

that she worked for a period of two to three months at the residence of 

Ms. Maheen Zafar and that she used to hit her and burned her hand as 

well  as  back  and  also  her  with  the  Dohi.  It  was  also  stated  by  Mst. 

Tayyaba Bibi that she got injuries near eye and at the back. She further 

stated that the burn injuries were caused because of stove and  that the 

accused lit the stove and burnt her hand. It is pertinent to observe that 

at the time of recording of the statement in examination-in-chief of Mst. 

Tayyaba Bibi the demeanour of the witness was noted by this Court and 

it  was  observed  that  she  responded  to  the  questions  asked  confidently 

after  understanding  them.  The  Court  also  observed  that  Mst.  Tayyaba 

Bibi is  intelligent. In cross-examination, she admitted that first time she 

told everything to the police authority and the same was all recorded in a 

video  clip.  The  Court  exhibited  the  video  clip  as  Ex-D/A  and  the 

examination  of  the  same  shows  that  police  officials  asked  leading 

questions  and  the  lady  person  in  the  background  is  somewhat  tutoring  

Mst. Tayyaba Bibi  and helping her. The display  of the video clip  and  its 

admission in evidence was objected by the prosecution that the same is 

not permissible, however, no specific prohibition  or bar under  Qanun-e-

Shahadat  Order, 1984  was  pointed  out  by  virtue  of  which  the  same 

cannot be done, hence, the objection of the prosecution is overruled. In 

cross-examination, Tayyaba Bibi stated that nobody hit her and that she 

had  fallen  down  and  she  was  living  voluntarily  at  the  residence  of  Raja 

Khurram Ali Khan and Mst. Maheen Zafar and she was also taken to the 

doctor. During the course of cross-examination, the Court also observed 

that Mst. Tayyaba Bibi is  answering  all questions  in  affirmative 

)

ںاہ یج

. 
(

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

15 

The  photographs  of  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  showing  her  injuries  were  taken 

by Mrs. Humaira Haroon, PW-4, which have been exhibited in evidence. 

The referred witness stated in examination-in-chief that Tayyaba Bibi told 

her  that  Mst.  Maheen  Zafar  has  hit  her.  The  learned  defence  counsel 

objected  to  the  statement  of  PW-4  on  the  ground  that  the  same  is 

hearsay. However, there is an exception to the referred principle which is 

referred  as  res  gestae  under  the  same  if  the  victim  informed  someone 

immediately about the occurrence and had no time to meditate or make 

up  things  then  the  same  is  admissible  in  evidence  as  exception  to 

hearsay.  Reliance  is  placed  on  cases  reported  as “Faqir Muhammad VS 

The State”  (PLD 1971 Lahore 929)  and  “Sameeullah Khan VS The 

State” (2000 MLD 1290).  In  the  said  case  the  doctrine  of  res  gestae 

was explained in the following manner:- 

“7.  This is a case which fully attracts the rule of ‘Res gestae’. The Res 

gestae  rule  is  that  where  a  remark  is  made  spontaneously  and 

concurrently. It is defined as a matter incidental to main fact and 

explanatory of it, including acts and words which are so closely connected 

therewith as to constitute a part of transaction and without a knowledge 

of which main fact might not be properly understood. They are events 

themselves speaking through instinctive words and acts of participants; 

circumstances, facts and declarations which grow out of main fact are 

contemporaneous with it and serve to illustrate its character. Res gestae 

includes everything that may be fairly considered as an incident of even 

under consideration. It carries with it hinerently a degree of credibility 

and will be admissible because of its spontaneous nature. ‘Res gestae’ 

means literally thing or things happened and, therefore, to be admissible 

as exception to hearsay rule, words spoken, thought expressed and 

gestures made must all be so closely connected to occurrence or event in 

both time and substance as to be a part of the happening. It is a 

spontaneous declaration made by a person immediately after an event 

and before the mind has an opportunity to conjure a false story. It 

represents an exception to the hearsay rule. 

8.  Res gestae is a concept which as a matter of principle is employed 

in the English system of administration of criminal justice under the name 

of ‘res gestae’. In our system of administration of justice, Article 19 of 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

16 

Qanoon-e-Shahadat (P.O. No. X of 1984) corresponding to section 6, of 

the Evidence Act of 1872, is an enacted provision of law under which 

statement made immediately after the occurrence under the influence of 

occurrence in order to characterize it and connecting therewith would be 

admissible under this article as ‘res gestae’ evidence.”    

16.   

In  the  instant  case,  it  is  not  clear  as  to  how  much  time  had 

lapsed  between  receiving  of  injuries  by  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  and  her 

informing  the  same  to  PW-4.  Hence,  in  the  referred  facts  and 

circumstances, whether what was informed by Mst. Tayyaba Bibi to PW-4 

can be relied upon under res gestae is questionable. The victim was duly 

examined  initially  by,  Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer  PW-5,  who  tendered  his 

report and then by Medical Board constituted in this behalf. PW-5 in his 

report  (Ex. PW-5/A)  categorically  stated  that  there  is  swelling  and 

blackening  of  right  upper  hand  and  lower  eye  lid  and  conjectivitise  of 

right eye which was ecchymosed; swelling and burn marks superficial in 

nature  on  the  dorso-nedial  aspect  of  left  hand  and  abrasions  on  right 

side  of  face  of  over  left  ear  and  pointed  that  injuries  are  in  the  nature 

falling under Section 337-A(i) and 337-F(i) P.P.C. It was also pointed out 

that  probable  duration  of  injuries  is  24  hours.  It  is  pertinent  to  observe 

that  the  examination  was  conducted  on  29.12.2016,  on  which  date  she 

was  recovered  from  the  house  of  accused  Raja  Khurram  Ali  Khan  and 

Mst.  Maheen  Zafar.  During  the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-5 

admitted  that  skin  of  children  is  more  sensitive  and  that  the  injuries 

could have been either accidental or homicidal. He also stated during the 

cross-examination that the burn injuries could have been caused because 

of match box accident. The report of Medical Board which conducted the 

examination  of  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  on  09.01.2017  is  Ex.PW-6/A  and 

Ex.PW-6/B.  In  Ex.PW-6/D  which  is  explanation  of  the  earlier  reports,  it 

has been stated that the burn wounds are acute in nature and few weeks 

 
 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

17 

old,  whereas,  the  remaining  wounds  over  body  are  old  healed  scars 

ranging  from  few  weeks  to  several  months.  Likewise,  Ex.PW-6/A  and 

Ex.PW-6/B  in  detail  explain  the  injuries  sustained  by  victim.  The 

photographs  taken by PW-4 which were  duly exhibited as  Ex.PW-4/1 to 

Ex.PW-4/3, shows the conditions of Mst. Tayyaba Bibi.  

17.   

In  view  of  above  facts  and  evidence,  there  is  no  ocular 

account  that  the  injuries  were  caused  to  Tayyaba  Bibi  by  Mst.  Maheen 

Zafar but only statement of PW-4 which has been objected to as hearsay 

and the medical evidence along with the pictures of Mst. Tayyaba Bibi. It 

is  a  general  principle  that  medical  opinion  corroborates  the  ocular 

account.  In  the  instant  case  there  is  no  ocular  account  and  medical 

opinion along with the pictures taken as well as information provided to 

PW-4 by Mst. Tayyaba Bibi and her statement in chief directs infliction of 

injuries  by  Ms.  Maheen  Zafar.  On  the  contrary,  during  the  course  of 

cross-examination Mst. Tayyaba Bibi has denied that she was beaten up 

by Ms. Maheen Zafar. Similarly, PW-5 and PW-6 in cross-examination had 

admitted the possibility of injuries being accidental. In cross-examination 

the  defence  has  sought  to  put  forward  the  case  that  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi 

had  fallen  from  stairs,  however,  the  pictures  taken  and  exhibited  in 

evidence  seriously  cast  doubt  to  such  version,  hence,  evidence  in 

question  is  circumstantial  which  is  always  recorded  as  weak  in  nature. 

However, there are various pronouncements that conviction can also be 

based  on  circumstantial  evidence  if  it  is  consists  a  continuous  chain 

without any missing link. Reliance is placed on “SANGO and another VS 

The State” (2004 P Cr. L J 1479) “Shahid alias Shah VS The State” 

(2002 MLD 1459) and “Muhammad Qadeer VS The State” (2007 YLR 

625).  

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

18 

18.   

In  view  of  the  above  facts  and  evidence,  the  case  of  the 

prosecution is based on medical as well as circumstantial evidence on the 

basis of which it cannot be said that the charges in question have been 

proved beyond reasonable doubt against accused.  

19.   

Ms.  Maheen  Zafar  has  also  been  charged  that  she  extended 

threats of dire consequences to Mst. Tayyaba Bibi, hence, committed an 

offence under Section 506(ii) P.P.C. The prosecution did not produce any 

evidence  which  goes  on  to  show  that  such  was  the  case  and  that  Mst. 

Tayyaba  Bibi  was  intimated,  therefore,  the  prosecution  has  failed  to 

prove the referred charge. 

20.   

Mst.  Maheen  Zafar  and  Raja  Khurram  Ali  Khan  have  been 

charged  for  willfully  assaulting,  ill-treating,  neglected,  abandoned, 

harmed  and  injured  minor  Tayyaba  Bibi,  so  as  to  commit  an  offence 

under  Section  328-A  P.P.C.  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  in  her  statement  in 

examination-in-chief  did  admit  in  cross-examination,  that  she  had  gone 

to the house of Maria  Hayat and had sit  with her late.  PW-2, PW-3 and 

PW-4  all  stated  in  their  examination-in-chief  that  on  26.12.2016  Mst. 

Tayyaba Bibi had been left alone at the residence and was locked out till 

late in the evening. She had not been provided with any food, so, PW-2 

gave her food. It was  also  stated by the  witness that Tayyaba Bibi  was 

shivering with cold and  she tried to contact Raja Khurram  Ali Khan, but 

was unable to reach him. The witness also stated that on 28.12.2016 she 

saw  Tayyaba  Bibi  in  an  injured  state.  Likewise,  Naila  Khizar  PW-3 

affirmed  the  same  facts.  Likewise,  Ms.  Humaria  Haroon,  PW-4,  also 

confirmed  and  stated  that  on  27.12.2016  they  found  Tayyaba  Bibi  in  a 

injured  state  and  that  they  had  giving  brufen  to  her.  Likewise,  PW-12, 

Guldaraz  Khan  stated  that  Tayyaba  Bibi  used  to  ask  for  meal,  while  he 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

19 

was working as a cook in the adjacent house of Raja Khurram Ali Khan. 

He  stated  that  lastly  he  saw  the  minor  Tayyaba  Bibi  in  an  injured 

conditions  and  he  gave  her  food,  tea  and  medicine.  Muhammad  Azam, 

PW-13,  who  is  the  father  of  minor  Tayyaba    Bibi  and  compromised  the 

matter during the course of proceedings which was rejected by this Court 

under the decision was confirmed by the august Apex Court stated that 

as  per  his  information  Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  was  living  voluntarily  at  the 

residence of Raja Khurram Ali Khan, however, it is an admitted position 

that he had not seen her daughter for last many months and as per his 

statement  he  came  to  know  about  her  through  television  news.  The 

defence did not cross-examine PW-2 to PW-4 as to the state of affairs of 

26.12.2016,  hence,  the  statements  of  referred  witnesses  are  un-

rebutted.  Even,  the  statements  of  PW-11,  Guldaraz  Khan,  and  minor 

Tayyaba  Bibi  show  that  from  time  to  time  she  used  to  demand  meals 

from the neighbors. 

21.   

Even, if the defence version is admitted and Mst. Tayyaba Bibi 

received  injuries  from  the  fall,  the  fact  remains  that  she  was  not  given 

proper  medical  treatment  for  the  same.  During  her  cross-examination 

Mst.  Tayyaba  Bibi  did  suggest  that  she  was  taken  to  the  doctor  and 

likewise  in  Ex.D/A  she  also  affirmed  but  the  medical  opinion  did  not 

suggest  the  referred  fact;  even  otherwise  offence  did  not  produce 

anything  to  substantiate  that  she  was  taken  to  the  doctor  or  had  been 

given any medical treatment for the injuries/burns received by her. Raja 

Khurram  Ali  Khan  filed  raport  categorically  stating  that  Tayyaba  was 

working in his house as maid and hence was under the care of both the 

accused.  

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

20 

22.   

Under  Section  328-A  P.P.C.,  whoever  willfully  assaults,  ill-

treats,  neglects,  abandons  or  does  an  act  of  omission  or  commission, 

that  results  in  or  has,  potential  to  harm  or  injure  the  child  by  causing 

physical  or  psychological 

injury  to  him  shall  be  punished  with 

imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than 

one year and may extend upto three years, or with fine which shall not 

be  less  than  twenty  five  thousand  rupees  and  may  extend  upto  fifty 

thousand rupees, or with both.      

23.   

The  evidence  mentioned  above  as  tendered  by  the  parties 

clearly  shows  that  the  accused  persons  neglected  and/  or  willfully 

harmed and abandoned Mst. Tayyaba Bibi which resulted in harm to her 

or had the potential of causing harm hence have committed the offence 

as charged and the prosecution has proved the same beyond shadow of 

doubt.  Both  the  accused  have  admitted  that  Tayyaba  was  working  as 

maid at their house thus was in their care. Raja Khurram Ali Khan being 

the head of the family and Mst. Maheen Zafar being responsible for the 

daily domestic affairs were jointly responsible for looking after and taking 

care  of  the  child  i.e.  Tayyaba  Bibi.  The  version  of  the  accused  that  the 

media  hype  was  created  about  the  incident  and  hence  the  FIR,  is 

inconsequential  in  as  much  as  the  media  hype  has  no  bearing  on  the 

facts leading to the commission of the offence.  

24.   

Raja Khurram Ali Khan has been charged with an offence for 

caused disappearance of minor Tayyaba Bibi so as to commit an offence 

under  Section  201  P.P.C.  No  substantial  evidence  was  tendered  by  the 

prosecution  to  substantiate  the  referred  charge  and  allegation,  hence, 

the same has not been duly proved. 

 
Criminal Original No.01 of 2017 
The State VS Maheen Zafar and another 

21 

25.   

In view of above the prosecution has been able to prove the 

charge  under  section  328-A  PPC,  hence  the  accused  persons  Mst. 

Maheen Zafar and Raja Khurram Ali Khan both are jointly responsible for 

it  and  are  accordingly  convicted.  They  are  acquitted  of  other  charges. 

Raja  Khurram  Ali  Khan  and  Mst.  Maheen  Zafar  are  punished  with 

imprisonment  of  One  year  simple  imprisonment  with  fine  of  Rupees 

50,000/-  each  and  in  default  to  serve  one  month  imprisonment.  The 

accused shall have the benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. The accused are 

on bail hence shall be arrested immediately to serve the sentence.   

   (AAMER FAROOQ) 

                          JUDGE 

Announced in Open Court on 17/04/2018. 

Approved For Reporting. 

                  JUDGE 

*M. Zaheer Janjua* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
            
 
                      
 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
