ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

      W.P.No.1300 of 2019 
Saeen Ullah and others 

VS          

Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and 
Textile and others 

S. No. of order 
/ proceedings 

Date of  order/ 
Proceedings 
23.09.2020  Mr. Tofeeq-ul-Irfan  Raja and Syed  Sardar Hussain, 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

Advocates for the petitioners, 
Mr.  Arshid  Mehmood  Kiani, 
Attorney-General, 
Ms.  Huma  Noreen  Hassan,  Advocate 
respondents No.2 and 3. 

learned  Deputy 

for 

Through 

the 

instant  writ  petition, 

the 

petitioners 

impugn  SRO  No.52(I)/2019,  dated 

15.01.2019  issued  by  the  Federal  Government  in 

exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3(1) of 

the 

Imports  and  Exports  (Control)  Act,  1950. 

Furthermore, the petitioners seek a direction to the 

respondents to extend the time period within which 

import  of  vehicles  could  take  place  under  the 

previous import policy.  

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted 

that in January 2019 (i.e. prior to the issuance of the 

impugned  notification  dated  15.01.2019), 

the 

petitioners  had  purchased  vehicles  in  the  United 

Kingdom  for  import  into  Pakistan  by  taking  the 

benefit  of  the  Import  Policy  Order,  2016  (“the  2016 

Policy”);  that  under  the  2016  Policy,  the  duties  and 

taxes  payable  on  the  vehicles  imported  under  the 

transfer  of  residence,  personal  baggage  or  gift 

scheme  could  be  paid  out  of  the  account  of  any 

person;  that  by  virtue  of  the  impugned  order  dated 

15.01.2019  issued  by  the  Commerce  Division,  the 

2016  Policy  was  amended;  that  as  the  result  of  the 

said  amendment,  the  duties  and  taxes  payable  on 

the  import  of  all  vehicles  to  be  imported  under  the 

transfer  of  residence,  personal  baggage  or  gift 

 
                
 
 
 
  
 
2 

           W.P.No.1300/2019 

scheme  were  to  be  paid  out  of  foreign  exchange 

arranged by Pakistan Nationals themselves or local 

recipient supported by bank encashment certificate 

showing  conversion  of  foreign  remittance  to  local 

currency  in  the  manner  provided  in  the  said  order; 

that the Bills of Lading for the import of the vehicles 

in  question  were 

issued  on  20.01.2019  and 

23.01.2019;  that  the  petitioners  live  abroad  and  do 

not  have  a  bank  account  in  Pakistan;  and  that  an 

unreasonable 

restriction 

as 

to 

the 

purchaser/importer  to  have  paid  for  the  imported 

goods  through  a  bank  account 

in  Pakistan 

is 

unlawful.  Learned  counsel 

for 

the  petitioners 

prayed for the writ petition to be allowed in terms of 

the relief sought therein. 

3. 

On  the  other  hand, 

learned  counsel  for 

respondents  No.2  and  3  submitted 

that 

the 

requirement for the transfer of money from the bank 

account of the person who imports the vehicle in the 

bank account of the same person in Pakistan or his 

relative  was  imposed  by  the Ministry  of Commerce; 

that prior to the issuance of the impugned order, in 

most  cases,  the  purchaser’s  name  used  to  be 

different  from  the  person  from  whose  account  the 

clearance of the duties and taxes was made; that as 

a result of this practice, the bank accounts of other 

persons  had  been  used  as  tool  for  turning  black 

money  into  white;  that  recently  a  scam  surfaced  in 

the  shape  of  fake  bank  accounts  which  caused  the 

Commerce  Division  to  issue  the  impugned  order; 

that  the  impugned  order  is  not  in  contravention  of 

any provision of the Constitution or even the statute; 

that  the  vehicles  imported  by  the  petitioners  would 

be  released  on  the  submission  of  a  certificate 

showing  that  the  remittance  for  the  payment  of 

duties  and  taxes  originate  from  the  account  of  the 

 
 
 
3 

           W.P.No.1300/2019 

Pakistan  National  sending  the  vehicle  from  abroad 

and that the remittance is received in the account of 

a  Pakistani  National  sending  the  vehicle  abroad  or 

in case he does not have an account or his account 

is 

inoperative  or 

in  the  account  of  his  family 

members;  that  the  mere  fact  that  the  petitioners 

purchased  the  vehicles  in  question  prior  to  the 

issuance of the impugned order dated 15.01.2019 is 

immaterial  since  it  is  an  admitted  position  that  the 

Bills of Lading with respect to the import of the said 

vehicles  was  issued  after  the  issuance  of  the  said 

impugned  order;  and  that  according  to  2016  Policy 

issued  through  notification  dated  18.04.2016  (SRO 

345(I)/2016), the import of all goods is allowed from 

worldwide  sources  unless  specified  to  be  banned, 

prohibited or restricted by the said order, provided 

that the amendments brought in the said order from 

time  to  time  shall  not  be  applicable  to  such  import 

where  the  Bill  of  Lading  or  Letters  of  Credit  were 

issued  or  established  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the 

amending  order.  Learned  counsel  for  respondents 

No.2  and  3  prayed  for  the  writ  petition  to  be 

dismissed.  

4. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned 

counsel for the contesting parties and have perused 

the record with their able assistance.   

5. 

The  petitioners  have  brought  on  record 

documents/invoices  to  show  that  the  vehicles  in 

question  were  purchased  prior  to  the  issuance  of 

the 

impugned  order  dated  15.01.2019.  The 

petitioners  rely  on  these  documents  in  furtherance 

of  their  case  that  they  had  a  legitimate  expectation 

to import the said vehicles into Pakistan and to have 

them  released  on  the  payment  of  duties  and  taxes 

regardless  of  the  source  for  the  payment  of  such 

duties or taxes. 

 
 
 
4 

           W.P.No.1300/2019 

6. 

The  petitioners  have  also  brought  on  record 

the  Bills  of  Lading  with  respect  to  the  vehicles  in 

question. All these Bills of Lading were issued after 

the 

issuance  of 

the 

impugned  order  dated 

15.01.2019.  The  petitioners  knew  or  ought  to  have 

known  about  the  said  impugned  order  prior  to  the 

issuance of the Bills of Lading. Since the issuance of 

the  said  impugned  order  was  prior  in  time  to  the 

issuance  of  the  Bills  of  Lading,  the  release  of  the 

imported vehicles was to be in accordance with the 

requirements  and  the  procedure  laid  down  in  the 

impugned  order.  The  question  of  making  the 

provisions  of  the  impugned  order  applicable  with 

retrospective  effect  to  the  release  of  the  vehicles 

imported by the petitioners does not arise since the 

said  amendment  was  made  before  the  issuance  of 

the Bills of Lading.  

7. 

The  2016  Policy  issued  through  notification 

dated  18.04.2016  (SRO  345(I)/2016)  makes  it  clear 

that  the 

import  of  all  goods 

is  allowed  from 

worldwide  sources  unless  specified  to  be  banned, 

prohibited or restricted by the said order, provided 

that the amendments brought in the said order from 

time  to  time  shall  not  be  applicable  to  such  import 

where  the  Bills  of  Lading  or  Letters  of  Credit  were 

issued  or  established  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the 

amending order. Bearing in mind the said provision 

in  the  2016  Policy,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the 

respondents  did  not  commit  any 

illegality  by 

requiring  the  petitioners  to  require  payment  of 

duties and taxes for the release of the said vehicles 

in  accordance  with  the  requirements  stipulated  in 

the impugned order dated 15.01.2019.  

8. 

As regards the challenge by the petitioners to 

the vires of the amendment in the 2016 Policy made 

through  the  impugned  order  dated  15.01.2019,  the 

 
 
 
5 

           W.P.No.1300/2019 

procedural  requirement 

introduced  through  the 

said  amendment  is  for  the  release  of  the  vehicles 

imported  under  the  transfer  of  residence,  personal 

baggage  or  gift  scheme  to  be  made  on  payment  of 

duties  and  taxes  out  of  the  foreign  exchange 

arranged  by  the  Pakistan  Nationals  themselves  or 

the  local  recipient  supported  by  bank  encashment 

certificate  showing 

the  conversion  of 

foreign 

remittance to local currency as under:- 

  “a)    the remittance for payment of duties and taxes 
shall  originate  from  the  account  of  Pakistani 
national sending the vehicle from abroad; and  
b)     the remittance shall either be received in the 
account  of  the  Pakistani  national  sending  the 
vehicle from abroad or, in case, his account is 
nonexistent or inoperative, in the account of his 
Family.” 

9. 

The  said  amendment  was 

introduced  to 

ensure  that  the  person  sending  the  vehicles  from 

abroad  pays  for  the  duties  and  taxes  by  remitting 

the amount from abroad through banking channels. 

If the person sending the vehicles from abroad does 

not have a bank  account in Pakistan,  the impugned 

order makes it possible for the funds to be remitted 

to  the  bank  account  of  his  family  member.  I  do  not 

find  any  illegality  or  irrationality  or  much  less  a 

Constitutional violation in the said requirement. It is 

a step  in  the positive direction and would make the 

purpose  behind  the  import  of  vehicles  under  the 

transfer  of  residence,  personal  baggage  and  gift 

scheme purposeful and meaningful.  

10. 

In view of the above, I do not find any merit in 

this petition, which is accordingly dismissed with no 

order as to costs.  

Qamar Khan 

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE  

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
