ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition No. 84 of 2021 
Isbah Rashid, etc.  
VS
Additional District Judge, Islamabad-West, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of 
parties or counsel where necessary.  

13.01.2021 

Mr.  Mudassir  Latif  Abbasi,  Advocate 
petitioners.  

for 

Through 

the 

instant  writ  petition, 

petitioners impugn orders dated 15.12.2020 and 

23.12.2020, passed by the learned Judge Family 

Court-III,  and  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 

Islamabad-West 

respectively 

whereby 

respondent No.3/father was allowed to meet his 

minor daughter Ayesha Noor/ petitioner No.2 for 

half  an  hour  once  in  a  month  while  appeal 

against  the  order-in-original  was  dismissed 

being not maintainable.  

2.       Facts, essential for adjudication of instant 

writ  petition  are  that  petitioners  filed  suit  for 

recovery  of  dower,  dowry  articles  and 

maintenance  allowance  wherein on  15.12.2020, 

on  the  request  of  respondent  No.3/defendant, 

the  learned  Family  Court  fixed  a  meeting 

schedule in terms noted in Para-1 above. Being 

dissatisfied  with  the  said  schedule,  petitioners 

filed  an  appeal  but  the  same  was  dismissed 

being  not  maintainable,  hence  instant  writ 

petition. 

 
 
 
 
 
                          
 
 
Writ Petition No. 84-2021 

                                         -2- 

3.       According  to  the  learned  counsel,  the 

learned  court  of  first  instance  travelled  beyond 

the  jurisdiction  vested  in  it  by  fixing  meeting 

schedule  as  the  lis  pending  is  with  regard  to 

recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  and  not  a 

guardian  petition;  that  respondent  No.3  has 

already  filed  a  guardian  petition  before  the 

learned Guardian Judge at Rawalpindi where he 

can  ask  for  the  relief  sought  and  that  the 

respondent  No.3  is  chronic  patient  of  skin 

disease and his exposure may cause irreparable 

injury 

to 

the  health  of  minor, 

therefore, 

impugned orders are liable to be  set aside.   

4.       Heard, record perused.  

5.       The 

jurisdiction  and  competence  of 

learned  Judge  Family  Court  cannot  be  read  in 

isolation, for the reason that the learned Family 

Court retains jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 

matters  contained  in  first  schedule  of  the  West 

Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  („Act  of 

1964‟),  that  includes  “custody  of  children” 

against  serial  No.5  with  addition  of  “and  the 

visitation  rights  of  parents  to  meet  them” 

inserted  vide  Ordinance  LV  of  2002.  The 

objection  that  the  Family  Court  does  not  retain 

jurisdiction  to  pass  the  order  impugned  is 

misconceived, hence repelled.  

6.      The  impugned  order,  on  the  face  of  it,  is 

an  interim  order.  It  was  so  observed  by  the 

learned  Appellate  Court  vide  order  dated 

 
 
 
Writ Petition No. 84-2021 

                                         -3- 

23.12.2020  by  referring  Section  14  (3)  of  the 

Act of 1964 which reads as under:- 

“No appeal or revision shall lie against 
an interim order passed by a Family 
Court.” 

7.        The  Act  of  1964,  being  a  special  law, 

explicitly  bars  remedy  of  appeal  or  revision 

against interim order, therefore, when a statute 

specifically excludes a remedy, petition in terms 

of Article 199 of the Constitution cannot be held 

to  be  maintainable  against  the  said  order  as  it 

would amount to circumvent the intention of the 

legislature and frustrate the express provision of 

law.  In  “Dr.  Samina  Anayat  v.  Additional 

District  Judge  and  others”  (2018  MLD  448 

Lahore),  the  Hon‟ble  Lahore  High  Court  was  of 

the view that:- 

“Perusal of section 14(3) of West Pakistan 
Family Court Act, 1964, shows that no appeal 
or revision shall lie against an interim order 
passed  by  a  Family  Court.  The  Act  has 
explicitly  barred  the  remedy  of  appeal  or 
revision against such an order, therefore, in 
case a constitutional petition is entertained 
against  such  an  order,  it  will  amount  to 
circumvent the intention of the legislation and 
to  frustrate  the  express  provision  of  law. 
Reliance  in  this  respect  is  placed  upon 
Muhammad Anwar Khan v. Mst. Yasmin Zafar 
(1987 SCMR 2029), Ms. Quratulain Aleem v. 
Muhammad Rehman Khan and another (2006 
YLR 2604) and Mst. Noor Jehan alias Tasleem 
Begum v. Muhammad Arshad and another 
(1986 CLC 442). Since the impugned order is 
an interlocutory order and against such an 
order  constitution  petition  cannot  be  filed, 
therefore, the petition before this Court is not 
maintainable. The learned Additional District 

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No. 84-2021 

                                         -4- 

Judge has rightly observed in the appeal that 
appeal  or  revision  against  interlocutory 
matters is not maintainable.” 

8.        Another important aspect of the matter is 

that  the  respondent  No.3  is  real  father  and, 

therefore, cannot be restrained to have meeting 

with  his  daughter.  The  apprehension  of  the 

petitioners that the respondent No.3 may cause 

any danger to the health of the minor was also 

addressed by the learned Family Court in terms 

that  the  respondent  No.3  was  allowed  to  meet 

the minor once in a month and that too for just 

half  an  hour  with  further  restriction  to  observe 

social 

distancing 

and 

other 

preventive 

measures/ SOPs. 

9.       There  can  be  no  second  opinion  that  like 

mother,  father  shall  have  equal  right  to  see  his 

minor  children.  The  right  so  bestowed  upon  the 

father cannot be taken away. If a mother retains 

apprehension  of  catching  any  disease  by  the 

minor, it cannot be presumed that a father would 

not think alike and can also not be expected even 

by  this  Court  with  further  expectation  that  the 

father would make every endeavor to protect and 

preserve the health of his minor daughter. In no 

way,  a  father  can  be  restrained  to  meet  his 

daughter  on  the  excuse,  being  pressed  into 

service, as it would not only be considered illegal 

but  unethical  and  oppressive  to  the  right  of  a 

father.  

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No. 84-2021 

                                         -5- 

10. 

In  view  of  above,  it  is  held  that  the 

instant writ petition is not maintainable and also 

lacks  merits,  consequently,  it  is  dismissed  in 

limine. 

Imran          

                 (FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN) 

            JUDGE   

Approved for reporting. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
