Form No.HCJD/C-121
ORDER SHEET
!SLAMABAD  HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAD

W.P No.3373-Q  ot 2014

Mrs. Ambreen  Naseem Khawaia

VS

Federation of Pakistan,  etc.

S.No.  of order
/ Proceeding

Date 
order/
oroceedinq

of

Order  with signature  of Judge,  and that of parties or counsel,
where necessary

23.09.2014 Mr. Tariq Mehmood Jehangiri,  Advocate for

petitioner.
Syed Husnain  lbrahim Kazmi,leared DAG.
M/s Haseeb Muhammad  Ghaudhry  and Yousaf M.
Qureshi,  learned Standing Counsels.
Kaiser, S.l.
Dr. Babar  Awan, ASG for Respondent  No.S  & 6.

By way of filing instant Constitutional  Petition  under

Article  199 of the Constitution of lslamic Republic of Pakistan,

Petitioner,  Mrs. Ambreen Naseem  Khawaja,  seeks quashment  of

FIR No.62 dated 05.09.2013  offence  u/s 363 PPC, registered  at

P.S Women, lslamabad, on the grounds that Petitioner and
Respondent  Nos.S & 6 are close  relatives and cousins, the

Petitioner came to Pakistan from  USA in the month of June 2013

and stayed  in the house of Respondent  Nos.s & 6 and with their

free will and consent,  accord  and permission  took  the minor namely

zyam  Khawaja  real nephew of petitioner to USA, the Respondent

Nos.S & 6 dropped  the Petitioner  and the minor at the Airport'  That

when the son met with  his father  in USA, he refused  to come back
and opted  to study in USA; therefore,  brother of Petitioner Mr'

Farrukh obtained  an injunctive order regarding the removal of the

minor  from USA Court on 26.09.2013  and this fact was very much
in  the knowledge of  the Respondent No'S and his
daughter/Respondent  No.6. That Respondent No.6 filed a petition

in the USA Court for vacation  of stay and vide order  dated

WPNo.3373-Q  ot2014

2

23.08.2013, injunctive  order was vacated by the USA Court and

visitation rights were provided  to the mother.  But Respondent  No'S
moved application for registration of FIR on 29.08.2013 by

concealment  of facts  regarding  pendency  of litigation  in USA  Court'
That the custody  of the minor was handed  over to the
mother/Respondent No.6 vide order dated 10.09.2013  by the USA

Court and the minor has been brought to Pakistan  and presently

living with his mother/Respondent  No.6. That petition  for dissolution

of marriage  filed by the brother of the Petitioner is pending in USA

court, whereas suit for dissolution of marriage  filed by Respondent

No.6 is pending  before the Judge Family  court, lslamabad.  That

the parties  are close relatives and just to settle the score upon a

family dispute, the impugned FIR has been registered.  That

Petitioner  is a respectable lady and cannot  think to commit any act
of criminal nature and through this cryptic device she has been
badly  insulted and defamed in the family  and her in laws' That
even, it is a fit case for initiating  the proceedings  U/S 182  PPC
against  the Respondent No.S  who willfully  lodged a false report by

misrepresentation  and concealment  of facts'

theotherhand,Iearnedcounselforcomplainant,Dr.
Babar Awan,  contended that the lowa District court for Scott
county, assert temporary and emergency  jurisdiction pursuant  to
lowa code section 5988.204  with the purpose of ordering the
return  of the child to his mother  and his state  of habitual  residence'
which  is Pakistan. And decline jurisdiction to make a final custody
decision because it is an inconvenient  forum. That the FIR against

petitionerhasbeenregisteredunderPakistaniLawandinstant
petition  for quashment of FIR is not entertainable as the same has

beenfiledthroughattorneyi.eMs.SiddiqaNaseemKhawaja.The

propercourse/remedyforpetitioneristofirstappearbeforethe

W.P No.3373-Q  ot 2014

J

competent  court  of law for grant  of bail in her favour and join the
proceedings of the case. That the case is under investigation and
till completion  of the same the provision of section  561-A, Cr'P'C

donotattractandFlRcannotbequashed'LearnedDAGand
standing counsel supported the contentions of learned counsel for

complainantandprayedfordismissalofinstantPetition.

3.  Arguments heard.  Record  perused'

+ 

First  aspect  which this court has to examine is that, whether

thequashmentofFlRcanbesoughtthroughspecialpowerof
attorney without  joining  investigation  and applying for bail from

competent  court of criminal jurisdiction?

lthasbeenheldbytheHon'bleSupremeCourtofPakistan

incasetitledPRoVlNcEoFEASTPAK|STANANDANoTHER

VSHIRALALAGARWALA,reportedasPLDlgT0S.c399thata
son comes within the definition  of ,,Aggrieved  person"  and could

moveforquashmentofproceedings.Inanothercasereportedas
1998  PCr, L J 1486 titled  Muhammad  Ashafaq alias CHIEF and  18
others VS The State  (The case of Altaf Hussain,  leader of MQM)
the Hon,ble Sindh High Court, Karachi observed that Appeal is a
fundamental  right and is a continuation  of proceedings,  when a

personcanbetriedinabsentia,thereisnoreasonastowhyhis

appealcouldnotbeheardassuch.Moreover,ithasbeenobserved

bytheHon'blePeshawarHighCourt'Peshawarinacaselaw

reportedasPLDlgg0Peshawarlg2,titledAFTABAHMADKHAN
SHERPAO VS THE GOVERNOR,  N.W.F.P AND OTHERS' thAt

underArticlelggoftheConstitutionoflslamicRepublicof
Pakistan,  the High  Court is not bound  by any precedent in
exercising  such discretion  as each case entails its own objective

conditionsandthereliefisgrantedorrefusedonthebasisofsuch

W.P  No.3373-Q  ol 2014

4

conditions. Therefore,  by placing  reliance on above quoted
judgments and keeping in view the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the instant case,  this court is of the view that the

attorney  Ms. Siddiqa Naseem  Khawaja  real mother  of petitioner  Ms'
Ambreen  Naseem Khawaja is competent  to file proceedings  for

quashment  of FIR registered  against  her daughter  in her absence'

f;sofarasthequestionofcompetenceoftheHighCourtfor
quashment of FIR is concerned,  it is observed that under section

561-A,  Cr'PC, High Court  vested  with inherent powers.  The above

section provides  three situations  where  the High court can exercise

its inherent  powers/jurisdiction,  the same are as under:-

a)

b)

c)

to give  effect to any order under the Code'
to prevent abuse  oftheprocess  of any Couft, and
Or otherwise  to secure the ends of iustice'

lthasbeenheldbythesuperiorcourtsoftheC.ountry
through various pronouncements  that, High Court, in exercise  cf
above  conferred powers  would be justified to quash  any

proceedings,ifitfindsthatcontinuationoftheSamewouldamount
to abuse the process of law or quashing of these proceedings
wourd otherwise  serve the ends of justice. The High court under  its
inherent  powers  keeping in view the facts and circumstances  of the
case,  if comes to the conclusion that process is being used as an

instrumentbyacomplainanttoharassanypersonneedlessly,can

quashtheproceedingstomeettheendsofjusticeandtoprevent
the abuse of process of law because if such  proceedings are
allowed  to continue, the same would  bring injustice and will cause

miscarriageofjusticeinsteadofadvancingthecauseofjustice.

W.P No 3373-Q of 2014

5

Judgments  on the issue  provide following situations  wherein

6, 
discretion of exercising  the authority  of quashment  of FIR has been

approved;

(t) 

Registration of FIR by Police/Authorities  having no iurisdiction  to

register the same'
From  the admitted  contents of FlR, no offence  is constituted;

(ii) 
(iii)  From  contents  of FIR matter purely  is of civil  nature'
Even in the judgments  through which exercise of such
discretion  has been dis-approved  "door of  extraordinary
circumstance"  has been kept open.  Guidance  in this regard  has

been  borrowed  from 1996 SCMR 186, 2006  scMR 276& PLJ 2011

sc 1932.

ln present  case it is brought  on the record that the custody  of

7. 
the r,,,:'3r was handed  over to the mother/Respondent  No.6 vide
order dated 10.09.2013  by the USA Court and the minor has been

broughttoPakistanandpresentlylivingwithlris
mother/Respondent No.6.  Petition  for dissolution of marriage filed

by the brother of the Petitioner is pending in USA Court, whereas
suit for dissolution  of marriage  filed by Respondent  No.6  is pending  '
before the Judge Family  court, lslamabad.  Moreover, the parties
are close relatives  and it seems  that just to settle the score upon a'
family dispute, the impugned  FIR has been  registered  against a
lady member  of the family.  Unfortunately, trend to settle the civil
disputes by exercising pressure of criminal proceedings is on high,
which is nothing  but exploitation.  The High court being custodian  of
the fundamental  rights  of the citizens is under  obligation to provide
shield against any invasion made on the guaranteed constitutional
rights and protect the subject from discrimination, exploitation'
colourable  exercise of authority, bolted actions,  malafide and'

stinking  Proceedings.

W P No 3373-Q of2014

6

Thus for the foregoing  reasons by placing reliance on case

laws reported  as PLD  1991 SC 575, titled Zahid  lqbal VSThe State,

1972 SCMR 194,  titled Muhammad  Aslam and other VS The State,
titled  Faisal  Jameel  VS'
2OO7 MLD  355, 

The State, instant petition is allowed. lmpugned FIR is declared  to
be illegal, unlawful,  unprecedented,  Sham, result of colourable
exercise of authority, an abuse  of process of law, tainted  with
malafide, ulterior motives, a  device of exploitation  without
jurisdiction  and outcome  of arbitrary  exercise  of authority,  and

same  is herebY quashed.

(s

JUDGE

Announced in open Court  on tb- t)- 2of1

Approved for RePorting.

"Waoar  Ahmed"
Alr4 s/4WA,l
+

