Form No: HCJD/C 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Case No: Criminal Appeal No. 186 of 2015 

Malik Qamar Hussain 
VS 
The State and another  

Appellant by:  

Jan Muhammad Khan, Advocate.  

State by: 

Malik Awais Haider, State Counsel. 

Complainant by: 

Syed  Ishfaq  Hussain  Naqvi  and  Syed 
Sumera Naqvi, Advocates.  

Date of Hearing: 

23.04.2019 

AAMER  FAROOQ,  J.-  On  the  complaint  of  one  Kashif  ur 

Rehman,  an  FIR  was  lodged  against  the  appellant  Malik  Qamar 

Hussain and  Sohail Qureshi co-accused under  Sections 337(J), 376 

&  34  PPC  with  Police  Station  Kohsar, 

Islamabad 

(FIR 

No.125/2011).  Section  302  PPC  was  subsequently  added.  In  the 

referred FIR it was alleged that the said accused persons raped and 

killed the complainant’s sister namely Huma Rehman. It was further 

alleged that the complainant and his sister came to know about it as 

they  received  phone  call  from  the  cellular  phone  of  the  deceased 

which was made by the appellant wherein he informed that she is in 

Benazir  Hospital,  Rawalpindi.  The  deceased  was  treated  at  the 

referred  Hospital  and  was  subsequently  discharged  but  died  on 

09.07.2011. The appellant and his co-accused were tried in the said 

case.  During  the  course  of  trial  Sohail  Qureshi  (co-accused)  was 

acquitted  due  to  compromise  with  the  complainant.  The  appellant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
2 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

was  convicted  of  the  charges  and  was  awarded  life  imprisonment. 

Hence, this appeal.  

2. 

Learned counsel for the appellant  inter alia  contended that 

there  is  no  proof  that  the  death  of  deceased  Huma  Rehman  was 

caused by the appellant; that there are material discrepancies in the 

evidence  led  by  the  prosecution  and  on  the  basis  thereof  the 

appellant could not have been convicted; that the star witness of the 

prosecution PW-1 Muhammad Masood  who stated that on the date 

of  occurrence  he  saw  Huma  Rehman  (deceased)  leaving  with  the 

appellant,  whereas  there  is  no  proof  that  the  referred  witness  was 

employee  of  NGO  where the deceased was working; that the sister 

of the complainant who allegedly received the phone call  from the 

appellant was not called as a witness; that the CDR of Mst. Noreen 

and mobile phone of the deceased  were not produced in the Court; 

that  the  operator  who  told  the  complainant  that  the  deceased  left 

with the appellant was also not called as a witness. Learned counsel 

further  contended  that  as  per  story  of  the  prosecution  the  deceased 

left  with  the  appellant  at  about  6/6:30  pm  whereas  the  phone  call 

was  received  allegedly  at  about  7:00  pm  and  the  distance  between 

the  office  situated  at  Sector  F-6/1,  Islamabad  and  the  Benazir 

Hospital Rawalpindi is more than one hour, hence it is not possible 

that  the  appellant  could  have  raped  and  administered  poison  to  the 

deceased. It was further contended that the testimony of Dr. Nasreen 

Butt PW-6 cannot be relied upon inasmuch as it is a verbatim copy 

of the initial medical report wherein she has opined that the deceased 

 
 
 
 
3 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

was  raped  and  the  semen  was  present.  It  was  submitted  that  it  is 

medically  acknowledged  that  semen  remains  in  the  body  for  only 

few days whereas autopsy was conducted after almost 4/5 months of 

the  alleged  rape.  It  was  also  submitted  that  in  the  Chemical 

Examiner’s  Report  Ex.P-Q  traces  of  tranquillizer  belonging  to 

benzodiazepine group was detected; that the case of the prosecution 

is that the same was administered through 7up but it was pointed out 

that the amount of drugs required to kill a person cannot be in one 

drink and needs much more quantity. Learned counsel also pointed 

out  that  the  Chemical  Examiner  has  not  opined  about  the  quantity. 

Moreover,  it  was  submitted  that there  were  traces of semen  but  no 

mark of violence and it is an admitted position that the appellant was 

in Nikah with the deceased but the complainant did not approve of 

the same. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  submitted  that  the  evidence  in  question  is 

unseen  and  is  based  on  circumstantial  evidence;  that  in  order  to 

procure conviction the prosecution had to prove beyond the shadow 

of doubt that the appellant committed the initial act which led to the 

death of the deceased and the chain of causation was not broken. It 

was further submitted that under the facts and circumstances there is 

no case against the appellant. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  inter  alia    contended 

that the story of the prosecution is unambiguous to the effect that the 

appellant picked the deceased Huma Rehman on 25.02.2011 at about 

06:00  pm  from  her  place  of  work  and  committed  rape  and  then 

 
 
 
 
4 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

killed  her;  that  he  dropped  Huma  Rehman  at  Benazir  Hospital, 

Rawalpindi  at  about  07:00  pm.  It  was  further  contended  that  the 

cause of death is brain damage due to poison and both the appellant 

and the deceased were seen last together by a natural witness. It was 

further submitted that the conviction can be based on the testimony 

of even a single witness however, in the instant case there is ample 

circumstantial  evidence  to  corroborate  PW-1.  It  was  further 

submitted that the circumstances and the evidence take the matter to 

the neck of the accused; that the accused has badly failed to furnish 

the  plausible  explanation;  that  the  report  of  Chemical  Examiner 

shows  that  the  poison  was  detected;  that  there  is  no  motive  of  the 

complainant  to  implicate  the  appellant  falsely;  that  no  discrepancy 

has been found in the medical evidence. 

5. 

Learned State Counsel adopted the arguments of the learned 

counsel for the complainant.  

6. 

Arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 

heard and the evidence was appraised with their able assistance. 

7. 

The  prosecution  in  support  of  their  case  led  inter  alia 

evidence which comprises 12 witnesses and also various exhibits. In 

this behalf the  Guard/Chawkidar  Muhammad Masood  at the place 

of work of the deceased appeared as PW-1; the complainant as PW-

2,  Doctor  Nasreen  Butt  who  conducted  the  autopsy  as  PW-6,  Dr. 

Sherzad  Farooq  Medical  Officer  as  PW-9.  Dr.  Fazal-e-Wahi 

appeared as DW-1 and the police officials appeared as other PWs. In 

this  behalf  the  Investigation  Officers  appeared  as  PW-10  and  11. 

 
 
 
 
5 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

Chemical Examiner Report dated 11.04.2011 was exhibited as Ex.P-

Q,  semen  report  Ex.P-R,  Chemical  Examiner  Report  dated 

05.11.2012  Ex.P-X,  DNA  report  Ex.P-E. In addition the  MLR  was 

exhibited as Ex.P-M, recovery memo of mobile phone record of the 

deceased  Ex.P-K,  Postmortem  report  Ex.P-D,  pointation  memo  as 

Ex.P-C,  FIR  No.125/2011  Ex.P-O,  Inquest  report  Ex.P-S,  Pictorial 

diagram  Ex.D-D,  Casuality  Department  entry  slip  Ex.D-E,  C.T. 

Scan Ex.D-F. As noted above, the case of the prosecution is that the 

appellant  picked  up  Huma  Rehman  (deceased)  from  her  place  of 

work  on  25.02.2011  at  about  06:00  pm    and  then  dropped  her  in 

unconscious condition at 07:00 pm at Benazir Hospital, Rawalpindi; 

that the fact that she had been admitted in the referred Hospital was 

intimated  to  the  complainant  and  his  family  by  the  appellant  using 

Huma’s cellular phone. The FIR was lodged on 14.03.2011 whereas 

the death of the deceased took place on 09.07.2011 and Section 302 

PPC was added. The evidence is unseen. The prosecution has relied 

heavily upon the statement of Guard/Chawkidar namely Muhammad 

Masood  PW-1.  However,  the  prosecution  did  not  tender  any 

document  to  show  that  the  Guard/Chawkidar  was  employee  of  the 

said Company. Moreover, PW-1 has stated that usually the appellant 

picked and dropped the deceased and even on the day of occurrence 

he had dropped her in the morning and picked her up at about 06:00 

pm. Contrarily, the complainant Kashif ur Rehman has stated that he 

dropped Huma Rehman in the morning on the day of occurrence. He 

also  testified  that  Mst.  Noreen,  complainant’s  sister  informed  him 

 
 
 
 
6 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

about Huma  Rehman  deceased being admitted in Benazir Hospital, 

Rawalpindi however, said Mst. Noreen never appeared as witness on 

behalf of the prosecution. Moreover, he also testified that the phone 

call was received by Mst. Noreen from the appellant but the phone 

was  of  Huma  Rehman.  The  call  data  record  of  the  cellular  phone 

was also not exhibited in evidence. Apparently the appellant and the 

deceased were in Nikah; though the prosecution did not mention the 

same  however,  in  cross-examination  the  question  was  put  to  the 

Investigation  Officer  PW-11  that  alongwith  the  challan  copy  of 

Nikahnama  is  appended  and  the  same  was  also  confronted  and 

turned  out  to  be  correct.  In  light  of  the  above  discrepancies  the 

evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 is not confidence inspiring.  

8. 

The  medical  report  does  suggest  that  there  were  traces  of 

drug  benzodiazepine  but  there  is  nothing  regarding  the  quantity. 

Even  the  medical  witnesses  i.e.  PW-6,  PW-9  and  DW-1  have  not 

opined anything about the quantity which is required to cause death 

of a person in case of overdose of the said tranquillizer. It is also the 

report  that  there  were  traces  of  semen  which  is  borne  from  the 

Chemical Examiner Report dated 11.03.2011 Ex.P-R; however, PW-

6  and  PW-9  both  have  testified  that  there  were  no  traces  of  any 

marks  of  violence  on  the body  of the deceased.  The Medico  Legal 

Officer PW-6 testified that she referred twelve samples for chemical 

examination but only two were remitted by the police authorities and 

there  is  no  explanation  for  not  sending  the  others.  The  subsequent 

reports  were  verbatim  copies  of  the  earlier  ones.  PW-6  in  her 

 
 
 
 
7 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

opinion  in  examination-in-chief  has  stated  that  there  was  semen 

present in the vaginal swabs  taken which is against all the medical 

principles on the subject inasmuch as it is an admitted position that 

the  semen  and  the  traces  thereof  remain  present  only  for  few  days 

(3-5  days)  whereas  the  autopsy  was  conducted  after  almost  4/5 

months of the alleged occurrence.  

9. 

Undoubtedly, as per the autopsy report the cause of death is 

damage  to  the  brain  due  to  abovementioned  tranquillizer  however, 

there  is  nothing  on  record  to  establish  that  the  said  drug  was 

administered  by  the  appellant.  Reliance  by  the  prosecution  on  the 

testimony  of  Nadeem  Mehmood  CW-11  that  he  saw  the  appellant 

and  the  deceased  together  at  Benazir  Hospital,  Rawalpindi    is  also 

not confidence inspiring inasmuch as he had not proved that he was 

there  and  admitted  in  cross-examination  that  he  left    without  the 

medical examination of his children for which purpose he had gone. 

It  is  also  noticeable  that  the  report  of  DNA  is  also  negative.  The 

prosecution is relying upon various judgments to indicate that there 

were traces of drugs and that the deceased had been administered the 

poison.  There  is  no  cavil  that  the  chemical  report  and  even  the 

defence has not cast doubt on the veracity  of the same but the fact 

that it was administered by the appellant has not been established by 

the  prosecution.  The  testimony  of  PW-3  Abdur  Rehman  was 

discarded  by  this  Court  vide  order  dated  05.06.2015  in  Criminal 

Revision No.21/2015 titled “Malik Qamar Hussain v. The State and 

 
 
 
 
8 

Criminal Appeal No.186 of 2015 

others”.  Hence,  the  admission  by 

the  appellant  purportedly 

regarding the place of occurrence remained un-established. 

10. 

In view of the above, the prosecution has failed to establish 

that it was the act of administration of poison by the appellant which 

led to the death of the deceased Huma Rehman and the causal link 

between  the  initial  act  and  the  death  remained  unbroken.  As  noted 

above it is an unseen occurrence and the evidence has to be in such a 

chain  that  from  the  initial  act  till  the  end,  the  chain  should  be 

unbroken however, in the instant case the prosecution failed to lead 

evidence  to  establish  that  the  death  of  the  deceased  was  caused  by 

the appellant.  

11. 

For the foregoing reasons, the instant appeal is allowed and 

the impugned judgment dated 11.11.2015 is set-aside; consequently, 

appellant is acquitted of the charges levelled against him in case FIR 

No.125/2011 dated 14.03.2011. The appellant be released forthwith 

if  not  required  in  any  other  case.  Case  property,  if  any,  be  also 

disposed of in accordance with law.  

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
          JUDGE 

  Announced in open Court on the 19th  day of July, 2019 

*M.Naveed* 

JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
