ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.1563/2020 
Asim Sabir Qureshi 
VS
Additional District Judge (East), Islamabad and others.  

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Hasan Rashid Qamar, Advocate.  

Respondents No. 3 & 4 by:  Mr. Muhammad Ramzan, Advocate 

alongwith respondents No. 3 &4.  

Date of Decision: 

18.02.2021 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner has assailed the judgment and decree dated 17.07.2019, passed 

by learned Senior Civil Judge (Guardian) (East), Islamabad, whereby suit 

for  Recovery  of  Maintenance,  Dower  Amount,  Dowry  Articles  and 

Personal  Belongings  filed  by  the  respondents  No.  3  &  4  have  been 

decreed in their favour. Against the said judgment and decree, petitioner 

has  filed  an  appeal  before  learned  Additional  District  Judge-VI  (East), 

Islamabad,  whereby  the  same  has  been  dismissed  and  maintained  the 

decision of the Trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 23.10.2019. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  petitioner 

Asim  Sabir  Qureshi  entered  into  marriage  with  Mst.  Javeria  Riaz  on 

10.11.2012  against  dower  of  Rs.  500,000/-,  whereafter  parties  started 

living  together  and  they  have  been  blessed  with  one  daughter  namely 

Feeha  Asim  minor  born  on  14.11.2013,  however,  both  the  parties  lived 

together  till  November,  2013,  whereafter  respondents  No.  3  &  4  have 

been  deserted  from  the  house  of  the  petitioner.  The  respondent 

No.3/Mst.  Javeria  Riaz  has  filed  a  suit  for  Recovery  of  Maintenance, 

Dower  Amount,  Dowry  Articles  and  Personal  Belongings  against  the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.1563/2020  

        Page 2 

petitioner.  On  the  other  hand,  petitioner  has  also  filed  a  suit  for 

Restitution of Conjugal Rights against respondent No.3. Respondent No.3 

after  receiving  the  notice  from  the  Court  has  also  filed  second  suit  for 

dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of  Khulla  against  the  petitioner, 

which  was  decreed  on  28.10.2017  in  terms  of  Section  10(4)  of  Family 

Courts  Act,  1964, whereas the suit for maintenance and dower has been 

decreed  by  the  Judge  Family  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

17.07.2019,  whereby  it  was  declared  that  respondent  No.3/Mst.  Javeria 

Riaz is entitled to receive past maintenance at the rate of Rs. 15,000/- per 

month  w.e.f.  November,  2013  till  her  Iddat  period  and  respondent 

No.4/Feeha Riaz is also entitled to receive maintenance at the rate of Rs. 

25,000/-  per  month  w.e.f  November,  2013  till  her  legal  entitlement  with 

10%  annual  increase.  At  the  same  time,  Judge  Family  Court  has  also 

awarded  decree  for  dowry  articles  as  per  list  Ex.P-5/1-6.  Petitioner 

feeling  aggrieved  with  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the  learned  Family 

Court  has  filed  the  appeal  before  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 

whereby the decree has been maintained vide judgment and decree dated 

23.10.2019, hence this writ petition.  

3. 

At the very outset, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that 

petitioner confines his claim only to the extent of maintenance allowance 

awarded to Mst. Javeria Riaz/respondent No.3/ex-wife of the petitioner 

and the other claims qua the maintenance of the minor as well as dowry 

articles have been conceded by the petitioner and he has no dispute over 

it.  He  further  contends  that  both  the  Courts  below  have  not  considered 

the  claim  of  the  petitioner,  whereby  the  petitioner  has  filed  the  suit  for 

Restitution  of  Conjugal  Rights  in  order  to  resolve  the  dispute  with  

Mst.  Javeria  Riaz/respondent No.3 and as such the gesture extended by 

the  petitioner  has  to  be  resolved  in  his  favour  and  respondent  No.3 

 
W.P. No.1563/2020  

        Page 3 

would be declared disobedient wife, who is not entitled for maintenance 

awarded by the  Judge  Family Court w.e.f. November, 2013 till expiry of 

Iddat period after passing of the decree.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  alongwith  respondents  No.  3  &  4 

contend that the petitioner has never maintained the respondent No.3 in 

any manner, even the maintenance fixed by the learned Trial Court to the 

extent of minor has not been paid regularly through the banking channel. 

It  has  been  contended  by  respondent  No.3/Mst.  Javeria  Riaz  that  she  is 

Doctor  by  profession  and  the  entire  dowry  articles  awarded  by  the 

Family Court are still in possession and custody of the petitioner and as 

such  respondents  have  been  dragged  into  this  litigation  without  any 

justiciable reasons. She further submits that despite  the desertion by the 

petitioner in November, 2013, she filed a suit for dissolution of marriage 

after  four  (04)  long  years  in  order  to  reconcile  the  matter,  but  petitioner 

was not interested to settle the family bond, even he has not paid a single 

penny to them.        

5. 

6. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  is  aggrieved  with  the 

concurrent  findings  of the  learned Family Court as well  as learned First 

Appellate  Court,  whereby  the  suit  for  Recovery  of  Maintenance,  Dowry 

Articles  and  Maintenance  of  the  minor  has  been  decreed  concurrently. 

The  respondents  No.  3  &  4,  plaintiffs  of  the  suit  filed  their  claim  before 

learned  Family  Judge  mainly  on  the  ground  that  they  were  thrown  out 

from the abode in the month of November, 2013 by the petitioner and he 

being husband and father of the minor is not paying the maintenance till 

now,  even  a  dowry  articles  list  has  been  placed  on  record  referred  as 

Ex.P-5/1-6.  The  Judge  Family  Court  has  passed  the  decree  of 

maintenance  in  favour  of  respondents  No.  3  &  4  while  considering  the 

 
W.P. No.1563/2020  

        Page 4 

entire  evidence  and  as  such  there  is  no  denial  to  the  proposition  that 

Father is responsible to maintain the minor in all circumstances and same 

is the case with husband, who is responsible to look after the affairs of the 

wife  and  it  is  his  responsibility  to  maintain  her  in  all  manners.  The 

petitioner  at  the  very  outset  conceded  the  claim  of  respondents  to  the 

extent of handing over the dowry articles referred in the list as well as the 

maintenance  of  the  minor  Mst.  Feeha  Riaz,  who  was  born  from  this 

wedlock, therefore, the only question left for determination of this Court 

in  judicial  review  is  to  the  extent  of  maintenance  of  respondent 

No.3/Mst.  Javeria  Riaz  (ex-wife),  who  has  filed  a  suit  for  dissolution  of 

marriage on the basis of Khulla, as a result whereof, the suit was decreed 

vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  28.10.2017,  passed  by  Judge  Family 

Court  (East),  Islamabad  and  as  such  there  is  no  denial  to  the  fact  that 

respondent  No.3  was  deserted  by  the  petitioner  in  the  month  of 

November,  2013  and  till  the  passing  of  the  decree  of  dissolution  of 

marriage,  she  was  maintaining  herself at  her own without  any payment 

on the part of maintenance by the petitioner, although the petitioner has 

taken  a  categorical  stance  before  this  Court  that  he  had  filed  suit  for 

Restitution  of  Conjugal  Rights  to  reconcile  the  matrimonial  relationship 

with the  respondent  No. 3  at that  time, this aspect  further demonstrates 

that if the petitioner is interested to reconcile the matrimonial bond then 

he  was  liable  to  pay  the  maintenance  at  all  costs  and  as  such  the 

respondent  No.3  could  not  be  declared  as  disobedient  wife,  who  has 

highlighted the conduct of the petitioner, in which, she would not be able 

to  live  in  the  matrimonial  relationship  and  as  such  her  entire  claim  of 

dissolution  of  marriage  is  based  upon  equality  attributed  to  the 

petitioner.  In  these  circumstances,  the  petitioner 

is  not  able  to 

demonstrate any illegality in the concurrent findings of the Courts below.  

 
W.P. No.1563/2020  

        Page 5 

7. 

 The scope of judicial review in such type of cases is very limited as 

such  no  illegality  has  been  observed  as  the  Trial  Court  as  well  as  First 

Appellate  Court  has  rightly  adjudicated  upon 

the  question  of 

maintenance of respondent No.3 within four corners of law. 

8. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  writ  petition  is 

misconceived  and  same  is  hereby  DISMISSED.  However,  respondent 

No.3  may  receive  the  Dowry  Articles  as  per  list  Ex.P5/1-6  through  any 

Authorized  person  as  and  when  she  desires,  as  the  petitioner  has 

conceded  the  same  before  this  Court  and  further  contends  that  the  said 

dowry articles are lying at his home in Quetta. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

                                 JUDGE 

RAMZAN 

 
 
 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
