ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 
WRIT PETITION NO. 878 OF 2022 

TANVEER ALI CHAUDHRY 
VS    
ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE ISLAMABAD (EAST) and others 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

: 

: 

Ms. Saira Khalid Rajput, Advocate. 

Mr. Sajjad Akbar Abbasi, Advocate. 
(for Respondents No.3 to 6) 

Date of Hearing   
SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:-    

: 

06-06-2023. 

1. 

Through  the  instant  writ  petition under Article 199 of the  Constitution 

of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  the  Petitioner  [Tanveer  Ali 

Chaudhry]  (“Petitioner/Husband”)  has  assailed  (i)  the  Judgment  and 

Decree dated 22-09-2021  (“Impugned Judgment and Decree I”) passed by 

the  Respondent  No.2 [Family Judge, Islamabad (East), Islamabad  (“Family 

Court”)]  and  (ii)  the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  11-12-2021  (“Impugned 

Judgment  and  Decree  II”)  passed  by  the  Respondent  No.1  [Additional 

District Judge, Islamabad (East) (“Appellate Court”)] in appeal filed by the 

Petitioner  against  the Impugned Judgment and Decree I.  

2. 

The brief facts as per the Memo of Petition are that Respondent No.3 

[Mst.  Shehla  Zafar]  (“Respondent  No.3/Wife”),  and  Respondent  No.4 

[Saim Ali], Respondent No.5 [Shavana Tanvir], and Respondent No. 6 [Mst. 

Manahil]  (hereinafter  Respondents  No.  4,  5,  and  6  are  collectively  referred 

to  as  the  “Minors”)  filed  a  Suit for Dissolution of Marriage on the basis of 

Khulla,  Recovery  of  Dower,  Maintenance  Allowance  and  Dowry  Articles 

(“Subject  Suit”).    The  Petitioner/Husband  filed  his  written  statement 

whereafter  the  Subject  Suit was fixed for pre-trial reconciliation proceedings 

which  failed.    As  such  the  Subject  Suit  was  decreed  to  the  extent  of 

dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  basis  of  Khulla  on  18.12.2020.    Thereafter 

issues  were  framed  by  the  learned  Family  Court.    After  recording  of 

evidence,  the  learned  Family  Court  decreed  the  Suit  of  the  Respondents 

No.3  to  6  vide  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I,  whereby  the 

Petitioner/Husband  was  directed  to  pay  Rs.15,000/-  maintenance to each of 

the  Minors  with  effect  from  12-10-2020 

till 

their  legal  entitlement; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rs.10,000/-  per  month  to  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  as  maintenance  with 

effect  from  19-05-2020  till completion of her iddat period; and to return the 

dowry  articles  to  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  or their value at Rs.2,96,935/-; 

and  that  all  the  above  amounts  shall  be  paid  with  10%  annual  increase  till 

realization. 

3. 

Aggrieved  of 

the 

Impugned 

Judgment  and  Decree 

I, 

the 

Petitioner/Husband  filed  appeal  before  the  learned  Appellate  Court.    The 

learned  Appellate  Court  after  hearing  the  parties,  partially  allowed  the 

appeal  and  modified  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I  vide  the 

Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II  by  holding  that  the  Respondent 

No.3/Wife  is  entitled  to  recover  dowry  articles  from  the Petitioner/Husband 

as  per  list Exh.P3 or the value thereof as mentioned against each article with 

deduction  at  the  rate  of  20%  on  account  of  depreciation  except  articles 

mentioned  at  Serial  No.11,  16,  10,  11,  12,  and  18.    Whereas,  the  Minors 

were  allowed  maintenance at the rate of Rs.15,000/- per month each till their 

legal  entitlement  with  10%  annual  increase  and  maintenance  to  the 

Respondent No.3/Wife at the rate of Rs.10,000/- with 10% annual  increase. 

4. 

Being  aggrieved  and  dissatisfied  by  the  Impugned  Judgments  & 

Decrees  I  and  II  passed  by  the  learned  Family  Court  and learned Appellate 

Court  the  Petitioner/Husband  preferred  the  instant  writ  petition  to the extent 

of  issue  No.1  whereby  it  was  directed  to  pay  maintenance  to  the Minors at 

Rs.15,000/-  per  month  per  head  with  effect  from  12-10-2020  till  their  legal 

entitlement;  Rs.10,000/-  per  month  to  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  as 

maintenance  with  effect from 19.05.2020 till completion of her  iddat period; 

and  issue  No.3  that  all  the  above  amounts  shall  be  paid  with  10%  annual 

increase till  realization.   

5. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner/Husband  submitted  that  the 

claim  made  by  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  that  she  was  deserted  by  the 

Petitioner/Husband  on  19-05-2020  vide  her  plaint  filed  in  the  Subject  Suit 

was  categorically  denied  by  the  Petitioner/Husband  vide  his  written 

statement  despite  which  no  evidence  was led by  the Respondent No.3/Wife 

to  establish  her  claim.      Yet  both  the  learned  Family  Court  as  well  as  the 

learned  Appellate  Court  did  not  consider  the  effect  of  such  failure  and  no  

finding  has  been  given  as  to  whether  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  was 

deserted  /  ousted  by  the  Petitioner/Husband  or  whether  she  left  the  marital 

 
 
home  of  her  own  will  and  accord  as  claimed  by  the  Petitioner/Husband.  

Notwithstanding  the  absence  of  such  finding,  both  the  Courts  below  have 

nevertheless  allowed  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  recovery  of  maintenance 

from the date of the alleged desertion.   According to the learned counsel for 

the  Petitioner/Husband,  such  recovery  is  not  justifiable  without  a  finding  of 

desertion  and  as  such,  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  is  only  entitled  to 

maintenance  for  the  period  of  iddat.    She  further  submitted  that  even 

otherwise  the  monthly  income  of  the  Petitioner/Husband  as  alleged  by  the 

Respondent  No.3/Wife  was  not  proved.  She drew this Court’s attention to 

both  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  whereby  it  has  been  recorded 

that  the  Petitioner/Husband  admitted  that  he  is  a  businessman  inspite  of the 

fact that no such admission was ever made by the Petitioner/Husband.  With 

regard  to  the  maintenance  allowed  to  the Minors the learned counsel for the 

Petitioner/Husband  submitted  that  although  the  Respondent No.3/Wife took 

the  Minors  with  her  on  the  night  of  18-05-2020,  they  resided  with  the 

Petitioner/Husband  from  24-09-2020  till  12-10-2020  which  is  evident  from 

the  fact  that  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  filed  a  petition  under  Section  491 

Cr.P.C.  for  the  Recovery  of  Minors  which  was  decided  vide  Order  dated 

12.10.2020  and  custody  of  the  Minors  was  given  to  the  Respondent 

No.3/Wife  with  visitation  rights  to  the  Petitioner/Husband  on  weekends.  

Therefore, the period of maintenance allowed for the Minors should exclude 

the  period  from  24-09-2020  till  12-10-2020  and  that  the  quantum  of 

maintenance  allowed  to  the  Minors  is  excessive  not  only  because  the 

Respondent  No.3/Wife  failed  to  discharge  her  burden  to  prove  the 

Petitioner’s  monthly  income  as  alleged  but  also because it has been granted 

without  due  regard 

to 

the  fact 

that 

the  Minors  reside  with 

the 

Petitioner/Husband  on  weekends  and  who  is  also  admittedly  bearing  the 

educational  expenses  of  the  Minors. 

  She  also  submitted  that  the 

Petitioner/Husband  has  made  an  application  for  modification  /  rectification 

of  the  Orders  dated 11-04-2022 and 12-05-2022 passed by this Court in the 

instant  writ,  which  incorrectly  recorded  that  she  made  statement  that  the 

Petitioner/Husband  is  not  challenging  the  Impugned Judgments and Decrees 

to the extent of quantum of the maintenance  of the Minors. 

6. 

The  learned  counsel for the Respondents No.3 to 6 at the very outset 

drew  this  Court’s  attention  to  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees 

 
 
whereby the Minors have been allowed maintenance from 12.10.2020 and as 

such  submitted  that  the  period  during  which  they  resided  with  the 

Petitioner/Husband is not included.  He also drew the Court’s attention to the 

Orders  passed  by  this  Court  on  11-04-2022  and 12-05-2022 whereby it has 

been  recorded  that  the  Petitioner/Husband  did  not  wish  to  challenge  the 

Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  to  the  extent  of  maintenance  to  the 

Minors.    In  respect  of  the  Petitioner’s  application  seeking  modification  / 

rectification  of  the  said  Orders,  he submitted that such application has been 

filed belatedly and even otherwise cannot be moved in respect of statements 

made  by  legal  counsel  as  recorded  in  court  orders.    He also submitted that 

the Petitioner/Husband is no longer paying the school fees of the Minors and 

that  it  is  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  who  is  paying  school  fees  out  of  the 

maintenance  allowance  granted by the Impugned Decrees. 

7. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused 

the available  record with their  assistance. 

8. 

First  and  foremost,  it  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  Court  in 

exercise  of  Constitutional  jurisdiction  does  not  act  like  a  Court  of  appeal.  

As  such,  the  Court  cannot  embark  upon  a  reappraisal  of  evidence.  It  is 

settled  law  that  a  High  Court  in  such  jurisdiction  cannot  substitute  the 

concurrent  findings  of  the  courts  below  with  its  own  findings  solely  on  the 

ground  that  another  view  was  possible  on  the  same  evidence.  A  party 

approaching  the  High  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  has  to 

demonstrate  that  there  is  a  gross  misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  or 

jurisdictional  error  or  such  legal  infirmity  that  has  caused  miscarriage  of 

justice.  Let  us  see  whether  interference  by  this  Court  in  exercise  of  its 

Constitutional  jurisdiction  is warranted  in this case.  

Period of Respondent No.3/Wife’s Maintenance  

9. 

The  Respondent  No.3/Wife  alleged in her plaint that she was severely 

beaten  and  thrown  out  from  the  marital  home  by  the Petitioner/Husband on 

19-05-2020.    This  has  been  denied  categorically  by  the  Petitioner/Husband 

in  his  written  statement  alleging  instead  that  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  left 

the  marital  home  along  with  the  Minors  and  valuables  on  the  night  of 

18.05.2020 stating that she wishes to visit her mother’s house on account of 

her  sister’s  illness  and  that  the  Petitioner/Husband  dropped  off  the 

Respondent  No.3/Wife  to  her  mother’s  place  himself.    It  was  therefore 

 
 
disputed  between  the  parties  as  to  whether  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  was 

expelled/ousted by the Petitioner/Husband or she left the marital home of her 

own will and accord. In view of such disputed fact, a finding was necessary 

as  to  whether  or  not  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  was  expelled  from  the 

marital  home  by  the  Petitioner/Husband  or  not  in  order  to  determine  the 

period  for  which  maintenance  could  be  granted.    However,  no  finding  has 

been rendered by the Courts below in this regard despite which maintenance 

has  been  allowed  to  the Respondent No.3/Wife from the date of the alleged 

desertion.    This  in  my  opinion  is  an  infirmity  which  merits  interference  by 

this  Court  in  exercise  of  Constitutional  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Islamic  Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

Quantum of Maintenance  of the Minors 

10.  Before I consider the merits of the arguments submitted by the parties 

with  regard  to  the  quantum  of  maintenance  of the Minors, it is necessary to 

first consider the objection made by the learned counsel for the Respondents 

No.3  to  6  that  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner/Husband  had  made 

statement  before  this  Court  that  the  Petitioner/Husband  is  not  challenging 

the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  to  the  extent  of  amount  of 

maintenance. 

11.  The  Orders  dated  11.03.2022,  11.04.2022,  and  12.05.2022  are 

reproduced hereunder: 

Order dated 11.03.2022: 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  states  that  vide  impugned  Judgment  and 
Decree  maintenance of the minors and plaintiff No. 1 has been decreed along 
with  return  of  dowry  articles  and  after  listing  of  the  above  categories  the 
impugned Decree at Sr. No. 4 states that “all the above amounts shall be paid 
with 10 % annual increase  till realization”.   
2. The Petitioner has challenged the amount of maintenance and duration of 
maintenance as well as 10 % annual increase against all the above amounts 
particularly as no increase can be granted in respect of dowry articles.  
3. Let notice be issued to the respondents. 
C.M No. 01/2022.  
Exemption sought for is allowed, subject to all just and legal exceptions.  
C.M No. 02/2022.  
Notice. In the meantime, 10 % annual increase shall not apply to the dowry 
articles. 
Order dated 11.04.2022: 

Learned counsel for the Petitioner submits that decree has not been challenged 
to  the  extent  of  return  of  dowry  articles  to  Respondent  No.3. Dispute is only 
with regard to the duration of maintenance awarded to the minors as well as to 
the  Respondent  No.3  and  also  to  the  extent  of  annual  increase  in  respect  of 
Respondent No.3. 
2. Re-list,  on 12.05.2022 with consent of parties. 

 
 
Order dated 12.05.2022 

Proxy counsel submits that learned principal counsel for the Petitioner is busy 
before another Bench. The last two orders reflect that the only issue raised by 
the  Petitioner  is  to  the  extent  of  duration  of  maintenance  awarded  to  the 
Respondents  No.  3  to  6  and  no  issue  has  been  raised  regarding  quantum  of 
maintenance. 
2. 
Despite foregoing, according to learned counsel for Respondents No. 3 
to  6,  the  Petitioner  has  not  been  paying  maintenance  as  per  impugned 
judgment and decree. 
3. 
In  view  of  the  above,  learned  counsel  for  the Petitioner is directed to 
satisfy this Court as to whether or not maintenance as per impugned judgment 
and decree is being paid to the Respondents No. 3 to 6, failure to comply with 
the foregoing shall result in dismissal of the instant petition. 
4. 
be granted under any circumstances. [Emphasis  added]. 

Re-list on 30.05.2022. It is made clear that no further adjournment will 

12.  As may be seen from the reproduction of the Orders dated 11.03.2022, 

11.04.2022,  and12.05.2022 hereinabove no order has been passed recording 

a  statement  made  by  the  learned  counsel for the Petitioner/Husband that the 

Petitioner/Husband  is  not  challenging  the  quantum  of  maintenance.    The 

prayer  in  the  instant  writ  petition  as  well  as  the  Order  dated  11.03.2022 

whereby  notice  was  issued  to  the  Respondents  categorically  contained  the 

Petitioner’s challenge to the amount of maintenance.  However, the same has 

not been mentioned in the subsequent two Orders.  The said omission cannot 

be equated with a statement made by the learned counsel Petitioner/Husband 

that  such  part  of  the  prayer  made  vide  the  writ  petition  is  abandoned  or 

withdrawn.  Therefore,  there  is  no  merit  in  the  argument  of  the  learned 

counsel for the Respondents No.3 to 6 in this regard. 

13. 

 Coming  to  the  merits,  the  learned counsel for the Petitioner/Husband 

has  taken  the  Court  through the record and indeed there is no admission  by 

the  Petitioner/Husband  that  he  is a businessman nor was the counsel for the 

Respondents No.3 to 6 able to point out such admission from the record. It is 

also  correct  that  the  Respondent  No.  3/Wife  was  unable  to  produce  any 

evidence  to  support  her  allegation    that  the  Petitioner/Husband  earns 

Rs.200,000/- per month.   

14.  Having  said  that  I  agree  with  the  judgments  rendered  by  the  Lahore 

High  Court  in  the  cases  of  Tanveer  Salamat  VS Additional  Sessions 

Judge and others, 2019 YLR 1862, and Tariq Mehmood VSMst. Farah 

Shaheen,  2010  YLR  349  whereby  it  has  been  held  that  the  onus  to  prove 

financial  capability  is  upon  the  Petitioner/Husband.  A  wife  cannot  be 

expected  to  have  documentary  proof  of  her former husband’s income.  No 

person can be burdened to prove the income of another.   There is no cavil to 

 
 
 
the  proposition  that  children  are  the  financial  responsibility  of  a  father.    A 

minor’s  maintenance  cannot  be  denied  on  account  of  the  wife/mother’s 

inability  to  prove  the  father/husband’s  financial  capability.    Therefore,  it  is 

the  father/husband  who  has  the  burden  to  prove  his  financial  capability  in 

order  for the learned Family Court to decide the quantum of maintenance of 

the  minor  children  and  in  case  of  his  failure  to  do  so  the  learned  Family 

Court  may  draw  any  negative  inference  on  the  basis  of  withholding  of 

evidence  and  determine  the  quantum  of  maintenance  for  the  minor.    The 

Petitioner/Husband  in  the  instant case has not produced any evidence of his 

monthly  income  or  source  thereof  and  yet  is  insisting  that  the  amount  is 

excessive.    There  is  nothing  on  the  record  for  me  to  conclude  that  the 

amount  of  maintenance  granted  to  the  Minors  is  beyond  the  means  of  the 

Petitioner/Husband.  On the face of it, the maintenance granted by the courts 

below does not appear to be excessive.   

10% annual  increase 

15.  Last  but  not  least,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner/Husband 

pointed  out  that  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I  has  allowed  10% 

annual  increase  till  realization  of  all  amounts  including  maintenance  of  the 

Wife  and  Minors  as  well  as  return  of  dowry  articles  and  submits  that  10% 

annual  increase  cannot  be  granted  in  respect  of  dowry  articles.    In  this 

respect  C.M.  02/2022  was  moved  by  the  Petitioner/Husband  praying  for 

suspension of operation of the Impugned Judgments and Decrees I and II, in 

respect of which notice was issued on 11.03.2022 and in the meantime it was 

ordered  by this Court that 10% annual increase shall not apply to the dowry 

articles.   

16. 

It  is  firstly  noted  that  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  I  was 

challenged  in  appeal  and  that  the  10%  annual  increase  has  been  allowed  by 

the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II  only  in  respect  of  the  maintenance 

granted  to  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  and  the  Minors  but  not  in  respect of 

recovery  of dowry articles.  The learned Appellate Court vide the Impugned 

Judgment  and  Decree  II  has modified the Impugned Judgment and Decree I 

to  the  extent  that  Respondent  No.3/Wife  has  been  held  entitled  to  the 

recovery  of  dowry  articles  as  per  Ex-P3  or  value  thereof  as  mentioned 

therein subject to depreciation at the rate of 20% except the articles as listed 

 
 
in the Impugned Judgment and Decree II.  Point to be noted is that recovery 

of the value  of the recoverable articles  has been allowed in the alternative.    

17.  The  parties  have  not  disclosed  whether  the  Petitioner/Husband  has 

returned  the  dowry  articles  as  per  the Impugned Judgment and Decree II or 

paid the alternate value thereof subject to depreciation at the rate of 20%.  In 

case  the  Petitioner/Husband  returns  the  dowry  articles,  it  goes  without 

saying  that  such  return  cannot  be  subjected  to  10%  annual  increase.  

However, in case the Petitioner/Husband pays the value of the dowry articles 

as  allowed  by  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  II  the  same  shall  be 

subjected to 10% annual increase till  realization.    

18.  The date from which such increase is to be applied is dependent on a 

finding  from  the  learned  Family  Court  regarding  the  allegation  of  desertion 

and  date  thereof.    In  case,  the  learned  Family  Court  determines  that  the 

Respondent  No.  3/Wife has established desertion by the Petitioner/Husband 

on  19-05-2020,  10%  annual  increase  shall  be  applied  from  the  said  date  of 

desertion.      In  case,  desertion  is  not  proved  then  the  10%  annual  increase 

shall  be applied from the date of the Impugned Judgment  and Decree II. 

19. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  partly  allowed  and  the 

Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees  are  set-aside  to  the  extent of duration of 

maintenance  granted  to  the  Respondent  No.3/Wife  and  the  matter  is 

remanded  to  the  learned  Family  Court  to render a finding with regard to the 

Respondent  No.3/Wife’s  allegation  of  desertion  by  the  Petitioner/Husband 

and  to  determine  the  duration  of  maintenance  to  be  granted  to  the 

Respondent  No.3/Wife  accordingly  as  well  as  to  apply  the  10%  annual 

increase  upon  recovery  of  alternate  value  of  dowry  articles  as  specified  in 

the Impugned Judgment and Decree II in terms of the directions given herein 

above.  All the pending C.Ms in the instant petition  are also disposed of. 

      (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
      JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on this 9th day of June, 2023. 

J U NAID 

JUGDE 

 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
