HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

CRL. MISC. NO. 662-B of 2020. 

Tariq Mahmood.      

VERSUS 
The State, etc 

S.No. of order/ 
Proceeding 

Date of 
hearing 

Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or 
counsel, where necessary. 

02.06.2020.  Malik Ahmed Nawaz Awan and Mr Muhammad Asif,  

Advocates for the petitioner. 
Syed Muhammad Tayyab, Deputy Attorney General.  
Mr Ijaz Ahmed Sheikh, A.D. (CTN) FIA.  
Mr M. Azmat Khan, A.D./I.O. (CTN), FIA.  

Tariq  Mahmood  son  of  Saif-ud-Din  has  sought  post  arrest 

bail  in  case  F.I.R.  No.  24,  dated  16.07.2019,  registered  under  sections 

34,109,120-B,165-A,201,420,468,471,500,506  of  Pakistan  Penal  Code, 

1860 and sections 6,10,13,15,20,21 and 24 of the Prevention of Electronic 

Crimes  Act,  2016  and  section  7  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997 

(hereinafter referred to as the “FIR”) at Police Station  FIA, Cyber Crime 

Islamabad Circle, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief  facts  as  narrated  in  the  FIR  are  that  the  petitioner  in 

connivance  with  other  co-accused  was  alleged  to  have  illegally  recorded 

audio and video images without permission of the complainant with intent 

to blackmail, criminally intimidate and subversion the course of justice. It 

was  further  stated  that  the  petitioner  had  disseminated  the  same  with 

intent  to  malign  personal  dignity  of  the  complainant  and  dignity  of  the 

State/Institutions. Hence the instant petition.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2- 

Crl. Misc. No. 662-B of 2020. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  contended  that; 

the  petitioner  has  been  falsely  involved  in  the  instant  case;  story  as 

narrated  in  the  FIR  is  false,  frivolous  and  vexatious;  the  petitioner  has 

been  made  a  scapegoat  in  the  instant  case;  real  culprits  have  not  been 

made  as  accused  in  the  instant  case;  section  7-A  of  Anti-Terrorism  Act, 

1997  is  not  attracted  in  the  instant  case;  sections  165-A,  201,  420,  500, 

506  and  471    are  bailable,  whereas  sections  468  and  120-B  are  not 

attracted  against  the  present  petitioner;  sections  10  and  21  of  the 

Prevention  of  Electronics  Act,  2016  are  non-bailable,  whereas  remaining 

sections are bailable; sections 10 and 21 of the Prevention of  Electronics 

Act,  2016  are  not  attracted  against  the  petitioner;  the  petitioner  is  also 

entitled to the concession of post arrest bail on medical grounds; the co-

accused of the petitioner have been enlarged on bail and keeping in view 

the rule of consistency, the petitioner is also entitled to the same relief; no 

incriminating  material  was  recovered  from  the  petitioner;  the  petitioner 

has  been  incarcerated  for  more  than  ten  months;  investigations  qua  the 

petitioner have been completed and he is no more required for purposes 

thereof;  further  incarceration  of  the  petitioner  will  not  serve  any  useful 

purpose;  the  petitioner  has  not  committed  the  alleged  offences;  the 

petitioner  has  not  used  an  electronic  device  by  transmitting  explicit 

material  relating  to  the  complainant;  recovery  if  any  is  fake  and 

concocted;  the  petitioner  has  no  criminal  history;  there  is  no  chance  of 

abscondance of the petitioner or tampering with the prosecution evidence; 

the case against  the petitioner is based on  malafide and ulterior  motives 

of the complainant; the offences do not fall within the ambit of prohibitory 

clause  of  section  497 of  Cr.P.C.;  report  under  section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has 

been  submitted  before  the  learned  trial  Court;  the  case  against  the 

 
 
 
-3- 

Crl. Misc. No. 662-B of 2020. 

petitioner  is  that  of  further  probe;  hence  the  learned  counsel  urges  the 

petitioner to be released on bail.  

4. 

The  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  appeared  alongwith 

Ijaz  Ahmed  Sheikh  and  M.  Azmat  Khan,  Assistant  Directors,  FIA.  They 

have contended that; recovery has been affected from the petitioner; the 

petitioner  has  been  specifically  nominated  in  the  FIR;  the  petitioner  has 

deliberately  uploaded  personal  and  objectionable  pictures  of 

the 

complainant; the said act of the petitioner has destroyed the honour and 

modesty of the complainant not only in family but also in the community 

and  department;  investigations  qua  the  petitioner  have  been  completed 

and  report  under  section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has  been  submitted  before  the 

learned trial Court; charge has been framed and the trial of the case will 

be concluded shortly; hence urges for dismissal of bail.   

5. 

Perusal of record shows that the co-accused of the petitioner 

namely,  Nadir  Khan  was  enlarged  on  bail  vide  order,  dated  27.02.2020. 

The  case  of  the  present  petitioner  is  at  par  with  the  co-accused.  The 

allegation  against  the  present  petitioner  is  that  he  and  his  accomplices 

had sold objectionable video to Mian Raza. The petitioner was arrested in 

this case on 16.07.2019 and since then he has been incarcerated. Perusal 

of  record  does  not  show  that  the  number/sim  used  for  sending  the 

objectionable pictures and messages was in the name of the petitioner or 

in his use. Investigations against the petitioner have been completed and 

further incarceration of the latter will not serve any useful purpose. Report 

under section 173 of Cr.P.C. has been submitted before  the learned trial 

Court. Whether or not the offences mentioned in the FIR are attracted to 

the  extent  of  the  present  petitioner  needs  further  probe.  Deeper 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-4- 

Crl. Misc. No. 662-B of 2020. 

appreciation  of  evidence  at  bail  stage  is  not  permissible.  The  petitioner 

does not have a criminal record. The continued custody of the petitioner is 

not  likely  to  serve  any  useful  purpose  at  this  stage.  Nothing  has  been 

placed  on  record  to  indicate  that  the  petitioner  may  abscond  or  tamper 

with  the  prosecution  evidence,  if  he  is  released  on  bail.  This  Court  is, 

therefore,  of  the  opinion  that  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  be  released  by 

extending the concession of bail. 

6. 

It has been aptly observed by the august Supreme Court in 

the case of “Manzoor and 04 others VS The State” reported as [PLD 1972 

S.C. 81] as follows: 

“The ultimate conviction and incarceration of a guilty 

person can repair the wrong caused by a mistaken relief of 

interim bail granted to him, but no satisfactory reparation 

can be offered to an innocent man for his unjustified 

incarceration at any stage of the case albeit his acquittal in 

the long run”.  

In  the  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  present 

case, refusal of bail will tantamount to punishing the petitioner.  

7. 

In  the  circumstances  as  mentioned  above,  this  petition  is 

allowed and the petitioner is admitted to bail, subject to furnishing bail 

bonds  in  the  sum  of  Rs.1,00,000/-  (Rupees  one  hundred  thousand  only) 

with one surety in the like amount  to the satisfaction of  the learned trial 

Court.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
-5- 

Crl. Misc. No. 662-B of 2020. 

Needless  to  mention  that  the  observations  recorded  in  the 
instant  petition  are  based  on  tentative  assessment,  which 
will  obviously  not  prejudice  the  proceedings  before  the 
learned trial Court.  

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Asad K/*  

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
