JUDGMENT SHEET. 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   
Majid Hussain 

VS           

Farrah Naz & others 

07.06.2016 
Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Malik Shaukat Nawaz, Advocate, 
Respondent No.1 by:  Ms. Shabana Rafique, Advocate. 
_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  The  petitioner  (Majid 

Hussain)  and  respondent  No.1  (Farrah  Naz)  got  married  on 

08.08.2007 at Tehsil Rawlakot, District Poonch, Azad Jammu and 

Kashmir  (“AJ&K”).  Subsequently,  the  relations  between  the 

petitioner  and  respondent  No.1  turned  sour.  On  11.07.2015, 

respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  on  the 

basis of Khula before the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad, 

exercising  the  powers  of  Judge,  Family  Court.  On  14.03.2016, 

the petitioner filed  an application under Sections 1(2) &  5 of the 

West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  read  with  Rule  5  of  the 

West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Rules,  1965,  for  the  return  of  the 

plaint 

for 

its  presentation  before  a  court  of  competent 

jurisdiction. Respondent No.1 contested this application by filing 

a reply on 18.03.2016. Vide order dated 31.03.2016, the learned 

Judge,  Family  Court  dismissed 

the  said  application  and 

adjourned  the  matter  for  the  filing  of  a  written  statement. 

Through  the  instant  Writ  Petition,  the  petitioner,  impugns  the 

said order dated 31.03.2016.  

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  even 

though  respondent  No.1  was  residing  at  Islamabad,  the  learned 

Judge, Family Court, Islamabad, had no jurisdiction in the matter 

because both the petitioner and respondent No.1 are not citizens 

of  Pakistan;  that  the  said  contesting  parties  have  their 

permanent  residences  at  Rawalakot,  AJ&K,  and  that  their 

marriage  was  also  solemnized  over  there;  that  on  03.09.2015, 

the petitioner instituted a suit for restitution of conjugal rights at 

                
 
 
 
 
  
2 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

Rawalakot, but the learned Judge Family Court, did not take this 

vital  aspect  of  the  case  into  consideration  while  assuming 

jurisdiction;  that respondent No1’s  temporary  visit  to  Islamabad 

did  not  vest  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad,  with 

jurisdiction over the matter;  and that  AJ&K is a foreign territory 

for  all  intents  and  purposes  and  their  citizens  cannot  take  the 

benefit  of  the  proviso  to  Rule  6(b)  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family 

Courts  Rules  1965.  In  making  his  submissions,  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  placed  reliance  on  the  cases  of 

Mst. Fozia VS Aziz Ullah (2010 CLC 403), Shahdat Khan VS Judge 

Family  Court  Rawalpindi  (2014  CLC  1238),  Rehmat  Ullah  VS 

Shamim  Akhtar  (1997  CLC  16)  and  Noor  Hussain  VS  the  State 

(PLD 1966 Supreme Court 88). 

3. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent 

No.1  submitted  that  respondent  No.1  was  indeed  residing  at 

Islamabad,  and  therefore,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court, 

Islamabad,  did  have  the  jurisdiction  over  the  matter;  that 

respondent  No.1,  as  a  citizen  of  AJ&K  could  take  the  benefit  of 

Rule  6  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Rules,  1965;  that  the 

benefit of the said  rule is  also extended to  the citizens of AJ&K; 

that  a  writ  petition  is  not  maintainable  against  an  interim  order 

passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad.  The 

learned counsel for respondent No.1 prayed for the dismissal of 

the instant writ petition. 

4. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.    

5. 

The  record  shows  that  on  08.08.2007,  the  petitioner  and 

respondent No.1 got married. Subsequently, over the years, the 

relations  between  the  couple  turned  sour.  On  10.07.2015, 

respondent  No.1  instituted  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  on 

the  basis  of Khula  before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad.  On  14.03.2016,  the  petitioner  filed  an  application 

under  Sections  1(2)  and  5  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts 

Act,  1964  read  with  Rule  5  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts 

Rules,  1965,  praying  for  the  return  of  the  plaint  on  the  ground 

3 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

that  both  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.1,  were  permanent 

residents  of  Tehsil  Rawalakot,  District  Poonch,  AJ&K,  and  that 

their  marriage  was  also  solemnized  over  there.  The  petitioner 

was of the view that only the courts in Tehsil Rawalakot, had the 

jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  upon  the  suit  for  dissolution  of 

marriage.  Respondent  No.1  resisted  this  application  on  the 

ground that respondent No.1 was residing at Islamabad, and that 

under  the  provisions  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Rules, 

1965,  she  could  institute  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  at 

Islamabad.  

6. 

As  mentioned  above,  vide  the  order  dated  31.03.2016,  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court, 

Islamabad,  dismissed 

the 

petitioner’s application  for return of plaint, and fixed the matter 

for filing of  the written statement.  

7. 

Rule  6  of  the  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Rules, 

1965, provides that the Courts which have the jurisdiction to try a 

suit, will  be that within the  local  limits of which  (a) the cause of 

action  wholly  or  in  part  has  arisen,  or  (b)  where  the  parties 

reside  or  last  resided  together.  According  to  the  proviso  of  the 

said Rule, in suits for dissolution of marriage or dower, the Court 

within  the  local  limits  of  which  the  wife  ordinarily  resides  shall 

also  have  jurisdiction.  Now  the  vital  question  that  needs  to  be 

answered is whether the benefit of the proviso to the said Rule 6 

can be extended to a plaintiff who is the citizen of AJ&K.  

8. 

Section 14B of the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951, reads as 

follows:- 

“14B. Certain persons to be citizens of Pakistan. A person who, 
being a subject of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, has 
migrated to Pakistan with the intention of residing therein until 
such time as the relationship between Pakistan and that State is 
finally determined shall, without prejudice to his status as such 
subject, be a citizen of Pakistan.”  

9. 

Now,  Section  14B ibid  speaks  of  subjects  of  the  ‘State  of 

Jammu  and  Kashmir’  and  not  of  subjects  or  citizens  of  ‘Azad 

Jammu  and  Kashmir’.  Who  the  subjects  of  the  ‘State  of  Jammu 

and Kashmir’ are has been well-explained by the Supreme Court 

in  the  case  of  Inam-ul-Haq  VS  Chairman,  F.P.S.C.,  Islamabad 

(2005 SCMR 622), in the following terms:- 

 
4 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

“After the partition of the Sub-Continent in the year 1949, the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir was forcibly occupied by India. 
Some parts of the said State were, however, got liberated and 
are  since  called  the  Azad  Kashmir  Territory  while  the 
remaining  parts  of  the  same  are  still  under  the  Indian 
occupation. Some residents of this Indian occupied Kashmir 
migrated  to  Pakistan  and  are  living  in  different  parts  of 
Pakistan and the Azad Kashmir Territory, marking time to 
return  to  their  homeland,  on  settlement  of  the  Kashmir 
dispute.  These  immigrants  and  their  descendants,  though 
living in Pakistan and Azad Kashmir appear to have preferred 
to continue to retain their status as subjects of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir and their said status appears even to 
have been recognized by the State of Pakistan.” 

10.  The plaint is silent on whether respondent No.1 is a subject 

of  ‘State  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir’  or  a  subject  of  ‘Azad  Jammu 

and  Kashmir’. 

If  respondent  No.1  holds  a  State  Subject 

Certificate,  showing  that  she  or her  predecessors  had  migrated 

to  Pakistan  from  the  ‘State  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir’  she  is  to  be 

considered as a citizen of Pakistan in terms of Section 14B of the 

Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951. Simply because respondent No.1 

came  from  AJ&K  after  her  marriage  broke  down  to  live  in 

Islamabad  would  not  make  her  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  under 

section 14B ibid.  

11. 

In  the  case  of  Akhtar  Hussain  Jan  VS  Government  of 

Pakistan  (1995  SCMR  1554),  the  appellant  and  his  father  had 

migrated from occupied Kashmir to Pakistan in 1971, and did not 

return ever since then; the appellant’s father resided in Pakistan 

until  his  death  in  1985;  the  appellant  got  married  to  Pakistani 

lady  and  had  a  child;  and  the  appellant  was  doing  business  in 

Pearl-Continental  Hotel  at  Rawalpindi.  After  taking  these  facts 

into  account,  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  case  of 

the  appellant  was  squarely  covered  under  Section  14B  of  the 

Pakistan  Citizenship  Act,  1951,  and  that  the  appellant  has 

attained  the  status  of  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  Furthermore,  it  was 

held  that  the  Pakistan  Citizenship  Act,  1951  was  amended  in 

1973  and  section  14B  was  inserted  therein  to  confer  Pakistan 

Citizenship  on  all  Jammu  and  Kashmir  State  nationals  who 

migrated to Pakistan with the intention to reside therein. 

12.  The  status  of  the  subjects  of  the  ‘State  of  Jammu  and 

Kashmir’  has  also  been  recognized  in  the  Azad  Jammu  and 

 
5 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

Kashmir  Interim  Constitution  Act,  1974,  Section  2  whereof 

defines a ‘State Subject’ as follows:- 

"'State Subject' means a person for the time being residing in 
Azad Jammu and Kashmir or Pakistan who is a 'State Subject' as 
defined in the late Government of the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir Notification No. l-L/84, dated the 20th April, 1927, as 
amended from time to time." 

13. 

In  the  Opinion  of  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  the  AJ&K  in 

President's Reference No. 1 of 1996, (PLD 1996 SC (AJ&K) 1), it 

has been held as follows: - 

“It may  be  observed  that  according  to  definition  of  "State 
Subject" it is no longer necessary in order to continuously enjoy 
the status of State Subject, that a State Subject must continue to 
reside in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The definition lays down 
that a State Subject who resides in Pakistan shall also continue 
to be a State Subject. This provision seems to have been 
incorporated in order to cater to the situation which was created 
at the time of War of Liberation and thereafter, when a large 
number of State Subjects had to take shelter in Pakistan in order 
to save themselves from genocide and persecution let loose in 
the State.” 

14.  The learned Trial Court has placed reliance on some Office 

Memorandum  8/9/70,  dated  24.06.1970  which  apparently 

provides  that  even  though  AJ&K  is  not  a part  of Pakistan  within 

the  meaning  of  Article  1  (2)  of  the  Constitution,  it  should  for  all 

practical  purposes  be  treated  like  any  other  province.  This  is  a 

preposterous  proposition  to  say  the 

least.  AJ&K  was  not 

included in the territories of Pakistan as mentioned in Sub-Article 

(2)  of  Article  1  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan,  1973.  It  was  a  foreign  country  for  all  practical 

purposes.  In  the  cases  of  Noor Hussain VS  State (PLD  1966 SC 

88),  Sakhi  Daler  Khan  VS  Superintendent  Incharge  (PLD  1957 

(W.P.)  Lahore  813),  Hassan  Kamran  VS  Federal  Public  Service 

Commission  (1996  CLC  826),  and  Commissioner,  Income  Tax, 

Azad  Jammu  and  Kashmir  VS  Haji  Ali  Khan  &  Co.  (PLD  1985 

Supreme Court (AJ&K) 62), it has been held that the territories of 

Azad Jammu and Kashmir did not constitute a part of Republic of 

Pakistan.  Therefore,  I  don’t  see  how  any  statute  let  alone 

notification/office  memorandum  can  give  a  status  of  a  province 

to AJ&K. In the case at hand, it is nobody’s case that AJ&K falls 

 
 
6 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

within  the  territories  of  Pakistan  under  Article  1  (2)  of  the 

Constitution. 

15.  The learned Trial Court has also placed reliance on section 

83 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“C.P.C.”), and held that 

respondent  No.1  as  an  alien  could  sue  in  Pakistan.  This, 

however,  is  subject  to  the  caveat  that  the  Court  in  Pakistan  in 

which the action is brought or a suit is filed has jurisdiction in the 

matter. In the case at hand, respondent No.1, in her reply to the 

petitioner’s  application  for  the  return  of  plaint,  has  not  denied 

that  the  parties  are  permanent  residents  of  Tehsil  Rawlakot, 

District  Poonch,  AJ&K;  that  the  marriage  of  the  parties  was 

solemnized and registered in AJ&K; and that no cause of action 

accrued at Islamabad. 

16. 

In  the  case  of  Masood  Ahmad  Malik  VS  Fouzia  Farhana 

Quddus (1991 SCMR 681), the petitioner and the respondent had 

got married in the U.S.A. and had acquired American citizenship. 

Subsequently, they came to Pakistan, and the petitioner/husband 

pronounced  talaq  on  the  respondent/wife.  The  Chairman, 

Arbitration  Council  was  of  the  view  that  since  the  parties  had 

become  American  citizens,  he  did  not  have  the  jurisdiction  to 

affect reconciliation between the parties. After that the petitioner 

filed  a suit  for  jactitation  of  marriage  before  the  Court  of  Senior 

Civil  Judge,  Islamabad,  exercising  the  powers  of  the  Judge, 

Family  Court.  The  respondent  applied  for  the  rejection  of  the 

plaint on the ground that the Pakistani Courts had no jurisdiction 

to  adjudicate  upon  the  suit  on  the  ground  that  since  the  parties 

were American citizens, the Muslim Family Law Ordinance, 1961 

was  not  applicable  to  their  case.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

held that the learned Civil Court had the jurisdiction to adjudicate 

upon  the  matter  because  the  talaq  was  pronounced  at 

Islamabad,  and  both  the  parties  were  residing  within  the  local 

limits  of  the 

jurisdiction  of  the  Court  of  the  Senior  Civil 

Judge/Family Court, Islamabad. 

17. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  case  of  Masood  Ahmad 

Malik VS Fouzia Farhana Quddus  (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme 

Court spurned the contention that Muslim Family Law Ordinance 

7 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

1961  (“MFLO”),  was  not  applicable  to  the  parties,  being  foreign 

citizens,  because  section  3  and  5  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family 

Courts  Act,  1964,  had  given  an  overriding  effect  to  the  MFLO. 

Section  1(2)  of  the  MFLO  made  the  said  Ordinance  applicable 

only to Muslim citizens of Pakistan wherever they may be. It was 

held that the words "subject to the provisions of the Family Laws 

Ordinance, 1961" employed in section 5 of the Family Courts Act, 

1964  did  not  mean  that  jurisdiction  under  the  said  Act  can  be 

exercised only in a case where the parties are "Muslim citizens of 

Pakistan"  and  in  no  other  case.  Furthermore  it  was  held  as 

follows:- 

“A close examination of the provisions of the Family Courts Act, 
1964 and those of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 
shows that they do not operate exactly in the same field and that 
the scope of the Family Courts Act, 1964 is wider than that of the 
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961. In our view, the affect of 
the words in section 5 that the Family Courts shall have the 
jurisdiction to entertain suits relating to dissolution of marriage, 
jactitation of marriage etc. but subject to the provisions of the 
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 imply only that where there 
is an inconsistency between Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 
1961 and the Family Courts Act, 1964, the provisions of the 
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance will prevail and shall be given 
effect to in their pristine form and no more. They do not have any 
other effect and the provisions of other laws are not affected 
thereby. Accordingly, suits of this nature filed by the parties 
other than Muslim citizens of Pakistan if otherwise competent 
under any other law can be entertained but will be heard and 
tried not in accordance with the provisions of the Muslim Family 
Laws Ordinance but by the proper law applicable to them. Thus, 
under  the  Civil  Procedure  Code,  1908  a  Civil  Court  has 
jurisdiction to entertain and try a suit if the parties, at the 
commencement of the B suit, are residing within its local limits 
(section 20, C.P.C.). Accordingly any party irrespective of the 
question whether he is a Muslim citizen of Pakistan or not can 
institute a suit, including a suit for jactitation of marriage, before 
a Court within whose local limits the defendant is; for the time 
being residing. If the parties are Muslim citizens of Pakistan, the 
suit  will  be  tried  and  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961. But if 
they are not Muslim Citizens of Pakistan the suit can still be 
entertained but it will be tried and determined by the proper law 
of the parties; in the former case by the Family' Court while in the 
later case by the ordinary Civil Court of competent jurisdiction.” 

18. 

In the case of Anil Mussarat Hussain VS Muhammad Anwar 

Naseem (1996 CLC 1406), a suit for dissolution of marriage was 

filed  by  a  Muslim  national  of  Pakistan  against  a  national  of 

England.  The  defendant  filed  an  application  under  Order  VII, 

 
 
 
8 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

Rule 11 C.P.C., for rejection of plaint on the ground that he being 

not  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act, 

1964 had no applicability on him and that the suit for dissolution 

of  marriage  brought  by  the  plaintiff  could  not  be  tried  by  the 

Family  Court  in  Pakistan.  One  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  Trial 

Court  rejected  the  said  application  was  that  the  plaintiff  was  a 

citizen  of  Pakistan,  and  that  the  marriage  had  been  solemnized 

at Lahore. 

19. 

In the above mentioned cases (reported as 1991 SCMR 681 

and 1996 CLC 1406) causes of action had clearly accrued in the 

jurisdiction  of  the  Courts  where  the  suits  were  instituted.  In  the 

case at hand respondent No.1, in her plaint has not disclosed as 

to  what  cause  of  action  accrued  to  her  within the  jurisdiction  of 

the  Family  Court  at Islamabad.  Respondent  No.1’s  sole  reliance 

seems to be on the proviso to Rule 6 of the West Pakistan Family 

Courts  Rules,  1965,  for  instituting  a  suit  for  dissolution  of 

marriage  before  the  Courts  at  Islamabad.  Respondent  No.1  in 

her  plaint  claims  to  be  presently  residing  at  village  Mera  Akoo, 

Post Office Golra Sharif, Tehsil and District, Islamabad. She feels 

that her residence at Islamabad give her the right to institute the 

said  suit  against  her  husband  (who  is  admittedly  a  permanent 

resident of AJ&K) at Islamabad.  

20. 

In the case of Rehmat Ullah VS Shamim Akhtar (1997 CLC 

16),  the  spouses,  who  were  said  to  be  subjects  of  the  State  of 

AJ&K, had submitted to the jurisdiction of the Courts at AJ&K in 

a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage.  That  litigation  had  gone  right 

up  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  AJ&K,  where  the  wife  had  not 

succeeded in dissolving her marriage. Thereafter, a fresh suit for 

dissolution  of  marriage  was  filed  by  the  plaintiff/wife  before  the 

Family  Court  at  Mansehra,  where  she  claimed  to  have  taken 

temporary residence. The Family Court after framing issues and 

recording evidence, decreed the suit for dissolution of marriage. 

A writ petition against the decree passed by the family Court was 

allowed  by  the  Division  Bench  of  the  Hon'ble  Peshawar  High 

Court. In paragraph 8 of the judgment, it was held as follows:- 

“8. The spouses of this case are subject of Azad Jammu & 
Kashmir State. They are admittedly not citizens of Pakistan 

9 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

either by birth or by descent or by migration within the scope of 
sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951. They 
cannot also hold dual citizenship or nationality under section 14 
of the Act ibid or being a subject of the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir and having migrated to Pakistan with the intention of 
residing therein until such time as the relationship between 
Pakistan  and  that  State is finally determined, shall without 
prejudice to their status as such subject, be a citizen of Pakistan 
as section 14-B envisages. The Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 
does not as such apply in case of the present parties and they 
cannot  be  deemed  to  be  citizens  of  Pakistan  at  the 
commencement of this Act as section 3 provides. …” 

21.  The  Family  Court  at  Mansehra  was  held  not  to  have 

jurisdiction  to  the  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  or  make  a 

decision  on  the  dissolution  of  marriage  between  the  parties. 

Perusal  of  the  judgment  of  the  Hon'ble  Peshawar  High  Court 

shows  that  the  primary  reason  that  prevailed  with  the  Hon'ble 

Court in allowing the petition was that the contesting parties had 

already  litigation  on  the  same  subject  matter  in  the  Courts  in 

AJ&K. 

22. 

In the case of Mohammad Zaman VS Uzma Bibi (2012 CLC 

24),  the  plaintiff/wife  had  instituted  a  suit  for  the  dissolution  of 

her marriage before the learned Judge, Family Court, Gujrat. The 

defendant/husband  filed  an  application  for  the  dismissal  of  the 

suit  on  the  ground  that  as  both  the  plaintiff  and  the  defendant 

were  citizens  of  AJ&K,  the  Family  Court  at  Gujrat  had  no 

jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the suit. The said application was 

dismissed by the Family Court, and so was the plaintiff’s appeal. 

The plaintiff challenged the said orders of the trial Court and the 

appellate  Court  in  writ  petition  before  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High 

Court  in  its  constitutional  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution.  The  Hon'ble High  Court  dismissed  the  writ  petition 

and held that the Family Court at Gujrat had correctly dismissed 

the  defendant’s  application  for  the  dismissal  of  the  suit.  One  of 

the  reasons  which  prevailed  with  the  Hon'ble  High  Court  in 

holding so were as follows:- 

“6. … the record shows that the respondent No.1 along with 
respondents Nos.2 and 3 have since long been residing in 
village Kalra Punwan, Tehsil and District Gujrat. Respondent 
No.1 is also a holder of national identity card which proves 
that she is a citizen of Pakistan along with her children who 
also appear to be registered as citizens of Pakistan. The 
stand of respondents Nos.1 to 3 of being citizens of Pakistan 

 
10 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

is also supported by section 14(b) of the Pakistan Citizenship 
Act, 1951, which allows a permanent resident of State of Azad 
Jammu and Kashmir, who has migrated to Pakistan to be 
regarded  as  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  Section  14(b)  of  the 
Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 is reproduced hereunder:--- 

"A person who being a subject of State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, has migrated to Pakistan with the intention of 
residing  therein  until  such  time  as  the  relationship 
between Pakistan and that State is finally determined, 
shall, without prejudice to his status as such subject, be 
a citizen of Pakistan". 

23.  With  utmost  respect  for  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court,  I 

cannot bring myself to share the above mentioned view taken in 

the  said  judgment.  A  subject  of  AJ&K,  who  had  acquired  a 

national  identity  card  was  treated  by  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High 

Court as a subject of the ‘State of Jammu and Kashmir’ who had 

migrated to Pakistan. In this way protection under Section 14B of 

the  Pakistan  Citizenship  Act,  1951,  was  afforded  to  the 

respondent.  As  explained  above,  subjects  or  citizens  of  AJ&K 

are not ‘subjects of the State of Jammu and Kashmir’ and cannot 

be  treated  as  citizens  of  Pakistan  under  Section  14B  of  the 

Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951.  

24.  The  learned  Trial  Court  could  not  dismiss  the  petitioner’s 

application  for  the  return  of  plaint  by  placing  reliance  on  the 

case  of  Mohammad  Zaman  VS  Uzma  Bibi  (supra),  because  in 

that case the respondent/wife held to be a citizen of Pakistan on 

account  of  obtaining  a  national  identity  card  of  Pakistan.  In  the 

case  at  hand,  however,  respondent  No.1 does  not  claim  to  be  a 

citizen  of  Pakistan.  In  the  case  of  Mohammad  Zaman  VS  Uzma 

Bibi (supra),  the Hon'ble Lahore High Court held that the Family 

Court  at  Gujrat  had  the  jurisdiction  to  try  a  suit  even  if  the 

marriage had been solemnized abroad and the parties  were not 

citizens of Pakistan. In this regard, it was held as follows:-  

“7.    Section 1(2) of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 
1964, provides that the Act applies to the whole of Pakistan 
and there is no bar contained therein as would exclude the 
jurisdiction of the Family Court where the parties are not 
citizens of Pakistan or one of them is not a citizen of Pakistan. 
The residence of one party gives the Family Court in Pakistan 
jurisdiction especially in the case of a family suit filed by the 
wife for the dissolution of the marriage or for recovery of 
maintenance, even if the marriage was solemnized outside 
Pakistan.” 

 
 
 
11 

W.P.No. 1271 of 2016   

25.  Now,  if  any  one  or  both  the  parties  to  a  suit  under  the 

provisions of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964, are not 

citizens of Pakistan, that may not be reason enough to return the 

plaint  or  to  dismiss  the  suit  if  a  part  of  the  cause  of  action 

accrued to the plaintiff within the jurisdiction of the Family Court 

where  the  suit  has  been  instituted,  or  the  defendant  resides 

within  the  jurisdiction  of  such  a  Court.  This,  in  my  view  is  the 

ratio  in  the  cases  of  Masood  Ahmad  Malik  VS  Fouzia  Farhana 

Quddus  (supra)  and  Anil  Mussarat  Hussain  VS  Muhammad 

Anwar  Naseem  (supra).  If  we  are  to  proceed  on  hypothesis  and 

imagine  a  foreign  Muslim  couple  getting  married  abroad  under 

the  laws  of  a  foreign  country  and  then  the  wife  coming  to 

Pakistan  and  filing  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  before  a 

Family  Court  in  Pakistan  –  would  the  Family  Court  assume 

jurisdiction  simply  because  wife  happens  to  be  here.  In  my 

opinion not, unless a cause of action recognized by law accrues 

within the jurisdiction of the local courts or the husband submits 

to the jurisdiction of such local courts.   

26. 

In  the  forgoing  circumstances,  I  am  inclined  to  set  aside 

the  impugned  order  dated  31.03.2016,  and  remand  the  matter 

back  to  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court  with  the  direction  to 

decide  the  petitioner’s  application  afresh  in  the  light  of  the 

observations  made  hereinabove.  In  the  circumstances  of  the 

case, there shall be no order as to costs.   

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

     JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2016 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan*  

      (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
