JUDGMENT SHEET. 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

            Shifa International Hospitals Ltd., etc         VS      Mst. Hajira Bibi, etc.  

Appellants by:  

Respondent No.1 by:   

Mr. Zaheer Bashir Ansari,  
Advocate.  

Ch. Abdur Rehman Nasir,  
Advocate. 

Date of Decision: 

20.04.2018. 

            MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI,  J:- The instant appeal has been preferred 

against    the    order    dated  12.09.2017,  passed    by    learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge-VII (West) Islamabad, whereby objection raised by the appellants regarding 

maintainability of consumer complaint filed by respondent No.1 was dismissed.  

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  appeal  are  that  respondent  No.1  filed  a 

complaint  U/S  8,  8-A  &  0  of  the  Consumers  Protection  Act,  1995  against  the 

appellants  before  the  Court  of  Additional  Sessions  Judge/Consumer  Court, 

Islamabad  with  the  allegations  that  she  availed  medical  services  of  Shifa 

International  Hospital  Limited/appellant  No.1  and  other  medical  officers/other 

appellants for her treatment in the month of November, 2012 up till May, 2015 vide 

registration  MR  No.72-01-6C.  Respondent  No.1  continuously  visited  the  hospital 

and  consulted  various  doctors  including  appellants  No.2  to  5  and  all  the  doctors 

extorted  money  but  could  not  diagnose  the  real  disease  and  she  has  been  mislead 

under deceptive misrepresentation and as a result of the same, she has finally taken 

different  medicines  as  per  their  advices  and  later  on  when  she  contacted  and 

consulted the doctor of Kulsum International Hospital Blue Area Islamabad, she has 

been referred to Leprosy Hospital Rawalpindi, where her disease was detected and 

she  has  been  given  proper treatment  and  medical  care.  Respondent  No.1  filed  the 

complaint  by  claiming  doctors’  fee,  monetary  loss,  expenditures  on  visits,  mental 

torture, physical and health loss and family disturbance.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

2 

3. 

The  appellants  challenged  maintainability  of  the  complaint  by  raising 

objection at initial stage mainly on the ground that case of respondent No.2 can only 

be dealt by Disciplinary Committee of PMDC U/S 19 & 30 of Pakistan Registration 

of Medical and Dental Practitioner Regulation 2008. Learned Consumer Court after 

hearing learned counsel for the parties dismissed the objection vide impugned order 

dated 12.09.2017 and proceeded with the complaint. 

4. 

Learned counsel for the appellants has contended that Islamabad Consumer 

Protection  Act  1995  is  general  law  and  PMDC  Ordinance  1962  is  special  law, 

which  covers  the  cases  of  medical  negligence  as  such  complaint  can  only  be 

determined by technical experts; that when there is conflict in two special laws, the 

law  which  contains  over  riding  clause  shall  prevail  and  PMDC  Ordinance,  1962 

contains over riding clause; that section 31(4) of PMDC Ordinance, 1962 provides 

concept of Disciplinary Committee, unless the said committee gives its findings, no 

other  case  can  proceed;  that  learned  Consumer  Court  misapplied  the  law  and  the 

consumer complaint is not maintainable.  

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  has  contended  that 

Islamabad Consumer Protection Act 1995 is  beneficial  legislation dealing with the 

affairs  of  consumers  and  it  provides  concept of  summary  trial  as  well  as  penalties 

upon 

the  person  responsible  for 

infringement 

including  fine  as  well  as 

imprisonment,  which  is  not  available  in  PMDC  Ordinance,  1962;  that  PMDC 

Ordinance,  1962  regulates  the  affairs  of  medical  practitioners  and  at  the  most 

license  of  the  practitioner  can  be  cancelled,  if  negligence  is  proved  by  the 

Disciplinary Committee of PMDC, whereas case of respondent No.1 is based upon 

the claim of damages, expenditures and cost, which cannot be treated under PMDC 

Ordinance, 1962. 

6. 

7. 

I have heard the arguments and gone through the record. 

From perusal of the record, it has been observed that respondent No.1 filed a 

complaint  before  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge/Consumer  Court,  Islamabad 

regarding  the  medical  negligence  committed  by  appellants  No.1  to  5  during 

treatment  of  three  years  starting  from  November,  2012  to  May,  2015,  when 

respondent  No.1  was  registered  vide  registration  MR  No.72-01-6C  and  during  the 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

3 

said  period,  she  has  been  treated  in  Shifa  International  Hospital  Limited  by 

appellants No.2 to 5 on different pretexts and diseases, even all kinds of tests were 

conducted by creating impression that respondent No.1 is TB patient and continued 

treatment  for  2  to  3  years,  respondent  No.1  approached  other  hospital  and  finally 

she has been referred to Leprosy Rawalpindi, where the disease of respondent No.1 

was detected and she was treated properly, which resulted  into recovery, however, 

as  per  claim  of  respondent  No.1  in  the  complaint,  she  has  suffered  huge  financial 

loss in the shape of payment of professional  fee to appellants No.1 to 5, her visits, 

mental torture, health loss and family disturbance and she claimed Rs.1,55,00,000/-. 

8. 

The  appellants  have  challenged  the  question  of  maintainability  of  the 

complaint  mainly  on  the  ground  that  the  appellants  are  governed  under  PMDC 

Ordinance, 1962, whereby Disciplinary Committee has been provided to deal with 

such kind of situation, however, learned Consumer Court  dismissed their objection 

vide impugned order dated 12.09.2017.  

9. 

I have gone through the term consumer described in Islamabad Consumers 

Protection  Act,  1995,  which  covers  all  kinds  of  persons,  who  buy  goods  for 

consideration as well as services, even the concept of unfair trade practice has been 

explained  in  detailed  manner,  whereas  PMDC  Ordinance,  1962  provides  the 

concept of professional  negligence  in terms of section 31  of the Ordinance, which 

can  only  be  dealt  by  Disciplinary  Committee  of  PMDC  and  the  ordinance  further 

contains the provisions of section 36-A, which has over riding effect over any other 

law  but  the  important  question  before  this  Court  has  to  see  whether  PMDC 

Ordinance, 1962 provides the concept of damages and compensation, the answer is 

in  negative,  even  PMDC  Ordinance  1962  deals  with  registration  of  medical 

practitioners and dentists and to provide or to establish uniform minimum standard 

of  basic and higher qualification in medicine and dentistry but the entire ordinance 

as  well  as  other  regulations  placed  before  this  Court  reflects  that  the  doctors  can 

only  be  proceeded  against  for  medical  negligence,  which  may  lead  to  removal  of 

their  names  from  the  register  of  practitioners,  which  is  not  the  mandate  of  The 

Islamabad Consumers Protection Act, 1995 as the same being special law provides 

the  concept  of  unfair  trade  practice  and  if  the  consumer’s  rights  have  been 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

4 

infringed, the offender may also be tried summarily U/S 8-A and similarly section 9 

of the Act provides different kinds of penalties, which include imprisonment, which 

may  extend  to  two  years  or  with  fine  with  maximum  limit  of  Rs.40,000/-  and 

section 9(3) of the Act empowers the authority to pass order of compensation to the 

consumer  to  the  extend  the  consumer  has  suffered  any  damage  or  loss  through 

unfair  trade  practice,  where  it  deems  appropriate,  which  is  lacking  in  the  case  of 

PMDC  Ordinance,  1962.  In  such  like  situation  where  the  consumer  under  The 

Islamabad  Consumers  Protection  Act,  1995  availed  the  medical  services  after 

paying the consideration falls within definition of “consumer” as defined in section 

2(c) of the Act and the “services” provided  by the appellants fall within definition 

of  section  2(e)  of  the  Act  and  in  such  like  circumstances  the  complaint  is 

maintainable.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  PLD  2010  Lahore  214  (Dr.  Shamshad 

Hussain Syed VS District Consumer Court, Lahore). 

10. 

Even  otherwise,  The  Islamabad  Consumers  Protection  Act,  1995  was 

enacted to promote and protect interest of the consumers and was passed to protect 

the society and individuals from exploitation. Therefore, such like enactments must 

be given purposive interpretation keeping in view the basic intent of the statue and 

without  transgressing  its  objects  and  scope.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  PLD  2015 

Islamabad (Muhammad Farooq Khan VS Excel-Labs and another). 

11. 

Even otherwise, when two special laws are in conflict, the general principle 

of  interpretation  of  a  statue  is  that  the  special  law  shall  have  precedence  over  the 

general  law and when two special  laws are  inconsistent of any provision/situation, 

then one which is latter in time shall prevail over the earlier one. Reliance is placed 

upon 2002 P Cr. L J 216 (Muhammad Saleem VS The State and another). 

12. 

 Similarly, while interpreting two special laws, the Courts have to see other 

factors  including  the  object,  purpose  and  policy  of  both  the  statues  as  well  as 

intention of the legislature in order to determine, which of the two special laws will 

prevail and applicable. Reliance is placed upon 2017 C L D 1198 (Syed Mushahid 

Shah and others vs Federal Investment Agency and others). 

13. 

In view of above background, this Court comes to the conclusion that when 

consumer  in  terms  of  The  Islamabad  Consumers  Protection  Act,  1995  filed 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

5 

complaint  against  any  medical  practitioner,  he  has  to  bring  medical  expert  before 

the  Consumer  Court  to  prove  the  case  of  negligence,  unfair  trade  practice  of  the 

doctor, in such eventuality the Court can only rely upon the evidence of the expert 

alongwith other factors, whereas PMDC Laws provide complete mechanism to deal 

such  kind  of  situation  against  the  medical  practitioner,  who  would  be  dealt  under 

disciplinary proceedings, even otherwise PMDC Authorities have expert, who after 

adopting  their  own  procedure  of  inquiry,  if  comes  to  the  opinion  may  cancel  the 

licence of the doctor, who is guilty of medical negligence.  

14. 

The  only  difference  in  both  special  laws  i.e.  The  Islamabad  Consumers 

Protection Act, 1995 and PMDC Ordinance, 1962 as well as PMDC Regulations is 

of compensation, which could only be given under Consumer Law, whereas PMDC 

Laws are silent to that extent, therefore, in my humble view, Consumer Court shall 

entertain the complaint of any consumer, if comes to prima facie view that a case of 

medical  negligence of any doctor comes on record, then the  matter will  be sent to 

PMDC  Authorities  for  their  opinion  with  time  limitation,  whereas  PMDC  after 

adopting  their  own  procedure  will  submit  their  report  to  Consumer  Court,  where-

after  complaint  under  The  Islamabad  Consumers  Protection  Act,  1995  shall  be 

processed for the purpose of compensation. 

15. 

Another  question  raised  in  these  proceedings  is  the  maintainability  of  this 

appeal, whereas section 10 of The Islamabad Consumers Protection Act, 1995 deals 

with the concept of appeal, the same is reproduced as under:- 

“10. Appeal. - An appeal against the order of Authority shall lie to the 
High  Court  and  the  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 
1898  (Act  V  of  1898),  in  respect  of  appeals  to  the  High Courts shall, 
mutatis mutandis, apply”. 

The  above  referred  provision  only  focus  the  appeals  to  High  Court,  which  means 

sections 410 and 417, Cr.P.C were applicable, the same are as under:- 

“410. Appeal from sentence of Court of Session. Any person convicted 
on a trial held by a Sessions Judge, or an Additional Sessions Judge, 
may appeal to the High Court. 

417.  Appeal  in  case  of  acquittal.  (1)  Subject  to  the  provision  of  sub-
section  (4),  the  Provincial  Government  may,  in  any  case,  direct  the 
Public  Prosecutor  to  present  an  appeal  to  the  High  Court  from  an 
original or appellate order of acquittal passed by any Court other than 
a High Court.  

(2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted 
upon  complaint  and  the  High  Court,  on  an  application  made  to  it  by 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

6 

the complainant in this behalf grants special leave to appeal from the 
order of acquittal the complainant may present such an appeal to the 
High Court. 

(2-A) A person aggrieved by the order of acquittal passed by any 
Court other than a High Court, may, within thirty days, file an appeal 
against such order. 

(3) No application under sub-section (2) for the grant of special 
leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall be entertained by the 
High Court after the expiry of sixty days from the date of that order.  

(4) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (2) for the 
grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal is refused, 
no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie under sub-section (1)”. 

In  view  of  above,  it  is  made  clear  that  the  forum  of  appeal  against  order  of 

Consumer  Court  is  High  Court  only,  which  can  be  considered  only  in  two 

eventualities i.e. in case of conviction or acquittal in terms of sections 410 and 417 

Cr.P.C, which can be equated as if any consumer complaint is allowed or dismissed 

through final order and in any other eventuality does not fall under this concept.  

16. 

The Islamabad Consumer Protection Act, 1995 is also silent qua the interim 

or  interlocutory  orders  and  appeal  U/S  10  of  the  Act  only  provides  application  of 

Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898  to  the  extent  of  appeal  to  High  Court  as  referred 

above, therefore, it can safely be considered that all interim/interlocutory orders are 

not appealable as the scheme of The Islamabad Consumers Protection Act, 1995 is 

based upon summary procedure for early determination of consumer complaint and 

the true intent of the legislature has to be applied in same manner.  

17. 

 While considering the entire concept of appeal in Criminal Procedure Code, 

this Court is fully convinced that appeal U/S 10 of Islamabad Consumers Protection 

Act, 1995 is only  maintainable against the order of the authority, which  is  final  in 

its  nature  after  conclusion  of  the  proceedings,  especially  the  procedure  U/S  8  for 

disposal  of  the  complaint  deals  with  examination  of  complainant  and  concept  of 

opportunity of  being heard describes complete mechanism of determination of real 

issue,  whereas  prior  to  the  said  procedure  every  order  is  to  be  considered 

interlocutory,  which  cannot  be  challenged  in  appeal,  otherwise  the  very  mandate 

and  intention  of  the  legislature  would  stand  frustrated.  Even  otherwise,  Islamabad 

Consumers Protection Act, 1995 does not provide any revisional powers to the High 

Court, which could cover such kind of eventuality and when the legislature has not 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.176/2017. 

7 

provided such provision to cover interim orders, then the intent has to be applied in 

strict manner.  

18. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  appeal  is  not  maintainable, 

therefore, the same is hereby dismissed.  

                               (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 

R.Anjam 

  JUDGE 

  JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
