ts

JUDGMENI  SHEEI

BAD HIGH COURT
!SIAMABAD

W.P. No33A2012

Shakeel H

in Shah

VS
Bushra  Hameed etc.

Petitioner by:
Respondent  No.1  by
Dote of heoring:

Jqn Muhqmmod  Khon  Advocqle
Sved  Wqjid AliGillqni. Advocqle
21-02-2013

Rioz Ahmod  Khon J:  This judgment  is directed to dispose of

W.P. No.33412012

2.  Brief facts of the case are that petitioner  shakeel

Hussain  shah married respondent  No.1  Bushra Hameed  on22-

04-2009.  Unfortunately, after the marriage, the rerations

became strained and in May 2010, the respondent wife left the

house of the petitioner. According to respondent wife,  she was

mal-treated  and was given beatings,  so she had to reave  the

house,  whereas contention of the petitioner husband is that the

respondent wife had left the house at her own sweet-will.

Respondent wife thereafter  filed suit for recovery of dower

amount Rs.3,00,0001 and maintenance  allowance at the rate of

Rs. 40001- per month. Aftenrards  prayer  regarding  recovery of

dowry  articles was also added to the plaint. whereas, the

defendant husband  filed suit for restitution  of conjugal rights.

The respondent/plaintiff appeared as her own witness  and

against that defendant  husband  appeared as sole witness.

\\/.1'" No.$:i'ii;#  ! !

2

Learned  trial Court after hearing  the parties, passed the decree

regarding dower amount as well as maintenance allowance,

however, the suit regarding dowry articles was dismissed. The

suit regarding restitution  of conjugal rights was also decreed

Both the parties filed appeals before learned Additiona!  District

Judge. ln appeal,  the decree  regarding  dower amount  as well

as maintenance a!lowance was maintained. The claim

regarding  dowry articles  was dismissed.  However,  suit

regarding restitution  of conjugal rights was also dismissed

Feeling aggrieved of the same, the petitioner husband filed the

present writ petition

3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner  submitted  that

petitioner/husband had paid dower  amount on the wedding

night to the respondenUwife and the petitioner/husband  had

stated  the same  fact before the Court. The wife as such,  was

required  to produce evidence  to disprove the claim of the

husband.  !t was further  submitted that the allegation  of cruelty

was not proved  against the husband. The wife had left the

house of her husband at her own sweet-will and therefore,  she

is not entitled to maintenance  allowance.  Learned counsel  also

submitted that since there is no suit for dissolution of marriage,

the dower  amount  had been paid, therefore,  the petitioner

husband  was entitled  to decree for restitution  of conjugal rights.

4.  On the other hand,  learned counsel  for respondent  wife

submitted that the dower amount was never paid, the

!'1.i"1  . l?. ;,j.ti: tt )'I

3

respondent  wife was subjected to physical  torture and in that

respect, medical report is available.  The respondent  wife had

been living in the house of her parents  since 11-05-2010  and

she is, therefore, entitled  to maintenance  allowance.

5. 

! have heard learned counsel for the parties and have

also perused  the record.

6.  Admitted  position in the present case is that dower

amount fixed at the time of marriage  was Rs.3,00,000/-.  lt is

also admitted that the maintenance  allowance, agreed at the

time of Nikkah was Rs.4000  per month. Nikkah-nama  in this

respect is also available on record. Contention of the petitioner

husband is that he had paid the dower amount on the wedding

night and in this respect  had deposed  before  the learned  trial

Court. Mere  statement  before the Court cannot be considered

as a proof in its own-self.  The petitioner  husband  is bound to

prove the payment of dower  amount through  evidence. ln

absence  of cogent evidence, sim[le statement cannot be

considered  as a proof and in such case, the onus would  not

shift to the wife to disprove  the claim of the husband. Mere

statement that dower was paid on the wedding  night, is not

sufficlent to prove the payment of dower.  lnfact, such a

statement  cannot even be considered as evidence.  The

payment  of dower as such has not been proved.
7.  Dower  infact is a debt against the husband  and in case

the dower amount is not paid, the wife would  have a right to

W.la. No"il:!  i.1)'{?  I !

4

refuse the performance  of her marital obligations. Once it is

proved that the dower has not been paid, the wife would  be

entitled to stay away from the husband and the husband would

be bound to pay maintenance  to his wife.  ln the present case,

there is no evidence  to prove that the husband had paid the

dower amount and therefore, the wife is entitled  to receive

maintenance  allowance.

8.  As far as amount of maintenance allowance is
concerned, the same was fixed in the Nikkah,nama as

Rs.4,000/-  per month, so both the learned lower Courts  had

rightly fixed the said amount as maintenance allowance  of the

respondent  wife. Regarding  restitution of conjugal  rights, the

learned counsel for the respondent wife submitted  that the

respondent wife is prepared to live with the petitioner  husband

provided  the dower amount as well as the maintenance

allowance  is paid to the wife and house for residential purpose

is provided  to the respondent  wife. The allegation of cruelty has

not been proved, therefore, the petitioner husband is entitled to

the decree for restitution of conjugal  rights  subject  to payment

of dower. The writ petition  in respect  of dower and maintenance

allowance  is therefore,  dismissed,' whereas in respect of

restitution of conjugal  rights is accepted  subject to payment of

dower

Waju)

(Riaz  Ahmad  Khan)
Judge

