Form  No:  HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

W.P.  No.472/2021 

Faisal Jamal Ayoob 

VS

Learned District Judge, Islamabad, etc 

Petitioner  by 

Ms.  Ammara  Kazmi, Advocate. 

Respondents by 

Ch  Junaid Nadeem. Advocate. 

Date of  Hearing 

05-03-2021. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH.  C.J.-  Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  assailed  order,  dated  07.01.2021,  passed  by  the 

learned District Judge, Islamabad (West), whereby the  separate suits 

filed  by the  parties have been consolidated and ordered to  be placed 

before  the  designated  court  dealing  with  matters  of  overseas 

Pakistanis. 

2. 

The learned counsel for the  petitioner  has contended that 

the  respondent  is  not  an  overseas Pakistani;  the  respondent  was 

arrested  on  12.11.2018  by  the  National Accountability  Bureau and 

reference  against  him  is  pending  before  a  competent  court;  the 

respondent was released from  prison on 23.04.2020;  the  latter  holds 

a  Pakistani passport  and  only  on  the  basis of  NICOP card  he  was 

treated an overseas Pakistani. 

Pa,e-  2 
W.P. No~72  /202j 

3. 

The  learned  counsel for  the  respondent  has  contended 

that  though  the  latter  holds  a  Pakistani passport  but  he  is  living 

abroad and has been treated  as such because NICOP card has been 

issued by  a  competent  authority;  the  respondent  has  been  living 

abroad since 1978; the family members of the  respondent are all U.S 

nationals. 

4. 

The learned counsels for the  parties have been heard and 

the record perused with their able assistance. 

5. 

The  court  designated is  to  deal  with  cases of  genuine 

overseas Pakistanis. The determining factor for an overseas Pakistani 

is  his or  her passport. In  the  case in hand the  respondent is  living in 

Pakistan for  last  two  years  and  he  holds a  Pakistani passport.  No 

prejudice would be caused if the  two  separate suits are consolidated 

and heard by a  competent court other than the  designated court for 

overseas Pakistanis. The suits were already pending in two  different 

courts. 

6. 

For the  above  reasons, this  petition  is  allowed  and  the 

impugned  order  is  hereby  set-aside.  The  learned  District  Judge, 

Islamabad  (West)  is  expected  to  consolidate  both  the  suits  and 

~l~ 
/ .plaeed them.  before  a  competent  court  other  than  the  designated 

court for overseas Pakistanis. This Court further  expects that the trial 

in both the separate suits would be concluded at the ea~i~st. 

Asif  mughal/* 

(CHI&i'JUSTICE) 

