JUDGMENT-SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Appeal No. 172 of 2021  
Ms. Ghazala Ali 
VS
Sikandar Ramzan Ch.  

===== 

Raja Iftikhar Ahmad Advocate. 

Appellant By:   
Respondents By:   Mr. Mudassar Hussain Malik Advocate.  
For the State: 
Date of Hearing:   08.11.2023 

Mr. Hazrat Younas with Anwar SI.  

ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR, J:  Through the listed criminal 

appeal in terms of Section 417 (2A) Cr.P.C, „appellant’ namely Ms. 

Ghazala Ali (complainant) impugns order dated 12.10.2021, passed 

by learned Judicial Magistrate Section-30, Islamabad-West whereby 

respondents  1&2  namely  Sikandar  Ramzan  Ch.  and  Ms.  Samina 

Babar Ramzan („respondents’) were acquitted in terms of Section 

249-A  Cr.  P.C  in  case  FIR  No.  228,  dated  25.05.2018,  under 

sections 420, 468 & 471 PPC, Police Station Aabpara, Islamabad.  

2-  Precisely,  subject  FIR  stood  registered  on  the  complaint  of 

appellant  Ms.  Ghazala  Ali  wherein  it  was  alleged  that  she  is 

daughter  of  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali,  who  was  owner  of  House  No.  41, 

Street No. 12, Sector F-6/3 Islamabad („subject house’); that her 

father  died  in  the  year  1990;  that  her  two  brothers  namely 

Sikander  Ramzan  Ch.  (respondent  No.1)  and  Babar  Ramzan  Ch. 

(late), by producing fake person in CDA and putting fake signatures 

of  her  father  got  transferred  subject  house  in  their  name;  that  at 

the  relevant  time,  other  brother  and  sisters  had  been  abroad, 

therefore,  remained  unaware  regarding  said  forged  transaction; 

that  their  father  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali  died  on  30.10.1990  while  the 

subject  house  stood  transferred  in  the  name  of  two  brothers  on 

23.11.1991;  that  her  brother  Babar  Ramzan  Ch.    died  in  the  year 

1992  and  at  that  time  their  mother  Ms.  Anwar  Sultana  was  alive 

and  entitled  to  1/6th  share  in  subject  house;  that  her  mother  Ms. 

 
 
 
 
 
2 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

Anwar  Sultana  died  in  the  year  1997;  that  after  the  death  of  her 

mother,  her  legal  heirs  including  appellant  and  brother  Tariq 

Ramzan Ch. were entitled to their due share in the subject house; 

that  in  the  year  2005  respondents  Sikandar  Ramzan.  and  Ms. 

Samina  Babar  Ramzan  prepared  forged  succession  certificate  and 

fraudulently got transferred the subject house in their names and in 

the names of their children, thus deprived the appellant and other 

legal heirs of their legal share in subject house by employing fraud 

and forgery. 

3-  After  due  investigation,  report  in  terms  of  Section  173  Cr.P.C 

was  submitted  before  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  for  trial. 

The  said  report  primarily  based  upon  documentary  evidence 

including  the  application  and  transfer  forms  collected  from  CDA 

containing  signatures  of  late  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali  and  Opinion  of 

Handwriting Expert wherein on examination, questioned signatures 

of  the  late  found  not  similar  with  that  of  his  routine  signatures. 

Subsequently,  on  an  application  by  respondent  No.1  regarding 

tendering  of  Opinion  with  fake  signatures  of  the  Examiner, 

supplementary  report  under  section  173  Cr  PC  was  submitted 

before  the  court  with  Opinion  of  Handwriting  Expert  of  even  date 

i.e.  19.04.2019  wherein,  the  signatures  of  the  late  on  questioned 

documents and routine signatures were found similar in nature. At 

the  trial,  respondents  were  charge-sheeted  on  31.07.2019  where 

after  they  filed  an  application  under  section  249-A  Cr.  P.C.  The 

learned  Trial  Court  after  hearing  the  parties,  accepted  the 

application  vide  order  dated  12.10.2021,  being  impugned  through 

the listed appeal. 

4-  Learned counsel for the parties addressed lengthy arguments by 

referring previous litigation, both civil and criminal, launched by the 

appellant  and  one  of  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch.  against 

respondents  and  others.  Both  the  sides  documented  the  appeal  to 

highlight 

their  respective  contentions.  Respondents 

through 

separate civil misc. placed on record copies of FIRs, orders passed 

thereupon  and  copies  of  civil  litigation  and  orders  thereupon 

besides an agreement-family settlement dated 17.01.1998. 

 
 
 
3 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

5-    The  circumference  of  the  submissions  advanced  by  learned 

counsel  for  the  appellant  had  been  to  the  effect  that  respondents 

by playing fraud and forgery, deprived the appellant and other legal 

heirs of their share in the subject  house; that forgery and fraud is 

substantiated  by  the  Opinion  of  Handwriting  Expert  and  that  in 

order  to  perpetuate  illegal  act  just  to  grab  the  property  by 

depriving other legal heirs, respondents subsequently got prepared 

succession  certificate  by  deliberately  concealing  all  legal  heirs  and 

then fraudulently got transferred the subject house in their names 

and  in  the  names  of  their  children.  Learned  counsel  in  support  of 

his  submissions  referred  various  documents,  tendered  before  the 

CDA  for  the  purpose  of  transfer  of  allotment  of  subject  house  by 

the respondents. According to learned counsel, the subject transfer 

of allotment in the name of respondents, on the face of it, is bogus 

as  it  was  made  after  the  death  of  Ch,  Ramzan  Ali,  who  died  on 

30.10.1990  while  alleged  transfer  of  allotment  in  the  name  of 

respondents was made much later on 23.11.1991, therefore, under 

the  circumstances,  proper  course  for  the  Trial  Court  was  to  record 

evidence  and  then  decide  the  case  on  merits  instead  to  knockout 

the  appellant  without  affording  her  due  opportunity  to  produce 

evidence,  thus  impugned  order  being  against  the  spirit  of  natural 

justice,  contrary  to  incriminating  material  made  basis  to  indict  the 

respondents  for  the  alleged  offence  and  offensive  to  right  of  fair 

trial envisaged in Article 10-A of the Constitution is liable to be set 

aside. 

6-  On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents vehemently 

repelled  the  submissions  advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant  by  contending  that  respondents  had  been/are  facing 

dense  litigation,  both  civil  and  criminal,  initiated  by  the  appellant 

and  the  other  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch,  while  none  of  the  other 

two sisters came forward to support the appellant; that the matter 

inter  se  the  parties  had  already  been  settled  regarding  estate  of 

their predecessor through family settlement in the year 1998 where 

after, appellant and her brother Tariq Ramzan Ch launched criminal 

and  civil  actions,  one  after  the  other  out  of  personal  grudge  and 

vendetta against widow of their late brother and the other brother 

 
 
 
4 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

with  whom  they  had  already  settled  the  family  issue;  that  in  an 

identical  case  lodged  by  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch,  respondents  were 

acquitted in terms of Section 249-A Cr. P. C and appeal against the 

said order   was also  dismissed by this Court with costs, therefore, 

instant  appeal  being  frivolous,  vexatious  and  offshoot  of  malicious 

prosecution launched by appellant, deserves the same treatment.  

7-  Heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  consulted  the 

documents made available on file with their able assistance.  

8-  The parties-to-lis hail from common pedigree. The subject house 

was  owned  by  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali  (predecessor  in  interest  of  the 

parties)  who  died  on  30.10.1990.  the  appellant  and  respondents 

are  closely  related  with  each  other.  The  appellant  and  respondent 

No.1 Sikander Ramzan Chaudhry are real brother and sister  while 

respondent No.2 Ms. Samina Babar Ramzan Ch. is widow of Babar 

Ramzan  Chaudhry,  late  brother  of  appellant  and    sister-in-law 

(bhabi)  of  appellant.  Late  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali  (died  in  1990)  was 

survived  by  Ms.  Anwar  Sultana  (died  in  1997)  widow,  three  sons 

Tariq Ramzan Ch., Sikander Ramzan Ch. (respondent No.1), Babar 

Ramzan  Ch.  (died  in  1992)  and  three  daughters  Bushra  Bibi, 

Zahida Parveen and Ms. Ghazala Ali (appellant).  

9-  As  per  the  documents  made  available  on  file,  before  the  rift 

cropped  up  between  the  parties,  dispute  with  regard  to  estate  of 

the deceased was settled through an agreement dated 17.01.1998. 

The  appellant  and  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch.  were  also 

signatories  of  the  said  agreement.  The  said  agreement,  as  per 

documents,  still  holds 

the 

field  and  has  not  yet  been 

cancelled/revoked  by  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  despite 

questioned  by  the  appellant  and  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch 

through a civil suit. 

10- 

Record  further  reveals  that  appellant  and  her  brother 

Tariq Ramzan Ch commenced the litigation, both civil and criminal, 

 
 
 
 
 
5 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

against respondents and others in the year 2018, then in 2019 and 

2020 as well.  

The  first  action  was  initiated  on  09.01.2018  by  appellant 
and  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch  by  filing  suit  against 
respondents  and  others  seeking  decree  for  declaration, 
partition,  cancellation  of  agreement  dated  17.01.1998, 
permanent and mandatory injunction.  

After  about  five  months  of  filing  of  said  suit  on 
25.05.2018  appellant  got  registered  FIR,  subject  matter 
of  instant  appeal  wherein  respondents  were  acquitted 
vide impugned order. 

Islamabad, 

i.e.  Aabpara 

Thereafter,  on  11.12.2018,  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  got 
registered  FIR  No.432,  under  section  420  PPC,  at  same 
Police  Station 
regarding 
preparation of forged agreement dated 13.02.2007 (after 
more  than  ten  years  of  said  agreement)  against 
respondents.  In 
the  said  case,  respondents  were 
acquitted  in  terms  of  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C  by  learned 
Islamabad-West  vide 
Judicial  Magistrate  Section-30 
Judgment  dated  12.10.2021.  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry 
assailed  the  said  order  before  this  Court  through  Crl. 
Appeal No. 199 of 2021 which was dismissed with costs of 
Rs.200,000/-.  Paragraph  7,  8  and  9  being  significant  are 
reproduced:- 

“07. 
Father  of  the  appellant  namely  Ch. 
Ramzan Ali, got transferred House No. 41, Street 
No.12,  Sector  F-6/3, Islamabad  in  the  names  of 
his sons Sikandar Ramzan and Babar Ramzan on 
11.08.1990,  in  his  life  time,  by  adopting  legal 
procedure  in  the  office  of  Capital  Development 
Authority, Islamabad. 

08. The  deceased  father  affixed  his  signatures 
and  thumb  impression  himself  on  the  transfer 
application  form,  consequently  transfer  letter 
was issued by the office of C.D.A on 23.11.1991, 
after  the  death  of  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali  but  all  the 
legal  and  codal  formalities  of  transfer  of  the 
property  were  completed  on  11.08.1990,  during 
life time of Ch. Ramzan Ali. 

09. When  confronted,  learned  counsel  for  the 
appellant  has  admitted  that  there  is  no  expert 
report  that  the  thumb  impressions  and  the 
signatures  of  deceased  father  are  fake  or 
forged.” {Emphasis added} 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

On  20.02.2019,  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  again  got 
registered  another  FIR  bearing  No.  131,  under  section 
420,  468,  471  PPC,  this  time  at  Police  Station  Civil  Lines 
Rawalpindi,  against  the  respondents  on  the  same 
allegation  of  preparing 
forged  agreement  dated 
13.02.2007.  It  this  juncture,  it  is  necessary  to  mention 
that  as  per  stance  of  respondents  said  agreement  had 
been  made  pursuant  to  original  agreement/settlement  of 
1998 in order to protect rights of legal heirs.  

On  09.05.2019  Tariq  Ramzann  Chaudhry 
filed  an 
application  against  his  sister-in-law/respondent  No.2  Ms. 
Samina  Babar  Ramzan  for  cancellation  of  guardianship 
certificate dated 25.07.1995 but the same was dismissed 
by learned Guardian Judge vide order dated 02.12.2021. 

On  11.09.2019  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  fled  suit  for 
declaration,  possession,  mesne  profits  and  permanent 
injunction against respondents and others. 

On 23.12.2019, one Tariq Masood, employee of Hammad 
son  of  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  got  registered  FIR  No. 
435,  under  sections  324,  34  and  109  PPC,  at  Police 
Station  Shalimar  Islamabad  against  respondents  and 
others  wherein  the  latter  were  acquitted  in  terms  of 
section  249-A  Cr.P.C  by  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate 
Section 30 Islamabad-West vide order dated 02.11.2021. 

On 01.05.2020, Tariq Ramzanan Chaudhry got registered 
FIR  No.  122,  under  section  420,  468,  471,  201,  498-A 
and  466  PC,  at  Police  Station  Shahzad  Town  Islamabad, 
on the allegation of fraudulent transfer of property of her 
in laws by excluding other legal heirs wherein respondent 
No.2  Samina  Babar  Ramzan  was  allowed  pre-arrest  bail 
by  learned  ASJ-II  Islamabad  East  vide  order  dated 
30.07.2021. 

11- 

Perusal of documents regarding above litigation, launched 

by  appellant  and  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  reveals  that 

respondents  were  subjected  to  face  criminal  and  civil  litigation 

primarily  on  the  same  subject  matter.  Besides  present  FIR,  four 

FIRs were got registered against them besides two civil suits, filed 

by  appellant  and  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  against 

respondents  and  an  application  for  cancellation  of  guardianship 

certificate  which  was  dismissed.  It  appears  that  the  appellant  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Chaudhry  had  been/are  keeping  the 

respondents  on  their  target.  The  above  mentioned  proceedings 

though  no  directly  related  to  subject  FIR  yet  their  relevance  and 

significance  cannot  be  ignored,  primarily  for  the  reason  of  having 

one and the same original cause of action, made basis by appellant 

and  her  brother  Tariq  Ramzan  Ch.  to  launch  proceedings  against 

respondents  and  the  aspect  that  same  do  form  part  of  judicial 

record,  having  direct  nexus  with  the  subject  matter  of  instant 

appeal.  Under  the  principle,  documents  that  retain  such  like 

qualifications can be made basis to take judicial notice of the same. 

Ordinarily, documents are produced through a witness who testifies 

on  oath  and  who  may  be  cross-examined  by  the  other  side. 

However, there are exceptions with regard to facts which need not 

be proved; these are those which the Court can take judicial notice 

of  under  Article  111  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahdat  Order,  1984  and  are 

mentioned in Article 112, and facts which are admitted (Article 113, 

Qanun-e-Shahdat  Order,  1984),  pertaining  to  part  of  judicial 

record,  having  direct  nexus  with  subject  matter  of  instant  appeal. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  recent  pronouncement  of  the  Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Manzoor  Hussain  (deceased) 

through LRs v. Misri Khan ( CA No. 1698 of 2014). 

12- 

Adverting to the merits of the case,  it is noticed that the 

alleged  transaction  of  transfer  of  allotment  in  the  name  of  two 

brothers  i.e.  respondent  No.1  Sikandar  Ramzan  Chaudhry  and 

Babar  Ramzan  Chaudhry  (late),  husband  of  respondent  No.2  was 

made in the year 1991 while subject FIR was got registered by the 

appellant in the year 2018 i.e. after twenty-seven years of alleged 

transaction  and  after  about  twenty  years  of  the  first  agreement 

wherein  she  had  also  been  a  signatory,  challenged  the  same 

subsequently  after  twenty  years  of  alleged  transaction.  Before  the 

registration  of  instant  FIR,  the  appellant  had  already  filed  suit  on 

09.01.2018 for cancellation of agreement dated 17.01.1998 with a 

delay of more than twenty years.  

13- 

As  there  were  two  reports  of  Handwriting  Expert  of  even 

date,  filed  before  the  Trial  Court  along  with  reports  under  section 

 
 
 
8 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

173  Cr.P.C,  one  allegedly  contained  fake  signatures  of  the  Official 

concerned  while  the  other,  filed  with  supplementary  report  under 

section  173  Cr.P.C,  testified  as  genuine.  In  order  to  verify  the 

veracity  of  the  report,  on  the  direction  of  this  Court,  FIA  filed 

comprehensive  report  on  24.10.2022  highlighting  the  procedure 

and  SOPs,  being 

followed 

for  examination  of  questioned 

documents.  As  per  said  report,  made  part  of  file,  after  careful 

examination and adopting due process, report was prepared by the 

concerned official, then examined and approved by Deputy Director 

Technical  and  thereafter  Director  Technical  Wing  FIA.  The  report 

dated  19.04.2019  reveals  that  signatures  of  late  Ch.  Ramzan  Ali 

are  similar  in  characteristics  with  his  routine  signatures.  Thus, 

report,  authenticated  and  verified  by  the  Deputy  Director  and 

Director  Technical  Wing  FIA,  negates  allegation  of  forgery,  as 

alleged by the appellant in her FIR and pressed to seek full-length 

inquiry  on  the  basis  of  reports  containing  fake  signatures  of  the 

official  concerned,  which  of  course,  deserves  stern  departmental 

action  against  the  delinquent/s,  after  tracing  them  out  by  the  FIA 

and the police as well. 

14- 

Apart  from  fake  Handwriting  Expert  Report,  rest  of 

incriminating material made basis to indict the respondents for the 

offence alleged, comprised of documents mentioned in the recovery 

memo. The same are allotment letter in the name of original owner 

pertaining  to  the  year  1964,  application  form  for  transfer  of 

allotment,  requisition  of  transfer  application,  document  containing 

signatures  of  late-predecessor  in  interest  of  the  parties,  transfer 

letter,  application  for  transfer  of  share,  letter  of  transfer  of 

allotment  in  the  name  of  respondent  No.2,  letter  of  division  of 

subject house and photo copies of CNICs. None of these documents 

even remotely suggest that any fraud, as alleged, had been played 

by the respondents. It was also for the reason that neither the CDA 

nor  the  Investigation  Agency  alleged  any  forgery  in  preparation  of 

said  documents.  Therefore,  entire  prosecution  evidence  did  not 

implicate  the  respondents  for  commission  of  alleged  fraud  and 

forgery. 

 
 
 
9 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

15- 

It  is  well  settled  that  in  terms  of  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C, 

the  Magistrate  may  acquit  an  accused  at  any  stage  of  the  case  if, 

after  hearing  the  prosecutors  and  the  accused  and  for  reasons  to 

be recorded, he considers that the charge is groundless or there is 

no  probability  of  the  accused  being  convicted  of  any  offence.  The 

prerequisites for invoking the power in terms of Section 249 Cr.P.C 

are  to  the  effect  that  before  passing  the  order,  Magistrate  should 

hear  the  parties  and  consult  the  incriminating  material  and  draw 

opinion  regarding  acquittal  on  the  basis  of  said  incriminating 

material only in case when the charge appears to be groundless or 

there  is  no  probability  of  the  accused  being  convicted  of  any 

offence.  In  the  present  case,  as  discussed  above,  charge  against 

respondents,  on  examination  of  incriminating  material,  appears  to 

be  groundless  and  there  was  no  probability  of  the  respondents 

being convicted of any offence, in case prosecution was allowed to 

lead entire prosecution evidence.  

16- 

To  sum  up,  on  careful  examination  of  incriminating 

material, made basis to indict the respondents coupled with the fact 

of  launching  dense  litigation,  both  civil  and  criminal  highlighted 

above, by the appellant and her brother Tariq Ramzan Ch., whose 

identical  appeal  was  earlier  dismissed  by  this  Court  with  costs,  it 

can  safely  be  held  that  charge  against  the  respondents  was 

groundless and there was no remote  probability of their conviction 

in case the prosecution was allowed to produce entire evidence. 

17- 

It  is  significant  to  note  that  instant  case  appears  to  be  a 

classic  example  of  frivolous  litigation.  It  appears  that  there  was 

blatant abuse of process of law to settle personal vendetta instead 

to  agitate  genuine  grievance  despite  the  fact  that  parties  are 

closely  related  to  each  other.  Such  frivolous,  vexatious  and 

speculative litigation unduly burdens the courts giving artificial rise 

to  pendency  of  cases  which  in  turn  clogs  the  justice  system  and 

delays the resolution of genuine disputes. Such type of litigation is 

required  to  be  rooted  out  of  the  system  and  one  of  the  ways  to 

curb such practice of instituting frivolous and vexatious cases is by 

imposing  of  costs.  The  specter  of  being  made  liable  to  pay  actual 

 
 
 
10 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

costs  should  be  such  as  to  make  every  litigant  think  twice  before 

putting forth a vexatious claim or defence before the Court. These 

costs  in  an  appropriate  case  can  be  over  and  above  the  nominal 

costs which include costs of the time spent by the successful party, 

the transportation and lodging, if any, or any other incidental cost, 

besides  the  amount  of  the  process  fee  and  lawyer's  fee  paid  in 

relation  to  the  litigation.  The  imposition  of  costs  in  frivolous  and 

vexatious  cases  meets  the  requirement  of  fair  trial  under  Article 

10A of the Constitution, as it not only discourages frivolous claims 

or  defences  brought  to  the  court  but  also  absence  of  such  cases 

allows more court time for the adjudication of genuine claims. The 

imposition  of  costs  lay  foundation  for  expeditious  justice  and 

promotes  a  smart  legal  system  that  enhances  access  to  justice by 

entertaining genuine claims. The purpose of awarding costs at one 

level  is  to  compensate  the  successful  party  for  the  expenses 

incurred to which he has been subjected and at another level to be 

an  effective  tool  to  purge  the  legal  system  of  frivolous,  vexatious 

and  speculative  claims  and  defences.  The  imposition  of  costs 

encourages alternative dispute resolution; settlements between the 

parties;  and  reduces  unnecessary  burden  of  the  courts,  so  that 

they  can  attend  to  genuine  claims.  The  costs  are  a  weapon  of 

offence for the plaintiff with a just claim to present and a shield to 

the defendant who has been unfairly brought into court. Reliance is 

placed upon Qazi Naveed ul Islam v. District Judge, Gujrat etc. (CP 

3127 of 2020), Province of Balochistan v. Murree Brewery Company 

(PLD 2007 SC 386 (5-MB),  Vinod Seth v. Devinder Bajaj (2010) 8 

SCC)  and  Edwin  Coe  LLP  v.  Naseem  Ahmad  Sarfraz  Khan  (2022 

CLC 1064-Islamabad). 

18- 

In  view  of  above,  impugned  order,  being  in  accordance 

with  law  and  facts  of  the  case,  does  not  call  for  any  interference. 

Consequently, by following the course adopted by learned co-equal 

Bench  while  dismissing  Crl.  Appeal  No.  199  of  2021,  titled  “Tariq 

Ramzan  Chaudhry  v.  Sikander  Ramzan  etc.”  instant  appeal  is 

dismissed with costs of Rs.200,000/- which the appellant shall 

pay to respondents within a period of two months from the date of 

this  judgment.  In  case  of  non-payment  of  costs  by  the  appellant 

within  the  prescribed  time,  same  shall  be  recovered  from  her  as 

 
 
11 

Crl. Appeal No. 172 of 2021 

money  decree  with  10%  monthly  increase,  and  the  costs  of  the 

execution proceedings shall also be recovered in addition thereto. 

Office is directed to transmit copy of this judgment to IG, ICT and 

DG  FIA  to  hold  in-depth  inquiry  and  proceed  against  the 

delinquent(s)  in  accordance  with  law  in  terms  of  Paragraph  12 

above.  

(ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR)  
JUDGE 

A,R.Ansari 

Announced in an open Court on ___.12.2023. 

JUDGE 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
