ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

Writ Petition No. 219/2020 
Muhammad Yousaf 
VS
AD&SJ-VII, Islamabad-West, etc. 

Petitioner by:         
Respondent No.3:   
Date of Hearing: 

Malik Babar Hamid, Advocate, 
In person, 
23.07.2020. 

FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM  JANDRAN,  J.-  Through  the 

instant  writ  petition,  petitioner  impugns  the  order  dated 

14.06.2019 & amended decree dated 07.10.2019, passed by 

learned  Additional  District  Judge-VII 

Islamabad-West, 

whereby  appeal  filed  by  the  respondent  No.3  was  allowed 

while  that  of  petitioner  was  dismissed  and  consequently, 

judgment  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  dated  10.12.2018  was 

modified in terms that suit of the petitioner for jactitation of 

marriage  was  dismissed  while  suit  of  the  respondent  No.3 

for  recovery  of  dower  amount  and  maintenance  was 

decreed. Both the learned courts below are at variance.  

2. 

Facts, relevant for the disposal of instant writ petition, 

are  that  on  09.10.2009  petitioner  filed  suit  for  jactitation  of 

marriage  with  the  averments  that  he  contracted  marriage 

with  respondent  No.3  on  10.11.2007;  that  their  relations 

turned hostile which ultimately led to separation  of spouses 

on 11.11.2008; that he sent notice of Talaq in the Arbitration 

Council  on  the  next  day  i.e.  12.11.2008  and  Certificate  of  

Effectiveness  of  Talaq  was  issued  on  30.03.2009;  that  the 

event  was  also  published  in  Daily  Jang  dated  04.02.2009; 

that  in  retaliation,  respondent  No.3  filed  a  suit  for  recovery 

of dower amount and maintenance which was contested by 

the  petitioner 

through  a  written  statement  but 

the 

respondent  No.3  subsequently  withdrew  her  suit;  that  the 

respondent  No.3  coerced  the  petitioner  time  and  again  to 

cohabit and re-unite, which necessitated this suit. 

 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 2 – 

3. 

On  the  contrary,  respondent  No.3  filed  separate  suit 

for  recovery  of  dower  amount  and  maintenance  allowance 

by  claiming  herself  to  be  the  lawfully  wedded  wife  of  the 

petitioner. On facts, she asserted that Talaq has not become 

effective,  as  the  petitioner,  soon  after  pronouncing  the 

Talaq, has withdrawn the same by making „Rujooh‟. Both the 

suits  were  consolidated  and  following  consolidated  issues 

were framed on 03.03.2011:- 

1.  Whether the plaintiff Mohammad Yousaf is entitled to 

the decree for jactitation of marriage? OPP 

2.  Whether suit of plaintiff Mohammad Yousaf is liable 
to be dismissed in view of preliminary objections 
No.1 to 5? OPD 

3.  Whether the defendant lady is entitled to the decree 
for recovery of maintenance, if so for which period 
and to what rate? OPD 

4.  Whether defendant lady is entitle to recovery of Haq 
Mahar of rupees 3 lac and 10 tola gold ornaments? 
OPD 

5.  Whether suit of defendant is liable to be dismissed in 
view of preliminary objections No.1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 10 
raised by defendant? OPP (As mentioned in the original 
order dated 03.03.2011 by the trial Court)  

6.  Relief    

4. 

    The  parties  produced  evidence  in  support  of  their 

respective versions. The petitioner appeared as PW-1 and in 

documentary  evidence  tendered  Nikah  Nama  Exh.P2, 

attested  copy  of  divorce  deed  Exh.P3,  Talaq  Certificate 

Exh.P4 and other documentary evidence comprising Exh.P5 

to  Exh.P40.  On  the  other  hand,  respondent  No.3  appeared 

as  DW-1  and  got  examined  Mohammad  Islam  as  DW-2.  In 

documentary  evidence  she  tendered  original  Nikah  Nama 

Exh.D4, Nikah Nama Register Exh.D5, Nikah Nama issued by 

Secretary, Arbitration Council Rawalpindi Cantt, Exh.D6 and 

other  documentary  evidence  comprising  Exh.  D7 

to 

Exh.D34.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 3 – 

5. 

     The  learned  Trial  Court  after  hearing  both  the 

parties,  decreed  both  the  suits  vide  Judgment  &  Decree 

dated 10.12.2018 in following terms:- 

“In view of my above findings,  suit of plaintiff for 
jactitation of marriage is decreed in his favour. Suit of 
defendant for payment of maintenance allowance and 
dower is partially decreed in her favour as defendant 
is found entitled for recovery of maintenance allowed 
of rupees 30 thousand per month for the iddat period 
and defendant is also found entitled for recovery of 
dower amounting to rupees 3 lac and 10 tola gold 
ornaments from plaintiff. Regarding remaining claim 
suit of the defendant is hereby dismissed.”  

6. 

      Both  the  sides  preferred  separate  appeals  against 

the  Judgment  &  Decree  ibid.  The  appeal  of  the  petitioner 

was  dismissed  while  that  of  the  respondent  No.3  was 

allowed vide Order 14.06.2019, and pursuant thereto decree 

dated 07.10.2019 was modified as under:- 

“Suit of the plaintiff for jactitation of marriage is 
dismissed.  Suit  of  plaintiff  for  payment  of 
maintenance allowance and dower is decreed in her 
favour as defendant is found entitled for recovery of 
dower amounting to rupees 3 lac + 10 tolas gold and 
pocket money 10 thousand per month. Where the 
currency  exchange  rate  of  US  Dollar  $  shall  be 
applicable on Pakistani rupees till realization of these 
amounts.  Defendant  is  also  found  entitled  for 
recovery of maintenance allowance @ 30 thousand 
per  month  from  10.11.2007  with  10%  annual 
increase.”  

7. 

     The Order ibid is being assailed through the instant 

writ  petition.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends 

that  petitioner  divorced  the  respondent  No.3  through 

Divorce  Deed  by  pronouncing  Three  Talaqs  at  a  time,  the 

notice  of  the  Talaq  was  sent  to  the  concerned  Arbitration 

Council,  where  parties  entered  appearance  and  got 

recorded 

their 

statements 

and 

thereafter 

Talaq 

Effectiveness  Certificate  was  issued  on  30.03.2009;  that 

respondent  No.3  challenged  said  certificate  before  the 

District  Officer  Revenue  Rawalpindi,  who  upheld  the  same 

and also awarded maintenance for the period of Iddat to the 

respondent  No.3;  that  the  learned  Appellate  Court  failed  to 

consider 

these 

important  documents  and  even 

the 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 4 – 

statement  of  the  respondent  No.3  which  she  got  recorded 

on  18.12.2008  before  the  Arbitration  Council;  that  the 

respondent  No.3  herself  has  sworn  in  an  affidavit  whereby 

she  has  waived  her  dower  and  maintenance;  that  earlier 

respondent  No.3  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance 

allowance  for  Iddat  period  but  subsequently  withdrew  the 

same  unconditionally,  therefore,  second  suit  on  the  same 

cause  of  action  was  not  maintainable;  that  petitioner  hails 

from  Hanfi  School  of  Thought  while  respondent  No.3 

belongs to Ahl-e-Hadees Sect and, therefore, questioned the 

Talaq pronounced thrice at once; that findings to the extent 

of  commission  of  any  perjury  by  the  petitioner  are  uncalled 

for,  unjust,  whimsical  and  arbitrary  and  that  the  impugned 

order being based on surmises and conjunctures is liable to 

be set aside. 

8. 

      The respondent No.3, on the other hand, reiterated 

the stance contained in her  pleadings; claims to be lawfully 

wedded  wife  of 

the  petitioner  and 

thus  entitled 

to 

matrimonial rights of dower amount and maintenance.  

9. 

      Heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  and 

respondent No.3 and examined the record. 

10. 

     The case in hand contains intricate questions, to be 

answered  in  accordance  with  the  Family  Courts  Act  1964 

(Act of 1964) and the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (Act of 1877).  

11. 

        In  this  case,  undoubtedly  the  marriage  through  a 

valid Nikah is an admitted  fact; not only this but the divorce 

pronounced  by  the  petitioner 

is  also  recognized  and 

acknowledged by the respondent No.3 and the dispute is on 

the point as to whether the petitioner has revoked the same 

by  making  Rujooh,  while  on  the  other  hand  petitioner 

constantly  denied  the  same  and  claimed  that  Talaq  had 

become  final  after  undergoing  the  mandatory  procedure 

that 

includes  proceedings  of  Arbitration  Council  and 

issuance of „Talaq Effective Certificate‟ („The Certificate‟).  

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 5 – 

12. 

      The  term  „jactitation of marriage',  according  to 

Black‟s Law Dictionary, Eleventh Edition means that:- 

“jactitation  of  marriage.  Hist.  1.  False  and 
actionable  boasting  or  claiming  that  one  is 
married to another.  2. An action against a person 
who  falsely  boasts  of  being  married  to  the 
complainant. 

“Jactitation of marriage is a cause of action which 
arises when a person falsely alleges that he or 
she is married to the petitioner, and the remedy 
sought  is  a  perpetual  injunction  against  the 
respondent to cease making such allegations. 
The cause is now uncommon in English municipal 
law and almost unknown in the conflict of laws.” 

13.  From  plain  reading  of  the  definition  supra,  it  is  clear  

that  kinds  of disputes  where  the very  basis  of the  marriage 

i.e.  performance  of  Nikah,  claim  and  counter  claim  on  its 

basis  is  made,  could  be  the  subject  of  a  suit  of  jactitation.  

When  circumference  of  the  suit  mainly  revolves  around  the 

claim  and  counter  claim  qua  existence  of  marriage  or 

otherwise. For instance, a decree for jactitation of marriage 

is  sought  on  the  ground  that  no  valid  Nikah  was  ever 

performed  between  the  parties  and  that  he  or  she  cannot 

claim  himself  or  herself  to  be  the  lawfully  wedded  wife  or 

husband, as the case may be.  It is unambiguously held that 

for  entertaining  a  suit  for  jactitation  of  marriage,  the 

foundation of the marriage i.e. Nikah Nama and existence of 

valid marriage is to be made subject of that litigation. 

14.  The  Hon‟ble  Federal  Shariat  Court  in  “Muhammad 

Anwar V. Mst. Shagufta Ahmad and 2 others” (2004 P.Cr.LJ 

1071) held that:- 

“here  is  marked  difference  between  suit  for 
dissolution  of marriage  and  suit  for  jactitation  of 
marriage; whereas in the former suit existence of 
valid marriage is admitted by the wife and decree is 
sought by her for its annulment/dissolution from the 
Qazi/Judge, Family Court on one or more grounds, 
enumerated  in  the  law  i.e.  Dissolution  of  Muslim 
Marriage Act; 1939, while in the latter case the Qazi is 
petitioned to declare that at no point of time marriage 
took place, thereby putting a permanent restraint on 

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 6 – 

the opponent from claiming the lady, to be his lawfully 
wedded wife.” [Emphasis Added]  

The  Hon‟ble  Lahore    High  Court  in  case  of  “Irshad 

Ahmad V. Muhammad Sharif and another  (PLD 2006 Lahore 

260), 

in  an 

irresistible  manner  expounded  that  “when 

anyone  of  the  parties  i.e.  husband/wife  alleges  that 

Nikahnama is forged and has a cause of action about 

adjudgment of Nikahnama, would be a cause of action under 

Section-5 of the Act, 1964.”  

15. 

In terms of Section 5 of the   West  Pakistan 

Family 

Courts Act 1964 („Act of 1964‟), subject to the provisions of 

the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  („Ordinance  of 

1961‟), the Family Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to 

entertain, hear and adjudicate upon matters specified in the 

Schedule.  The  matters  depicted  in  the  schedule  are  as 

under:-  

1. Dissolution of marriage.  
2. Dower.  
3. Maintenance.  
4. Restitution of conjugal rights.  
5. Custody of children.  
6. Guardianship.  
7. Jactitation of marriage.  
8. Dowry. 
9. Personal property and belongings of wife. 

The „jactitation of marriage‟ made part of the schedule 

pursuant  to  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  (Amendment) 

Act, 1969 (I of 1969).  

16.  Undoubtedly,  suit for jactitation  of  marriage  is  triable 

by the Family Court but the instant matter entails altogether 

different proposition, rather two steps ahead of the situation 

that  deals  with  the  suit,  mentioned  in  the  schedule  ibid  i.e. 

not only marriage between the parties is admitted, birth of a 

daughter  and  thereafter  her  death  after  two  days 

is 

admitted,  pronouncement  of  Talaq  has  also  been  admitted 

by both the parties and the dispute has arisen thereafter.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 7 – 

17.  What  would  be  the  proper  course  in  dealing  with  the 

suit  of  the  petitioner,  whereby  he  sought  jactitation  of 

marriage on the basis of aforementioned circumstances?  

The  learned  Court  of  first  instance  while  exercising 

jurisdiction as  a Family  Court,  without  adhering  to  the legal 

proposition decreed the suit as prayed for, while the learned 

Appellate Court, has not only reversed the said findings but 

also  proceeded  to  dismiss  the  suit  of  the  petitioner  by 

treating  it  as  a  suit  for  declaration  without  adverting  to  the 

admitted documentary evidence placed on record.  Even no 

evidence/record has been referred for dismissing the suit by 

treating it a suit for declaration.  

18.  Merely  stating  that  the  parties  are  married  according 

to the Ordinance of 1961 and each and every dispute arising 

out  between  them  would  be  triable  by  the  Judge  Family 

Court  amounts  to  oversimplification  of  a  highly  complex 

subject.  There  was  the  conflicting  legal  opinion  of  the 

Hon‟ble  Lahore  High  Court  regarding  the  matter  that  each 

and every case between husband and wife would fall within 

the  ambit  of  the  Act  of  1964  (PLD  2004  LHR  588  tiled  as 

Nasrullah  V.  District  Judge)  and  every  dispute  between 

husband and wife is not amenable to the Act of 1964, rather 

it  is  the  claim  of  the  parties  (PLD  2007  LHR  515  titled  as 

Mohammad  Akram  V.  Hajira  Bibi).  The  Hon‟ble  Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  resolved  this  conflict  in  a  judgment 

reported  as  PLD  2011  SC  260  by  approving  the  case  of 

Mohammad Akram (supra) in the following manner:- 

“Thus the interpretation of entry No.9 ibid as provided 
by Mohammad Akram v. Mst. Hajra Bibi and 2 others 
(supra) is the correct explication of law, which is 
hereby approved. However adding thereto, it may be 
held that if the ratio of Nasrullah dictum (supra) which 
is  entirely  and  solely  founded  on  the  noted 
concept/definition is taken to be correct, than a suit for 
Specific Performance, declaratory suits of any nature, 
or any other civil litigation between a wife and husband 
shall be amenable to the special jurisdiction of the 
family Court, which is not intent of the law.” (emphasis 
added) 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 8 – 

19.  By  seeking  guidance  from  the  above  referred  dictum 

of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan it is held that it is 

not the relationship between the parties that is to be given 

significance but matter and substance regarding which they 

are in litigation.  In  the  case  in  hand,  the  petitioner  alleges 

that he had divorced the respondent No.3, while she denies 

this fact by alleging that the petitioner had revoked the same 

afterwards.  The  petitioner  in  support  of  his  claim  has  a 

divorce  deed  in  his  possession;  talaq effective certificate 

duly  issued  by  the  Chairman  Arbitration  Council,  upheld  by 

the  Deputy  Collector  concerned  while  the  writ  petition  filed 

by  the  respondent  No.3  was  dismissed  in limine  by  the 

Hon‟ble  Lahore  High  Court,  Rawalpindi  Bench  vide  order 

dated 05.04.2010.  

20. 

In  presence  of  all  these  documents  along  with  other 

available  record,  the  petitioner,  as  per  his  claim  has 

grievance  to  be  declared  that  he  is  not  husband  of  the 

respondent No.3, while on the other side; all these facts had 

been denied by respondent No.3, merely on the ground that 

she is the wife of the petitioner. This fact demonstrates that 

the  substance 

in  question 

is  declaration  of  status  of 

particular 

individual,  whether  he 

is 

the  husband  of 

respondent No.3 or otherwise.  

21.  The claim of the petitioner, in presence of above facts 

and  record,  in  pith  and  substance,  is  a  claim,  whereby  he 

sought  declaration  of  his  legal  character  as  an  ex-husband 

of the respondent No.3.  

22.  Section  42  of  the  Act  of  1877  provides  remedy  to  a 

person  entitled  to  any  legal  character  to  file  a  suit  against 

any  person  denying  such  character.  For  ease  of  reference, 

Section ibid is reproduced hereunder:-   

“42. Any person entitled to any legal character, or to 
any right as to any property, may institute a suit 
against any person denying, or interested to deny, his 
title to such character or right, and the Court may in 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 9 – 

its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so 
entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for 
any further relief:  

Provided  that  no  Court  shall  make  any  such 
declaration where the plaintiff, being able to seek 
further relief than a mere declaration of title, omits to 
do so. 

Explanation  -  A  trustee  of  property  is  a  "person 
interested to deny" a title adverse to the title of 
someone who is not in existence, and for whom, if in 
existence, he would be a trustee.” [emphasis added] 

23.  The  section  ibid  provides  that  any  person  entitled  to 

any  legal  character  or  to  any  right  as  to  any  property,  may 

institute a suit  against any  person denying,  or interested  to 

deny, his title to such character or right. In the present case, 

the petitioner seeks decree to the effect that the respondent 

No.3  is  no  more  his  lawfully  wedded  wife  and  that  she  be 

restrained  to  claim  as  such  after  the  pronouncement  of 

divorce that has become effective. The suit of the petitioner, 

therefore, falls within the ambit of section ibid, triable by the 

court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to  try  the  said  matters.  The 

Hon‟ble  Lahore  High  Court  in  case  of  “Mst. Sadia Khan V. 

Muhammad  Asim  Khan  and  another”  (2001  CLC  330), 

endorsed 

the  position  regarding 

talaq  and  suit 

for 

declaration. 

24.  The  next  question  is  whether  the  learned  Appellate 

Court  rightly  exercised  the  jurisdiction  vested  in  it  and  that 

whether  the  judgment  in  appeal,  suffers  from  jurisdictional 

defect  and  result  of  misreading  and  non-reading  of  the 

evidence on record.  

25.  The facts, as glean out of the evidence on record, are 

that  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3  (hereinafter  to  be 

described  as  the parties)  entered  into contract  of marriage 

on  10.11.2007.  On  27.08.2008,  a  daughter  was  born  who, 

unfortunately  died  two  days 

later  on  29.08.2008.  The 

petitioner  pronounced  three  talaqs  upon  the  respondent 

No.3 vide divorce deed, Ex.P3 on 11.11.2008 and thereafter 

applied  for  issuance  of  talaq  effective  certificate  from  the 

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 10 – 

concerned  Union  Council.  The  respondent  No.3  appeared 

before  the  Union  Council  and  got  recorded  her  statement. 

The  petitioner  also  got  recorded  his  statement  in  those 

proceedings,  wherein  he  expressly  asserted 

that  no 

compromise  could  be  effected  between  the  parties  and 

certificate regarding effectiveness of divorce be issued.  

26.  The  Chairman  of  the  concerned  Union  Council,  after 

due  procedure,  issued  the  Certificate  on  30.03.2009.  The 

respondent  No.3  challenged  the  said  certificate  before  the 

District  Collector  Revenue  but  her  revision  was  dismissed 

by  upholding  the  Certificate  vide  order  dated  27.01.2010. 

The  respondent  No.3,  then,  filed  W.P.  No.347/2010  before 

the Hon‟ble Lahore High Court Rawalpindi Bench which too 

was dismissed in limine on 05.04.2010 by observing that the 

competent forum i.e. Family Court was already seized of the 

matter.  

27.  She  also  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dower  and 

maintenance on 29.01.2009.  In the said suit under  para No 

7&8,  respondent  No.3  stated  that  the  talaq  has  not  been 

revoked  by  the  petitioner,  so,  she  is  filing  the  suit  for 

maintenance  and  dower.  In  prayer  clause  amongst  other 

grounds,  she  also  claimed  the  maintenance  for  the  Iddat 

period, while in paragraph No.10, she specifically mentioned 

regarding  her  claim  in  respect  of  period  of  Iddat.  The 

petitioner  filed  written  statement 

in  the  said  suit  on 

08.04.2009,  wherein  it  had  been  categorically  mentioned 

that there was no Rujooh between the parties and certificate 

regarding effectiveness of divorce had already been issued 

by the concerned  Union Council, which has been upheld by 

the  Hon‟ble  High  Court.  The  petitioner  had  specifically 

stated  that  the  lady  now  falls  within  the  prohibited  degree 

for  him;  that  he  is  subject  of  Hanfi  sect,  where-under  after 

the pronouncement of three talaqs, wife becomes prohibited 

upon  the  individual  except  undergoing  the  Halala.  The  date 

was  fixed  for  reconciliation  of  the  matter  after  filing  of  the 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 11 – 

written  statement,  wherein  respondent  No.3  without  any 

permission to file fresh suit, recorded her statement that she 

is not interested to pursue the matter and wants to withdraw 

the  same.  Ultimately,  the  suit  was  dismissed  as  withdrawn 

vide  order  dated  25.06.2009.  The  respondent  No.3  claims 

that  there  is  no  divorce  and  that  she  is  still  wife  of  the 

petitioner  which  compelled  him  to  file  suit  for  permanent 

injunction  against  the  respondent  No.3,  wherein  she  got 

recorded  her  statement  on  06.02.2009  that  she  will  not 

illegally  harass  the  petitioner  and  the  suit  was  dismissed 

being infructuous.  

28.  Thereafter,  the  petitioner  also  issued  a  proclamation 

in  the  daily  Jang,  wherein  he  reiterated  the  stance  that 

respondent  No.3  is  no  more  his  wife;  he  has  divorced  her 

and is not responsible for any act of the respondent No.3. In 

addition,  the  petitioner  filed  an  application  to  the  police 

authorities  in  respect  of  conduct  of  respondent  No.3  which 

was disposed of. 

29.  At  the  end,  petitioner  filed  suit  for  jactitation  of 

marriage  on  09.10.2009  while  on  17.02.2010,  respondent 

No.3  filed  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  and  dower.  The 

respondent  No.3  filed  application  for  amendment  in  the 

plaint of the suit for recovery of maintenance allowance and 

dower  consisting  of  19  pages.  She  also  filed  another 

application for amendment in written statement, filed by her, 

in  suit  for  jactitation  of  marriage  consisting  of  28  pages. 

Both  the  applications  were  dismissed  by  the  learned  Trial 

Court vide order dated 31.05.2016 which had been assailed 

by  her  through  W.P.  No.4526/2016  before  this  Court.  The 

said  writ  petition  was  dismissed  through  a  detailed  order 

dated  17.02.2017  with  the  direction  to  the  Family  Court  to 

decide  the  case  within  a  period  of  one  month.  C.P.  No. 

907/2017 was filed against the said order before the Hon‟ble 

Apex  Court  but  the  same  too  was  dismissed  vide  order 

dated 14.04.2017.  

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 12 – 

30.  The history of the case referred above is part of record 

and  evidence.  The  learned  trial  Court  proceeded  to  decree 

the  suit  of  the  petitioner  for  jactitation  of  marriage  while 

partly dismissed the suit of respondent No.3 for recovery of 

maintenance  and  dower  in  terms  noted  in  Para-5  above, 

while  the  learned  Appellate  Court  reversed  the  findings  by 

dismissing  the  suit  of  the  petitioner  even  by  treating  it  as  a 

suit  for  declaration,  while  suit  of  the  respondent  No.3  was 

decreed as prayed for in terms noted in Para-6 above.  

31.  The  proposition  of  law  if  put  in  juxtaposition  with  the 

facts highlighted above, it transpires that the issue between 

the  parties  is  not  whether  the  marriage  is  in  existence  or 

otherwise  but  a  question  as  to  whether,  Talaq  has  become 

effective or has been revoked as alleged by the  respondent 

No.3.  The  findings  of  the  learned  Appellate  court  qua 

dismissal  of the  suit  of  the petitioner  by  treating  it as  a  suit 

for  declaration,  is  not  based  on  any  of  the  documents  and 

the evidence highlighted above. The documents i.e. divorce 

deed,  talaq  effectiveness  certificate,  order  of  District 

Collector  Revenue,  statement  of  respondent  No.3  during 

proceedings  before  the  arbitration  counsel,  her  stance 

during first suit for maintenance and recovery of dower and 

subsequent  claim  were  neither  considered  nor  discussed. 

No  observation  with  regard  to  said  documentary  evidence 

has  been  rendered  which  makes  the  impugned  judgment, 

result  of  misreading  and  non-reading  of  the  evidence, 

illegality floating on the surface of record.  

32.  The  other  important  aspect  of  the  matter  is  that  the 

learned Appellate Court proceeded to dismiss the suit of the 

petitioner  by  treating  it  as  a  suit  for  declaration  which,  of 

course,  as  a  matter  of  fact  and  under  the  spirit  of  the  law, 

when  it  was  established  that  the  proceedings  before  the 

learned Family Court were coram non judice, proper course 

was to return the plaint for its presentation before the court 

of  competent  jurisdiction.  However,  the  learned  Additional 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 13 – 

District  Judge,  while  hearing  an  appeal  against  judgment 

and  decree  of  the  Family  Court,  dismissed  the  suit  for 

declaration, when there was no appeal filed/ pending before 

him  in  a  civil  suit,  against  the  declaratory  decree  under 

Section  42  of  the  Act  of  1877,  therefore,  to  the  extent  of 

dismissal  of  the  suit  of  the  petitioner  by  treating  it  as  a 

declaratory suit, is an order without jurisdiction.   

33.  The  sequel  of  above  discussion  is  that  the  decrees 

passed by the learned Judge Family Court and upheld by the 

learned Appellate court  in a suit of the respondent No.3 for 

the  recovery  of  dower  amount  and  ten  tola  gold  ornament 

are upheld, being based on correct appreciation of evidence 

on record. The decree of learned Family Court to the extent 

of jactitation of marriage and that of learned Appellate Court 

to the extent of dismissal of suit of the petitioner by treating 

it  as  a  suit  for  declaration,  is  not  legally  sustainable  and  is 

accordingly  set  aside.  Likewise,  the  decrees  of  the  two 

learned courts to the extent of award of maintenance to the 

respondent No.3 are also set aside.  

34.  The  suit  of  the  petitioner  for  jactitation  of  marriage 

shall  be  deemed  pending  by  considering  it  a  suit  for 

declaration, which shall be decided afresh. The claim of the 

respondent  No.3  for  the  recovery  of  maintenance  for  the 

period  of  Iddat  or  otherwise,  would  depend  upon  the 

outcome of the suit of the petitioner, to be tried by the court 

of competent jurisdiction.  

35.  As  the  order  dated  14.06.2019  passed  by  the  learned 

Addl.  District  Judge, 

Islamabad  (West) 

in  a  suit  for 

jactitation  of  marriage  by  considering  it  a  declaratory  suit 

and  amended  Decree  in  the  light  of  said  order  dated 

07.10.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  to 

that  extent  have  been  set  aside,  therefore,  proceedings 

initiated  against  the  petitioner  under  Sections  476  and 

195(b) Cr.P.C are also set aside. The learned District Judge 

concerned is directed to entrust the suit of the petitioner for 

 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.219/2020. 
                                                            - 14 – 

its  decision  by 

the  Court  of  competent 

jurisdiction 

established to adjudicate the matters in terms of Section 42 

of the Act of 1877. As the parties are in litigation since 2009, 

therefore, learned Court, to whom the trial will be entrusted, 

shall  decide  the  case  within  a  period  of  one  month  by 

proceeding on day to day basis. No orders as to costs. 

36.  The  instant  writ  petition  is  accordingly  disposed  of  in 

above terms.  

(FIAZ AHMAD ANJUM JANDRAN)  

          JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on __________ 

Imran 

  JUDGE 

Approved for reporting. 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
