IUDGMENT SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD,
IUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

Criminal Revision  No.022014
Imtiaz Ali
VS
Salma Liaqat,  etc.

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Ahmad Iqbal Maiken,  Advocate  along
with petitioner.

Respondent  No.1by:  Mian Ashfaq  Ahmad,  Advocate along

with father of respondent  No.1.

Date of Hearing: 

05.07.2019.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  I: Through  the instant criminal

revision  petition,  the petitioner  impugns judgment  dated 08.01.2014 of

the learned Additional Sessions  Judge, whereby appeal filed

against judgment  dated  27.09.2013  of the Assistant Commissioner

(SecretariaQ/Sub-Divisional  Magistrate was dismissed  and sentence of

0L month awarded under Section  6(5) of the Muslim  Family  Laws

Ordinance,1961.  along  with fine of Rs.5,000  f - was upheld.

2.  Brief facts as referred in the instant writ petition are that

Mst. Salma  Liaqat  (hereinafter  referred  to as "responilentNo.l'),  submitted

a complaint against  her husband  namely lmtiaz Ali (hereinafter  referred  to

as "petitioner") with the allegations  that petitioner contracted  second

marriage  on 01.11.2012  without getting prior  permission from her, which

is a violation of the condition  envisaged  vide Column  No.2L of the

Nikahnama and Section  6 of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance,1961..

Pursuant  to proceedings on the complaint of respondent  No.l,,  the

learned Trial Court  convicted the petitioner  and sentenced  him to 0L

month simple imprisonment  along with payment of fine of Rs.5,000/-.

Crl. Revision  No.02l2014

Pase | 2

The petitioner feeling aggrieved thereby Preferred  an aPPeal, which was

dismissed  and view  of the learned Trial Court  was upheld.  Hence,  the

instant criminal revision.

3. 

Learned counsel  for petitioner  contends that resPondent

No.1./complainant  being lawful wedded wife of petitioner  abstained

from performing conjugal  rights since 02 yearc, which constrained  the

petitioner to contract second marriage with prior intimation  to

respondent  No.L, who showed no conflict on the matter  of second

marriage; that petitioner is  ready to  maintain  resPondent

No.1/complainant in  a  separate  house, however respondent

No.L/complainanfs  parents are not allowing her to Perform  her

conjugal rights as evident from record; that neither respondent

No.1./complainant  sought  dissolution  of martiage,  nor petitioner has

divorced  her; that petitioner  has instituted a suit for restitution  of

conjugal dghts, which is pending  adjudication  in the Family  Court/Civil

]udge, Islamabad;  that both the Courts below have misconstrued  the

evidence available  on record as well as facts and circumstances  of the

case, and passed the impugned judgments in hasty  manner,  therefore,

the same may be set aside.

4.  Conversely,  learned counsel  for respondent  No.1 contended that

permission  in writing to contract second marriage  is mandatory,  which

is to be obtained only  from the concerned Chairman  Arbitration  Council,

but the petitioner  has failed to do so; that there is no concept  of either

written or oral permission  of existing  wife in order to confract  second

rnarriage, rather  prior permission  has to be obtained  from Arbitration

Council;  that the stance  of petitioner  that he informed respondent

Crl. Revision  No.02 / 2074
No.1,/complainant of his conkacting  second marriage is just an

Page  | 3

admission and the same is in violation  of Section  6 of the Muslim Family

Laws Ordinance,  !961.; that both the Courts  below have rightly

appreciated the available  record as well as circumstances  of the case and

passed  the impugned  judgments,  therefore,  the instant criminal  revision

may be dismissed.

5. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused.

6.  Perusal of record  reveals that the petitioner  was married  to

respondent  No.1 in the year 2008 and later on petitioner  entered into

second marriage with Mst. Tayyaba  Nadeem  Abbasi on 01'.11,.2012

through Exh.PS,  which was solemrdzed  by PW-2 Haliz Noor  Elahi

Chishti, who confirmed  the execution  of second marriage without

permission.

7.  Respondent  No.L appeared  as PW-L and contended that  she filed

a complaint in terms of Section  6 of the Muslim Family  Laws Ordinance,

1961. onthe ground that petitioner  entered into second  marriage without

her permission.  The complaint was processed by Chairman Arbitration

Council/Administration,  Union Council  Tarlai,  Islamabad  under Rule

21. of the Family Law Rules under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance,

1961, and presented  the salne before  the Assistant Commissioner

(Secretariat)/Sub-Divisional  Magistrate l.'t Class, Islamabad  for initiation

of trial against  the petitioner  under Section  6 of the Muslim  Family  Laws

Ordinance,  1961, as the petitioner has contracted  second  marriage

without  prior permission  of respondent  No.L. During  the trial, the

prosecution  has produced three witnesses  i.e. PW-L Mst. Salma  Liaqat

Crl. Revision  N
(complainant),  PW-2 HalizNoor Elahi Chishti and PW-3 Haji Liaqat Ali

20'1.4

4

Mughal,  father of comPlainant.

8.  As per record, respondent  No.1 produced  complaint  Exh'P1 in

support  of her contention  along with complaint to Arbitration Council

Exh.P2, original  Nikahnama  with petitioner  Exh.P3 and coPy  of

Nikahnama of second  marriage  Exh.PS.  Even though  respondent  No'1

was subjected to lengthy cross-exalnination,  the petitioner could not

achieve any material  fact in his favour'

g.  PW-2 Hafiz Noor Elahi chishti, Nikah Registrar,  stated  that

petitioner assured him that he will submit written submission  of his first

wife with respect to second  marriage and on assurance  and execution  of
affidavit  the second  marriage of petitioner  was registered,  whereas in

the relevant section  i.e. column No.21 of the Nikahnama was filled  by

the petitioner  with the acknowledgment that permission  was orally

granted  by his first wife. PW-z  Hafiz Noor E1ahi Chishti further stated
that the petitioner  has given affidavit Exh.P6 with undertaking  that in

case of any fraud he will be held responsible'
10.  on the other hand, respondent  No.1 being the first wife was
specifically  confronted regarding permission  of second  marriage  in the

following manner:

ttl 6,o;V{6,e,J/,,/rJrG  idu1,y./1u!2  d t-=f{ 

'J'"
-eili-  l-12
(-

11.  on the contrary,  the petitioner  put aPPearance in his own defence

to substantiate  his case  and has taken  a specific  stance that:

utLcttJrz/&u:u/z;{-"vf  ,nVL|'b,/+uiLvtelz'otLL'fiJ'0"
0,,  u ti i tl u Jtz,l t O x tl L vt ol *iV Jt' tr  t tp / ;f t ( x ey ill J'u{ t'l I t

Crl. Revision  No.02/2014

Page  | 5

,f lU /,fau!-/t/tlxd  /()WfiJ*tJ/,,t5,ri 7t { i7fil4(Ltd
i,1 L tl i t : cttt/ ct i / 6u. +z \-t *t st t g L tJ :0 tJ 7 L 7tt L J v - ? 

y',/ 

t! tl iV
" -zl i 4 4/ * 1$t )t t u7 t n{,, ?t,.t

" 

During the course of  cross-examination, the petitioner  has

acknowledged his second  marriage in the following  manner:

g,e tfi - 74J :0 u 7 t tJ 7Exh.P 5 uv (r$ 
er(; L tJ :C rJ r,, !7€ 

" 

- 7 J n /20  12 / i 6J'C 6,t 

tJ ./"
-,U ; u:  tJ :0 I r { J 6 * - d t L't it Sa J ut ru
" - -o{6 /,.t ;/  r $'u 7 : E?' L' i t/ L ctt Jv vt! "t

" 

" 

72.  The above referred admission  on the part of petitioner  has left

nothing to disbelieve  the contention  of respondent  No.l. Similarly,  the

petitioner  has also acknowledged  that he has written  correct  statement

in Column No.21.  of Exh.PS.  However,  he further acknowledged that:

- *f /,3  g L,.t l*€ 

6'0 tJ 7' : Lt I 

"v 

"'7V 

e )lt t-'J w & { ! 7€  o"

"-?Vuvo)Vr($:0$7r

The above referred statement  has been  read in context  with the entire

case  and it seems  that the word " ;"  has been missed as if there  was

some written  permission  issued by any Court or Arbitration Council in

favour  of petitioner to contract  second  marriage the same could  have

been produced  on record.

13.  In order  to decid.e the controversy,  I have gone  through  section

6(1) of the Muslim Family  Laws Ordinance,Tg6l,which  reads  as under:

,,No  man during  subsistence  of existing  marriage,  shall,  except
with the preaious  permission in writing of the Arbitration
council, contract another  marriage,  nor shall any  such marriage
contracted without  such  permission be registered  under this
Ordinance."

Crl. Revision  No.02/2014

Page | 6

The above referred provision of law placed a Permanent  restriction  upon

the Registrar not to register a malriage without  priol Permission of the

Arbitration Council.  The  said provision  also puts a statutory duty upon

a person entering into a second marriage  to submit written  permission

from Arbitration Council.  However,  in present  case no such permission

was issued by Chairman Arbitration Council,  rather the petitioner had

not applied  for any such permission'

74.  The admitted  position  on record confirms that respondent  No'1

has proved  the charge of polygamy against the petitioner, who  has

intentionally  and willfully entered  into second marriage without  any

written  permission from Arbitration  Council.  The documentary proof

i.e. Exh.PS relating to second marriage has been confirmed  by PW-2

Hafiz Noor Elahi chishti,  Nikah Registrar, and even  admitted  by

petitioner  himseu,  which Proves the offence  of Section  6 of the Muslim

Family  Laws  Ordinance, 1961'.

15.  Perusal  of the impugned  judgments  further reveals  that both the

Courts below  have skipped an important  issue  involved in the instant

, matter  to converse on as the role of PW'2 Hahz Noor Elahi  Chishti'

Khateeb, ]amia Masjid Moeeni+  sector  E-11',  Islamabad  has not been

examined  appropriately,  who got registered  second  marriage between

petitioner  and Mst. Tayyaba  Nadeem Abbasi  through  Exh'PS'

PW-2 HafizNoor  Elahi Chishti has not performed his statutory duty as he

had not refused to register second Nikah of petitioner in absence of

written permission  from Arbitration Council  and as such, pursuant to

CrI.  Revision  No.02/20L4

7

obtaining  an affidavit  Exh.P6 from the petitioner,  PW-2 Hahz  Noor  Elahi

Chishti/Nikah  Registrar registered  the same,  which shows his criminal

misconduct and intentional violation of Section  6(1) of the Muslim Family

Laws Ordinance,lg6!,wherein the legislature  has specifically  used  terms

i.e. "nor shall, anU such  marriage  contracted  utithout  such Permission  be

registered uniler this Orilinance".  Such state of affairs clearly depict that

PW-2 Haliz Noor Elahi Chishti being the Nikah Registrar has not

performed  his statutory duty in a manner prescribed  under the law,

which  entails necessary  action against him as the license granted to him

under the law was meant to solemnize  mawiages  in accordance with

mandate  of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance,1967,  while any violation

or contravention  of any condition of license  granted  to Nikah Registrar

would result into revocation  and cancellation of the license.

1,6.  In order to further elucidate the position, it is the statutory duty

of Nikah Registrar  to ask the man entering into another  marriage  for

submission of written permission from Chairman  Arbitration Council  in

a manner provided under Rule  14 and 15 of the West  Pakistan  Rules

under the Muslim Family  Laws Ordinance,  1961'  and in this regard

following steps should be taken.

o  written application to the Chairman Arbitration  Council for

seeking  permission to contract  second  marriage shall be filed by a

person  (man) interested  in such  permission'

o  Prescribed  fee should be submitted.

Crl. Revision  No.

4

8

r  Brief statement of grounds  on which new marliage is alleged  to

be just and. necessary,  which includes  the reasons of sterility,

physical infirmity, physical  unfitness for the conjugal relation,

willful avoidance of a degree for restitution  of conjugal rights or

insanity  on the part  of existing  wife'

o  The  applicant  has to state whether  the consent of existing wife or

wives  has been obtained  thereto'

r  on receipt of application  the Chairman  Arbitration Council shall

ask the applicant  and existing wife or wives to nominate their

representative(s).

o  Chairman  Arbitration  Council  after hearing parties  and

representatives decide the application after recording of reasons

within prescribed  period while granting permission  for second

marriage or otherwise.

The above referred process, if not adopted  by the Person  (man) to get

permission  for second marriage,  such Person is not entitled for

solemnization of second  marriage, even the Nikah Registrar  is under

statutory  duty  to refuse registration  of second  marriage,  failing which he

shall  also be liable for prosecution'
17.  For what has been discussed  hereinabove, I have  also  gone

through the concurrent  findings  of both the Courts below and observed

no illegality therein  as ProPer opportunity  was granted to petitioner,

who has failed to substantiate  any of his plea, rather the prosecution has

successfully proved  the matter.  Furthermore,  the sentence awarded  by

both  the Courts below  is on lesser side despite  the fact that the petitioner

Crl.

Revision  No.02l2014

Page  I 9

has acknowledged  and admitted his second marriage  without  having a

valid legat permission  under the law, however,  at this stage,  this Court

in criminal revision  is not in a position to enhance the sentence of the

petitioner while relying  upon PLD 2077  SC 787 Oshtiaq Ahmail  os. The

state,  etc.\.wherein  it has been held by the apex court as under:

,11..  The petitioner concedcs that  he was alteady married  and
he also had a child from his first wife when he contracted  a
second  marriage  without  obtaining permission fro*  the
Arbitration  Council.  The  ingredients of the offino uniler section
6(5)@) of the Ordinance  thus stood  established'  The petitioner
was lucky as tlu trinl court had treated him aery leniently in tlu
matter if punishment  by sentencing him to imprisonment  for
only  one month as he could haoe been  imprisoned for up to a
year. Consequently,  this petition for leaoe to appeal  is dismissed
andleaae  is refused,"

In view of above, the instant criminal revision  is hereby  DISMISSED

having no merits.  Petitioner  is on bail, therefore,  he should be taken  into

custody to serve  his remaining  sentence'

18.  On the other hand, taking into account the role of PW-2 Hafiz

Noor  Elahi chishti/Nikah  Registrar  towards non-performance  of his

statutory  duties, the Chief Commissioner,  Islamabad and Deputy

Commissioner,  Islamabad  are hereby directed  to initiate necessary

proceedings against PW-2 Hatiz Noor  Elahi Chishti  with respect  to

revocation  of  his license. The Chief Commissioner/ Deputy

Commissioner,  Islamabad and the concerned  Chairman Union  Council

of Islamabad  capital Territory  shall issue written directions  to all Nikah

Registrars to follow the spirit  of law in registration of marriages'  They

shall refuse to register second marriage where  written  permission of

Crl. Revision  No.02/2014

Paee  | 10

Arbitration Council in prescribed  manner has not been granted and any

oral permission  claimed by any Person with respect to second marriage

should not be treated valid as it requires proper documented  authority

of the Arbitration Council. Similarly, the oral permission of the first wife

or earlier  wives during subsistence of marriage  in favour  of husband is

also not valid under the law and such oral permission to allow any

person  intended  to contract  another  marriage  is also not acceptable

(MOHSIN

AR
JUDGE

Announced  in open Court

L . 08 .)n1

Khdidz.

E

