ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P.  No. 2446120,,,9

Muhammad Aftab
VS
Mst. Shahida  Bano  and others

S. No. of
order /
proceedinqs

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or
counsel  where necessary.

Date of
order/
Proceedinos
01.O7.2019  Mr. Attiq-Ur-Rehman, Advocate  for  the

petitioner.

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner  assails judgments  and decrees dated
28.02.2019 and 12.06.2019, passed by learned
Judge Family Court and learned Additional
District Judge-lll lslamabad  (East), respectively,
whereby the suit filed by respondent No.1 for
recovery of maintenance allowance, dowry
articles and gold ornaments,  was partially
decreed.
2.  The facts essential for disposal  of the case
are that the petitioner  and respondent No.1 got
married on 08.05.2011. Differences between
them lead to desertion  of respondent No.1.  On
07.','1.2016, respondent  No.1 instituted a suitfor
recovery  of maintenance allowance  at the rate
of  Rs.20,000/- per month along with past
maintenance  at the rate of Rs.15,000/-  per
month from August, 2011 to October,  2016;
dowry articles or  an alternate value  of
Rs.1 ,34,4301-; salami and dower to the tune of
Rs.11,000/-,  and five tolas of gold ornaments.  On
03.01 .2017, the petitioner  submitted  his written
statement,  whereby he contested the suit and
raised counter claim for restitution of conjugal
rights. They could  not reconcile  in the Court and

2

W.P. No.2446/2019

from divergent  pleadings,  the issues  were
framed on 09.02.2017.  They produced  their
respective evidence. The  Respondent
No.1/plaintiff  along with two other witnesses
deposed in support  of the assertions made  in
the plaint while respondent  No.1 along with
another  witness  deposed against the claims
raised  in the plaint  and in support of the claim of
restitution of conjugal  rights. At the conclusion
of the trial, learned Family  Court, vide judgment
and decree  dated 28.02.20'19, decreed the suit
of respondent  No.1 to the extent of past
maintenance  at the rate of Rs.4,000/-  per month
from August,  2011 to  October,  2016 and
Rs.5,000/-  per month  with 10% annual increase
from institution of suit till legal entitlement,  claim
for recovery  of dowry was decreed as per
respondent  No. 1's list Exh.P.3 or in alternate
amount of Rs.1 .34,4301-;  and the claim for
recovery  of five tolas of gold ornaments was
also decreed whereas  to the extent of recovery
of salami and dower the suit was dismissed.
Counter claim of the petitioner  for restitution  of
conjugal rights was decreed subject  to
provision of residence  to the respondent  No.1
comprising  two separate rooms, one kitchen
and one wash room.

and one wash rooms, one kitchen  and one wa
3.  The petitioner  assailed  the said Judgment
and decree dated 28.02.2019  in an appea!,
which  was dismissed, vide judgment and decree
dated 12.06.2019.  The said  concurrent
judgments and decrees have been assailed by
the petitioner before this Court in the instant
writ petition.

3

W.P.  No.2446/2019

4. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends
that learned Courts below ignored the fact that
respondent  No.1 left, house of the petitioner
without any reason and his permission; that
respondent No.1 is a disobedient wife she
refused to  return despite  efforts of  the
petitioner;  that she is not entitled to any kind of
maintenance;  that respondent No.1's list of
dowry  articles is false and exaggerated to grab
the amount; that only the dowry articles
mentioned  in the list of the petitioner are lying at
his house;  that respondent  No.1 took five tolas
gold ornaments  along with her at the time of self
desertion; that the maintenance  awarded in the
impugned judgments  and decrees is exorbitant
as the petitioner's monthly salary is around
rupees 17,OOOI-  in which he has to provide for
other liabilities, including  parents dependent
upon him; and that the petitioner had
constructed  a separate room for residence  of
respondent  No.1, but she is still unwilling  to
settle. Learned  Counsel  prayed for acceptance
of  this writ petition by setting-aside the
impugned  judgments  and decrees.
5. 
I have heard  the contentions  of the learned
counsel  for the petitioner  and have perused  the
record with his able assistance.
6. 
lt is an admitted fact that the marriage
between the petitioner and respondent  No.1 is
still intact.  The petitioner's  version is that the
maintenance  fixed by the learned Courts below
is beyond his paying capacity.  This averment
does not cohere with the record  as the rate of
maintenance fixed in the impugned  judgments is
merely  Rs.5,000/-  per month with 10% annual

4

W.P.  No.2446/2019

increase. During the evidence, the petitioner
deposed that his brother also contributes for the
expenses  of their parents.  A husband is liable to
pay maintenance to his wife and he is not
absolved from this responsibility  even when the
wife is not living in his house due to their
differences. ln  such circumstances, the
quantum of maintenance cannot  be termed  to be

excessive or harsh.
7.  Rrespondent  No.1 produced  Shaukat  Ali
(PW-3) who categorically  deposed  through
affidavit (Exh P-3) that he went to the house of
the petitioner for reconciliation between  the
spouses and the petitioner's  matter  admitted
that petitioner took back the gold ornaments
from respondent  No.1. This portion of the
evidence was not challenged during the cross-
examination.  PW-3 also remained consistent
during the cross-examination  that father  of the
petitioner  asked him to  discontinue  the
reconciliation efforts which belies  the
petitioner's version about his willingness to
bring back his wife, i.e. respondent  No.1.
8. 
ln appeal,  the petitioner  did not challenge
the  condition  for  provision  of  separate
accommodation to respondent  No.1 mentioned
in the decree  for restitution  of conjugal rights. lt
is not his stance that he provided  the separate
accommodation in compliance  with the decree
passed by the learned Family Court.
9.  On the  aspect of  dowry articles,
respondent No.1 substantiated her list of
articles (Exh-P/3) by provision of purchase
receipts, but the petitioner neither cross-
examined  the PWs on the specific additional

5

IU.P. No.2446/2019

articles  not mentioned in his own list (Exh-D/3)
nor did he produce independent evidence  in
support of his version.  Therefore,  the findings of
learned Family Court on this subject do not
suffer from incorrect appreciation  of  the
evidence.
10. As mentioned above,  the evidence of PW-3
regarding taking back of the gifted gold
ornaments  was not rebutted.  Therefore, the
learned Family Court in  absence of  the
refutation had rightly decreed the claim to that

extent.

11. Learned  counsel for the petitioner  could
not point out any jurdictiona! error or defect in
the impugned  judgments and decrees. The
aspects highlighted in the present petition are
related to findings of fact which have already
been reappraised  by the learned  appellate
Court, which upheld  the findings  of the learned
Family Court. lt is settled principle  of law that in
cases where concurrent findings of the Courts
are assailed  in writ jurisdiction, the scope of the
writ jurisdiction is confined  to matters  where the
judgments  passed by the Courts  below are not
reasonable  or have been passed in disregard of
the provisions  of law or accepted principles
concerning  appreciation of evidence. ln the
cases  reported as
Haider
Butt VS Judge.  Family Court" (2009 SCMR 1243)
Farioue VS Kaneez  Bibi'  12018
ttMLr
MLD 1988). "Parveen Umar and 3 others VS
YL R 3097
Sardar Hu ain and 5 others"
PeshawarL  "Aqal Zaman VS Mst. Azad Bibi and
others"  (2003  CLC 702)" it was held that the

t'Waoar

6

W.P.  No.2446/2019

High Court, in its writ jurisdiction, can neither
reappraise the evidence  and substitute findings
of facts recorded  by Family Court, nor can give
opinion regarding quality or adequacy of the
evidence. The assessment and appraisal  of
evidence  is the function  of the lower Court,
which is vested with its exclusive jurisdiction,  in
this regard.

12.ln view of the above,  finding  no jurisdictional
error or perversity  in the concurrent  findings of
the learned Courts below, the instant petition  is

dismissed in limine.

(MTANGUL  HASSAN  AURAhGZEB)
JUDGE

narKhan"

