ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Misc.  no.  1300-B/2022 
Mst.  Sonia  Bibi 
VS
The-State 

S.  No.  of 
order/ 
proceedings  Proceedings 

Date  of 
order/ 

Order  with  signature  of Judge  and  that  of parties  or counsel 
where  necessary. 

24. l 0.2022  Malik  Muhammad  Ajmal  Khan,  Advocate  for  the  petitioner 

Mr.  Jameel  Fayyaz  Rajput,  State  counsel 
Iftikhar  Ali  SI with  record 

Sardar Ejaz  Ishag  Khan,  J:  The  petitioner 

(Mst.Sonia  Bibi) 

applies  for  post-arrest  bail 

in  case  FIR  No.442/2022  dated  12.06.2022 

registered  at  Police  Station  Noon,  Islamabad,  under  section  9(c)  of  the 

Control  of Narcotic  Substances  Act,  1997 (CNSA). 

2 

The  FIR  narrates 

that  the  police  party  were  at  their  picket  for 

prevention  of  trafficking 

in  narcotics  when  they  observed 

the  petitioner 

along  with  a  man  acting  suspiciously  on  seeing  the  police  after  alighting 

from  a  bus,  whereupon 

they  were  apprehended  and  a  packet  wrapped  with 

solution  tape  was  recovered  from  the  petitioner,  which  on  checking  revealed 

heroin  that  was  weighed  at  1, 115  grams  along  with  the  packing  and  the 

solution  tape;  hence  the  FIR. 

3 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends 

that  the  petitioner 

rs 

innocent  and  the  accusations  against  her  are  false  and  frivolous; 

that  the 

petitioner  has  been  falsely  implicated  by  the  police; 

that  the  case  of  the 

petitioner 

is  one  of  further  inquiry  in  that  the  spot  of her  apprehension  fell 

within  the  jurisdiction  of  another  police  station; 

that  the  petitioner  has  no 

criminal  record;  that  the  petitioner 

is  behind  bars  since  her  arrest;  that  the 

petitioner 

is  a  female  and  belongs  to  a  respectable 

family;  and  that  the 

quantity  recovered  is  below  the  borderline  for  bail  in such  cases. 

4 

Learned  State  counsel  contends  that  the  petitioner  was  apprehended 

red-handed  in the  presence  of other  police  witnesses,  that  the  forensic  report 

- 

- 

is  positive  and  therefore  the  petitioner  was  not  entitled  to  the  concession  of 

bail. 

Criminal  Misc.  no.  1300-8/2022 

-2- 

5 

The  recovered  narcotic  per  the  FIR  was  weighed  along  with  the 

packing  and  the  tape  wrapped  around  the  package.  This  fact  was  found 

relevant  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  Ateeb  ur  Rahman@  Atti  Mochi 

VS The  State  and  others  (2016  SCMR  1424)  and  in Aya  Khan  and 

another  VS The  State  (2020  SCMR  350),  where  the  court  found  that  it 

created  a  doubt  as  to  the  net  or  gross  weight  of the  recovered  narcotics,  and 

the  benefit  of any  doubt  has  to  go  to  the  accused  even  at the  bail  stage.  The 

weight  of  the  narcotics  without  the  packing  could  make  it  a  case  under 

section  9(b)  CNSA,  and  the  7  year  sentence  prescribed  thereunder  does  not 

fall  within  the  ambit  of the  prohibitory  clause  of section  497  Cr.P.C. 

6 

The  current  borderline  quantity  is  1320  grams  of narcotics  per  Noor 

Khan  VS The  State  (2021  SCMR  1212).  The  quantity  recovered  from 

the  petitioner 

is  well  below  the  current  border  line.  The  petitioner  was 

arrested  on  12.06.2022  and  is  behind  bars  ever  since. 

7 

The  petitioner 

is  therefore  admitted 

to  post-arrest  bail  subject  to 

furnishing  bail  bond  in  the  sum  of Rs.50,000/-  with  one  surety  in  the  like 

amount  to the  satisfaction  of the  learned  trial  court. 

8 

Be  it  noted  all  observations  made  in  deciding  this  bail  petition  are 

tentative  only  and  shall  have  no  bearing  on  the  merits  of the  case  which  is  to 

be  decided  on  the  basis  of the  evidence  led therein. 

(Aamer Farooq) 
Judge 

(Sardar  Ejaz Ishaq  Khan) 

Judge 

