ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.640-2020 

Muhammad Imran  

VS

The Additional District Judge (East), Islamabad and others.  

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Taqweem Ali Janjua, Advocate. 

Respondents by:  

Ms.  Saira  Khalid  Rajpoot,  Advocate 
for respondent No.3. 

Date of Decision:   

19.02.2024. 

………………………………………………………………………………………        

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition, the petitioner has assailed the judgment and decree dated 

07.10.2019,  passed  by  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (East), 

Islamabad,  whereby  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  against  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated  24.07.2017,  passed  by  learned  Judge 

Family Court, Islamabad has been dismissed.   

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that 

petitioner  was  married  to  respondent  No.3/Saima  Akhtar  on 

01.05.2010 in Islamabad in accordance with Muslim rites in lieu of 

dower amount of Rs.2,000/-, which was paid at the time of Nikah 

and  Rukhsati;  that  petitioner  also  gifted  10  Tolas  gold  ornaments 

to  respondent  No.3;  that  respondent  No.3  has  filed  a  suit  for 

dissolution  of  marriage,  recovery  of  monthly  maintenance,  dowry 

articles  and  gold  ornament,  which  was  decreed  in  the  previous 

round vide judgment and decree dated 24.07.2017 in the following 

manner:- 

In  light  of  my  issue  wise  discussion  and  findings  the 

plaintiff  is  held  entitled  to  the  recovery  of  maintenance 

allowance  @  Rs.3,000/-  per  month  from  the  date  of 

institution  of  suit  till  dissolution  of  her  marriage  and  at 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.640-2020 

2 

the  same  rate  for  the  iddat  period  as  well.  She  is  also 

held  entitled  for  recovery  of  06  Tolas  gold,  whereas  to 

the  extent  of  rest  of  the  prayers,  her  suit  is  dismissed. 

No order as to costs. Decree sheet be drawn accordingly. 

It is hereby made clear that my any arithmetical, clerical 

or  typographical  errors  may  be  ignored/avoided  in  the 

interest  of  justice  and  the  same  may  be  corrected,  if 

need be. Filed be consigned to record room after its due 

completion and compilation.       

3. 

The  matter  was  challenged  before  the  appellate  Court  by 

both  the  sides,  which  has  been  decided  through  consolidated 

judgment and decree dated 10.02.2018, whereby both the appeals 

were  dismissed,  whereafter  the  matter  was  assailed  before 

Islamabad  High  Court  through  W.P  No.3086/2018,  which  was 

remanded  back  to  the  extent  of  06  Tolas  of  recovery  of  gold 

ornaments  and  same  has  now  been  decided  vide  judgment  and 

decree  dated  07.10.2019,  passed  by  learned  Additional  District 

Judge (East), Islamabad in the following manner:- 

To  resolve  the  controversy  regarding  recovery  of  dowry 

articles,  a  local  commission  was  appointed  by  the  learned 

trial  Court,  who  submitted  its  report,  containing  statements 

of  witnesses  of  rival  parties.  From  the  report  submitted  as 

well as statement of respective witnesses, it is clear that the 

dowry  articles  except  gold  ornaments  were  handed  over.  In 

this regard, counsel for appellant has placed reliance on Ex-

P3, which was list of damages articles as well as remaining 

dowry  articles.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  said  list  was  prepared 

in  view  of  the  report  of  local  commission,  where  gold 

ornaments  were specifically excluded from  the list of dowry 

articles  which  were  handed  over  by  the  appellant  side. 

Furthermore, 

it 

is  also  an  admitted 

fact 

that 

the 

respondent/plaintiff  suffered 

from  “night  blindness”; 

hence,  said  disability  of  respondent  made  her  case  fall  in 

exception  to  the  general  presumption  that  gold  ornaments 

were always possessed by female.   

 
 
 
 
W.P No.640-2020 

3 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  first 

appellate Court has not appreciated the legal position in respect of 

gold  ornaments,  whereas  counsel 

for  petitioner  has  been 

confronted as to whether he has raised any objection on the claim 

of the respondent at the time of cross-examination, whereby it has 

candidly  been  conceded  that  he  was  not  counsel  at  that  time  nor 

any  such  objection  was  raised  qua  the  claim  of  respondent  No.3, 

therefore,  non-mentioning  of  anything  in  the lis  will  not  effect  the 

claim  of  respondent,  especially  when  it  is  the  primary  case  of  the 

respondent to the extent of 06 Tola gold ornaments and same was 

the issue, which required to be adjudicated by the Courts below in 

specific manner after post remand proceedings. 

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  counsel  for  respondent  No.3  has  drawn 

the  attention  of  this  Court  towards  the  record,  whereby  case  of 

gold ornaments has rightly been demonstrated by respondent No.3 

before  the  Courts  below  and  judgment  to  that  extent  has  clearly 

been worded in the findings on Issue No.2, where it was held that 

documentary evidence of the plaintiff could not be rebutted by the 

present petitioner/defendant, such aspect is conclusive findings of 

the Courts below and petitioner has failed to point out any element 

for interference in the concurrent findings by this Court. 

6. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  writ  petition  is 

misconceived and same is hereby DISMISSED.           

RAMZAN 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

                         JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
