JUDGMENT 

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.---Through this consolidated judgment, we will decide Jail 
Appeal No.107/2015 titled 'Gul Muhammad v. The State, Jail Appeal No.108/2015 titled 'Mst 
Eid Un Nisa v. The State' and answer Murder Reference No.11/2015 titled 'The State v. Gul 
Muhammad'. 

2. 

In  the  case  in  hand,  Gul  Muhammad,  son  of  Muhammad  (hereinafter  referred  to  as 
'Appellant No.1') and Ms. Eid Un Nisa, wife of Saeed ur Rehman (hereinafter referred to as 
'Appellant No.2'), were charged on 16-11-2011 for the murder of Saeed ur Rehman (hereinafter 
referred to as the 'Deceased') and on conclusion of the trial they were convicted and sentenced 
by the learned Additional Sessions Judge vide judgment, dated 22-05-2015, in the following 
terms. 

"For above reasons, this court has come to the conclusion that prosecution proves its 
case against accused Gul Muhammad for commission of Qatl-i-amd of deceased Saeed 
(father  of  three  minors)  after  trespassing  the  house  and  caused disappearance  of  cell 
phone of accused Eid Un-Nisa beyond reasonable shadow of doubt. Therefore, he is 
convicted and sentenced under section 302, P.P.C. to death as Ta'zir and he shall be 
hanged  by  his  neck  till  he  is  dead  subject  to  confirmation  of  death  reference  by 
Honourable  Islamabad  High  Court,  Islamabad  within  the  meaning  of  section  374, 
Cr.P.C.  In  addition  to  the  above,  accused  Gul  Muhammad  is  also  directed  to  pay 
compensation to the tune of Rs.400,000/- under section 544-A, Cr.P.C. to the legal heir 
of deceased Saeed which shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. In default of 
payment of recovery of compensation, the convict shall suffer S.I. for a period of six 
months. Separate Reference be sent to Honourable Islamabad High Court, Islamabad 
for confirmation of death sentence as required under section 374, Cr.P.C. 

Accused Gul Muhammad is also convicted under section 201, P.P.C., imprisonment for 
a period of seven years and fine of Rs.100,000/- and in case of default in payment of 
fine to further undergo 03 three months' S.I. 

Accused Gul Muhammad is also convicted under section 449, P.P.C. for imprisonment 
for life with fine of Rs.100,000/- and in case of default in payment of fine to further 
undergo  03  three  months'  S.I.  It  is  also  note  worthy  to  mention  here  that  all  the 
sentences of accused Gul Muhammad shall run concurrently. 

Accused Eid-Un-Nisa is held guilty of offence under section 201, P.P.C. and convicted 
for  imprisonment  of  seven  years  with  fine  of  Rs.100,000/-  and  in  case  of  default  in 
payment of fine to further undergo 03 three months' S.I. Both the convicts are extended 
benefits of section 382-B, Cr.P.C." 

3.  The  necessary  facts  are  that  Ghulam  Shabbir,  Sub-Inspector  (PW-15),  received 
information  and  pursuant  thereto  he  reached the  crime  scene.  Appellant  No.2,  who  was  the 
wife of the Deceased, narrated the facts which were reduced into writing and the said complaint 
(Exh.P-D/1) was sent by the Investigation Officer to the concerned Police Station which led to 
the registration of FIR No.212, dated 14-05-2011 (Exh.P-D). According to the facts narrated 
in the written complaint, the Deceased was sleeping in one of the rooms of his house with the 
Appellant  No.2  and  their  two  children,  namely  Mehwish  Bibi  (PW-1)  and  Ali  Raza.  The 
occurrence took place on 14-05-2011. According to the initial version of Appellant No.2, at 
about 10 pm she woke up on hearing a shot fired from a firearm weapon. She saw two men 
taking out Rs.50,000/- and a cell phone from the pockets of the clothes of the Deceased. When 
they were leaving they also removed a ring which Appellant No.2 was wearing and took it with 
them. The Investigating Officer, namely Ghulam Shabbir, S.I. (PW-15), prepared the inquest 
report (Exh.P-U) and rough site plan (Exh.P-D/2). The last worn clothes of the Deceased were 
taken  into  possession.  One  crime  empty  fired  from  a  .30  bore  firearm  weapon,  a  pair  of 
slippers,  blood  on  cotton  wool  and  a  motor  vehicle  designated  as  a  taxi  were  t aken  into 
possession vide recovery memos i.e. Exh.P-1, Exh.P-F/1, Exh.P-J and Exh.P-E/1, respectively. 
An application (Exh.P-R/1) for conducting a postmortem of the Deceased was also submitted 
by the Investigating Officer. The body of the Deceased was taken to the Pakistan Institute of 
Medical Sciences (hereinafter referred to as the 'Hospital') where an autopsy was performed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by  Dr.  Farrukh  Kamal,  MLO  (PW-11).  The  latter  prepared  a  postmortem  report  (Exh.P-R) 
wherein  he,  inter  alia,  described  the  nature  of  the  injuries.  On  19-05-2011,  Amir  Shahzad, 
Draftsman (PW-13), visited the crime scene and prepared a scaled site plan (Exh.P-V). On 31-
05-2011,  Appellant  No.2  along  with  her  brother-in-law  appeared  before  the  Investigating 
Officer and she informed him that she wanted to make a confessional statement. She was sent 
to the Dar-ul-Amaan by the learned Magistrate and her confessional statement under section 
164  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  'Cr.P.C.')  was 
recorded by Malik Farrukh Nadeem, Assistant City Magistrate, Islamabad Capital Territory on 
01-06-2011. The statement was tendered in evidence and placed on record as (Exh.P -Y). On 
01-06-2011,  the  Investigating  Officer  was  informed  that  Appellant  No.1  was  arrested  by 
officials of Police Station Westridge, Rawalpindi in another criminal case i.e FIR No.1172, 
dated  27-12-2010.  The  latter  was  formally  arrested  in  the  instant  case  on  03-06-2011.  The 
Investigating Officer also took into possession the crime weapon which was recovered during 
the investigations in case FIR No. 1172, dated 27-12-2010. On 03-06-2011, the Investigating 
Officer  filed  an  application  before  the  learned  Magistrate  for  conducting  an  identification 
parade of Appellant No.1 (Exh.P-AA/1). The identification parade was conducted on 11-06-
2011 and Appellant No. 1 was identified by Habib Ur Rehman (PW-2) and Mehwish Bibi (PW-
1). The cell phone used by Appellant No.2 was identified by her daughter Mehwish Bibi (PW -
1) and on 04-07-2011, the Investigating Officer took in possession the data relating to the SIM 
used  in  the  said  phone  vide  recovery  memo  (Exh.P-L).  The  Forensic  Science  Laboratory 
Punjab, Lahore (hereinafter referred to as 'Laboratory') vide a report, dated 26-09-2011 (Exh.P-
X), confirmed that the crime empty matched the firearm weapon. The Chemical Examiner for 
Punjab,  Lahore,  also  submitted  reports  (Exh.P-FF,  P-GG  and  P-HH).  It  is  noted  that  the 
statement of Ms. Mehwish Bibi (PW-1), which was recorded by the Investigating Officer under 
section  161  of  the  Cr.P.C.  was  brought  on  record  with  the  consent  of  the  learned  counsel 
(Exh.D-A).  The  said  statement  was  recorded  on  14-01-2011  i.e.  when  investigations  had 
commenced. After considering the report under section 173 of the Cr.P.C., a charge was framed 
against  the  appellants  on  16-11-2011.  The  prosecution  produced  twenty-two  witnesses. 
Appellant No.2 preferred not to be examined under oath and, therefore, her statement under 
section 342 of the Cr.P.C. was recorded. Appellant No.1 opted to be examined under  oath and 
he  entered  the  witness  box  as  DW-1.  Two  other  witnesses  also  deposed  in  his  favour.  The 
learned trial Court, after the recording of evidence and affording an opportunity of hearing to 
the parties, convicted and sentenced the appellants in the terms which have been reproduced 
above. 

4.  The  learned  Counsel,  who  appeared  for  Appellant  No.1,  has  argued  that;  the 
prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt; there was no reference in the 
complaint filed in the instant case to Habib ur Rehman (PW-2) nor was he present at the crime 
scene;  no  source  of  light  was  mentioned  in  the  room;  Mehwish  Bibi  (PW -1)  was  also  not 
present at the crime scene; the latter, being a child witness, was tutored and influenced by her  
elders  and,  therefore,  her  testimony  required  strong  and  independent  corroboration;  the 
identification  parade  was  not  conducted  in  accordance  with  law;  during  the  identification 
parade, no role was attributed to Appellant No.1; the statement of Appellant No.2 under section 
164 of the Cr.P.C. is not admissible because she was an accused; the report of the Laboratory 
is not reliable because the firearm weapon was not recovered from Appellant No.1; it is not 
clear from the record as to who had deposited the firearm weapon at the Laboratory; reliance 
was placed on the cases of 'Ulfat Hussain v. The State' [2010 SCMR 247], 'Lal Khan v. The 
State' [2008 SCMR 1846] 'Muhammad Ali v. The State' [2017 SCMR 1468], 'Riaz Ahmed v. 
The State' [2010 SCMR 846], 'G. M. Niaz v. The State' [2018 SCMR 506], 'Sardar Bibi and 
another v. Munir Ahmed and others' [2017 SCMR 344], 'Muhammad Asif v. The State' [2017 
SCMR 486], 'Ulfat Hussain v. The State' [2018 SCMR 313], 'Khalil v. The State' [2017 SCMR 
960], 'Arshad Khan v. The State' [2017 SCMR 564], 'Zahir Yousaf and another v. The State 
and another' [2017 SCMR 2002], 'Muhammad Ashraf Javeed and another v. Muhammad Umar 
and others' [2017 SCMR 1999], 'Nazir Ahmed v. Muhammad Iqbal and another' [2011 SCMR 
527], 'Gulfam and another v. The State' [2017 SCMR 1189], 'Dr Israr Ul Haq v. Muhammad 
Fayyaz' [2007 SCMR 1427] and 'Riaz Masih alias Mithoo v. The State' [1995 SCMR 1739] . 

5.  The learned counsel who was requested to assist us at the State's expense on behalf of 

 
 
Appellant No.2 has argued; the latter was forced to give a confessional statement in order to 
deprive her of her share in inheritance; the sole witness was a child and her testimony is not 
trustworthy;  the  prosecution  could  not  prove  the  case  against  the  Appellant  No.2  beyond 
reasonable doubt. 

6.  The learned State counsel was also heard at length. He has stressed that the prosecution 

was successful in establishing the guilt of both the accused beyond reasonable doubt . 

7.  The learned  Counsels  and the  learned State  Counsel  have been heard and the  record 

perused with their able assistance. 

8. 

It is not disputed that Appellant No.1 was closely known to the Deceased and his family 
members. The Investigating Officer had recorded the statement of Appellant No.2's daughter, 
namely,  Mehwish  Bibi  (PW-1)  soon  after  commission  of  the  offence  and  when  he  had 
commenced the investigations on 14-05-2011. The said statement was brought on record with 
the  consent  of  the  learned  counsel  and  exhibited  as  Exh.D-A.  A  plain  reading  of  the  said 
statement unambiguously shows that Ms. Mehwish Bibi (PW-1) had named Appellant No.1 
and had also narrated the facts which were later reiterated by her when she entered the witness 
box  as  a witness.  This statement was  consistent  with  her  testimony  as PW -1.  There  was no 
reason for Ms. Mehwish Bibi (PW-1) to have falsely implicated her mother and Appellant No. 
1.  Moreover,  the  statement  recorded  under  section  161  of  the  Cr.P.C.  was  of  significance 
because it was a spontaneous narration of the facts as they took place  on the fateful night of 
the occurrence which had led to the murder of her father. Reading her statement recorded under 
section 161 of the Cr.P.C. with her testimony as a witness it undoubtedly negates the argument 
raised  by  the  learned Counsel  for  Appellant  No.1 that  she  was  influenced  because  after the 
occurrence she had been living with her uncles. Her consistent stance and confidence inspiring 
deposition leaves no doubt that she had truly narrated the events without being influenced or 
tutored. There is no plausible explanation for falsely involving her mother i.e Appellant No. 2. 
It is also alarming as to how the Investigating Officer could have ignored the crucial statement 
made by Mehwish Bibi (PW-1) on the day when he had commenced investigations. Moreover, 
Appellant No.2 had voluntarily opted to record her confessional statement and it is obvious 
from the record that she had approached the Investigating Officer and, thereafter, was given 
sufficient  time  to  reflect.  The  deposition  of  Mehwish  Bibi  (PW-1)  is  corroborated  by  other 
unimpeachable, credible and trustworthy evidence. The learned Counsel for Appellant No.1 
has laid great stress on the weaknesses while conducting the identification parade. In the facts 
and circumstances of the instant case, the  identification parade was inconsequential because 
Appellant No.1 was a close family friend of the Deceased and known to every member of his 
family, including Mehwish Bibi (PW-1). The crime empty recovered from the crime scene by 
the  Investigating  Officer  had  matched  the  crime  weapon  which  was  taken  into  possession 
during the course of investigations. The report submitted by the Laboratory was positive. The 
data  of  the  cell  phone  which  was  in  the  use  of  Appellant  No.2,  read  with  the  testimony  of 
Mehwish Bibi (PW-1), substantiated that Appellant No.1 and Appellant No.2 were in contact 
with each other and that the latter had visited the house of the Deceased during the day on the 
date  when  the  occurrence  had  taken  place.  We  have  carefully  gone  through  the  evidence 
brought on record and we are satisfied that the prosecution had established the guilt of both 
the appellants beyond reasonable doubt. 

9.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  have  laid  great  stress on the  reliability  of  the 
testimony of Mehwish Bibi (PW-1) who, at the time deposing under oath, was fifteen years 
old. They have argued that it was not safe to place reliance on her statement. The law relating 
to  admissibility  of  deposition  of  a  child  witness  is  settled  by  now.  It  would,  therefore,  be 
beneficial to examine the precedent law in this regard. 

10.  The august Supreme Court, in the case titled 'Abdullah Shah v. The State' [1968 SCMR 
852], has observed and held that all persons are competent to testify, unless the Court considers 
that they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them or prevented from giving 
rational answers to those questions due to tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of 
body or mind, or any other cause of the same kind. The child witness was held to be competent 
and her testimony was also relied upon. In the case titled 'Muhammad Ismail and another v. 
The  State'  [1995  SCMR  1615],  it  was  held  that  evidence  of  a  child  witness  who  possesses 
sufficient  understanding  can  be  relied  upon  for  handing  down  a  conviction.  In  the  case  of 
'Ameer Umar v. The State' [1976 SCMR 338], it has been observed and held that there are no 
particular questions which could be put to a child witness to test the latter's intelligence and 

 
 
understanding. The Court has merely to be satisfied as to the child witness being capable of 
giving rational answers to questions put by the Court. In the facts and circumstances of the 
case decided by the august Supreme Court in the case titled 'Muhammad Jamal and others v. 
The State' [1997 SCMR 1595], the deposition of a child witness was found reliable and worthy 
of being relied upon. The principles and law regarding the testimony of a child witness have 
been highlighted by the august Supreme Court in the case titled 'Maqsood Khan v. The State' 
[1982 SCMR 757] as follows.- 

"In a case of a child witness it is immaterial whether he can understand and answer in 
a rational manner the questions put to him. No general rule of universal application can 
be laid down that in no case should the evidence of a child witness be believed. Each 
case  depends  upon  its  particular  facts  and  circumstances.  The  evidence  of  a  child 
witness, before it is acted upon should, however, be subjected to a close and careful 
scrutiny. The mere fact that the evidence of the only eye-witness of a crime is that of a 
child  of  10  years  of  age  is  not  a  ground  for  not  relying  upon  it  especially  when  the 
evidence  was  given  without  hesitation  and  without  slightest  suggestion  of  tutoring 
anything of the sort and there is corroboration of the  evidence in so far as it narrates 
the actual facts or the child's subsequent conduct immediately afterwards. The real tests 
are; how consistent the story is with itself ; how it stands the test of cross -examination 
and how far it fits with the evidence and circumstances of the case". 

11.  The  august  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  titled  'The  State  through  Advocate-General 
Sindh, Karachi v. Farman Hussain and others' [PLD 1995 SC 1], has dealt in detail with the 
principles and law relating to the evidentiary value of a child witness and has held and observed 
that it is to be assessed with care and caution. It has been further held that, since the testimony 
of a child witness is a delicate matter, therefore, normally it is not safe to rely upon it unless 
corroborated. Moreover, as a rule of prudence, great care has to be taken that in the case of 
evidence of a child, the element of couching is not involved. Dilating upon the nature of the 
child testimony, it has been observed that, on account of tender age, a child  could mistake a 
dream  for  reality  and,  therefore,  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  rule  of  prudence  requires 
corroboration of the testimony of a child. 

12.  On the touchstone of the above principles and law enunciated by the august apex Court, 
we have no hesitation in concluding that in the case in hand the testimony of Ms. Mehwish 
Bibi (PW 1) was consistent, reliable and trustworthy. She definitely appears to be intelligent 
and does not suffer from any disability to justify discarding her testimony. Her deposition was 
corroborated by cogent and confidence inspiring evidence that was brought on record by the 
prosecution. Appellant No. 2 had recorded her statement under section 164 of the Cr.P.C. and 
later also recorded her version under section 342 of the Cr.P.C. The presence of Appellant No. 
1 in the house on the day and at the time of occurrence was established beyond doubt. The 
testimonies of the prosecution witnesses were reliable and inspired confidence. The learned 
trial  Court  appears  to  have  handed  down  a  lesser  sentence  in  the  case  of  Appellant  No.  2 
because she had voluntarily come forward and had disclosed some crucial facts. Appellant No. 
2 had indeed taken the life of an innocent human being and she does not deserve to be treated 
leniently.  Her  guilt  was  established  beyond  reasonable  doubt  and  there  are  no  mitigating 
circumstances to hand down a lesser sentence. 

13.  For what has been discussed above, we answer the Murder Reference No.11/2015 titled 
'The State v. Gul Muhammad' in the affirmative and uphold the conviction and sentence handed 
down  by  the  learned  trial  Court.  Consequently,  Jail  Appeal  No.107/2015  titled  'Gul 
Muhammad v. The State' and Jail Appeal No.108/2015 titled 'Mst. Eid Un Nisa v. The State' 
are hereby dismissed. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
