ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

                                                    R.F.A. No.65 of 2013 

Javed Ahmed Mir  
VS          

Muhammad Afzal and others  

Date of Hearing:   
Appellant by: 

Respondents by: 

02.12.2021  
M/s  Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani  and  Zohaib 
Hassan Gondal, Advocates.  
Mr.  Taimoor  Aslam  Khan,  Advocate 
respondents No.1. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Akhtar  Awan,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.4. 
Respondents No.2 and 3 ex-parte. 

for 

__________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

regular  first  appeal  the  appellant,  Javed  Ahmed  Mir,  impugns  the 

order  dated  14.03.2013  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil 

Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  plaint  in  his  suit  for  specific 

performance of agreement to sell dated 07.04.2003, mandatory and 

permanent  injunction,  was  rejected  by  invoking  the  provisions  of 

Order  VII,  Rule  11  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (“C.P.C.”). 

The plaint in the said suit was rejected primarily on the ground that 

in  the  said  agreement,  the  buyer was  M/s  Royal  Craft International, 

whereas the suit was instituted by Javed Ahmed Mir.  

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  the  learned 

Court  below  erred  by  not  appreciating  that  the  appellant  /  plaintiff 

(Javed  Ahmed  Mir)  was  the  sole  proprietor  of  M/s  Royal  Craft 

International; that  since  M/s  Royal Craft  International was  neither a 

company 

incorporated  under  the  provisions  of  the  erstwhile 

Companies Ordinance, 1984 nor a partnership firm registered under 

the  provisions  of  the  Partnership  Act,  1932,  there  was  no  need  for 

any authorization in favour of Javed Ahmed Mir for the institution of 

the suit; that it is well settled that a sole proprietorship cannot file a 

suit, and that a suit on behalf of the sole proprietorship can only be 

filed  by  its  sole  proprietor;  and  that  the  impugned  order  dated 

14.03.2013 passed by the learned Court below is contrary to the law 

laid down by the superior Courts. Learned counsel for the appellant 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2 

R.F.A.No.65/2013 

prayed  for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed  and  for  the  impugned  order 

dated 14.03.2013 to be set-aside.  

3. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

submitted that since the buyer in the agreement was M/s Royal Craft 

International,  no  person  other  than  the  buyer  could  have  instituted 

the suit for specific performance of the agreement to sell; that at no 

material stage did the appellant bring on record any authorization by 

M/s  Royal  Craft  International  in  his  favour  to  institute  the  suit;  that 

another fatal defect from which the suit suffers is that the seller i.e., 

M/s  Air  Mech  Engineering  Industries  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  has  not  even  been 

impleaded as a defendant in the suit; that the defendants in the suit 

are  the  attorneys    and  /  or  owners  of  the  said  company;  and  that 

since  the  impugned  order  does  not  suffer  from  any  legal  infirmity, 

interference  with  the  same  is  not  warranted.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.1 prayed for the appeal to be dismissed.  

4. 

In  rejoinder,  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that 

the appellant had submitted an application for the amendment in the 

plaint  so  as  to  implead  M/s  Air  Mech  Engineering  Industries  (Pvt.) 

Ltd. as a defendant in the suit; that the said application was filed on 

17.12.2012  after  an  objection  was  raised  by  the  defendants  in  the 

written  statement  as  to  the  maintainability  of  the  suit;  and  that  the 

said application had been left undecided by the learned Civil Court.  

5.  We  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.   

6. 

The  record  shows 

that  on  07.04.2003  M/s  Air  Mech 

Engineering  Industries  (Pvt.) Ltd.  and  M/s.  Royal Craft International 

entered into an agreement whereby the former agreed to sell to the 

latter  Industrial  Plot  No.218,  measuring  300  x  100  feet  situated  at 

Industrial  Triangle,  Kahuta  Road,  Islamabad  for  a  total  sale 

consideration  of  Rs.42,00,000/-.  Subsequently,  disputes  arose 

between  the  seller  and  the  purchaser.  It  was  not  until  04.04.2006 

that  a  suit  for  specific  performance  of  the  said  agreement  to  sell 

dated  07.04.2003  was  instituted  by  the  appellant.  The  respondents 

contested  the  said  suit  by 

filing  a  written  statement.  The 

respondents also filed an application under Order VII, Rule 11 C.P.C. 

 
3 

R.F.A.No.65/2013 

praying  for  the  rejection  of  the  plaint  inter alia  on  the  ground  that 

since  the  purchaser  of  the  said  property  was  M/s  Royal  Craft 

International, the suit for specific performance could not have been 

filed  by  the  appellant.  Vide  order  dated  14.03.2013,  the  said 

application was  allowed  by  the  learned  Civil Court  and  the plaint in 

the  suit  was  rejected.  The  said  order  has  been  assailed  by  the 

appellant in the instant regular first appeal. 

7. 

The  sole  ground  on  which  the  learned  Civil  Court  dismissed 

the appellant’s suit for specific performance of the agreement dated 

07.04.2003 was that the same had been filed by the appellant / Javed 

Ahmed Mir and not by M/s Royal Craft International which, as per the 

said  agreement,  was  the  purchaser  of  the  property  which  was  the 

subject matter of the said agreement. There is nothing on the record 

to  show  that  M/s  Royal  Craft  International  was  either  a  Company 

incorporated  under  the  provisions  of  the  erstwhile  Companies 

Ordinance,  1984  or  a  partnership  firm  registered  under  the 

provisions  of  the  Partnership  Act,  1932.    Furthermore,  in  the  said 

agreement  to  sell,  M/s  Royal  Craft  International  has  not  been 

described as a company or a partnership. 

8. 

The  appellant  asserts  that  he  is  the  sole  proprietor  of  M/s 

Royal Craft International. Learned counsel for respondent No.1 also 

did  not  contest  the  assertion  that  M/s  Royal  Craft  International  is  a 

sole proprietorship, with the appellant as its sole proprietor. 

9. 

A suit or legal proceedings can be filed by a natural person or 

a  juristic  person  having  legal  personality.  A  proprietary  concern  is 

not  a  juristic  person  and  it  cannot sue  in  its  name.  It  is  the 

sole proprietor that can sue. In the instant case as is apparent from 

the  plaint  and  memo  of  parties,  the  suit  has  been  filed  by  the  sole 

proprietor  (Javed  Ahmed  Mir)  of  the  proprietorship  concern  (M/s 

Royal Craft International). 

10.  Order  XXX,  Rule  10  C.P.C.  provides inter alia  that  any  person 

carrying  on  business  in  the  name  or  style  other  than  his  own  name 

may be sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name. The said 

provision was interpreted by the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh in the 

case  Ahan  Saz  Contractors  VS  Pak  Chromical  Limited  (1999  MLD 

1781).  It  was  held  that  the  filing  of  a  suit  in  the  name  of  a  proprietary 

 
4 

R.F.A.No.65/2013 

concern/sole  proprietorship  was  not  merely  a  technical  flaw  but  was  a 

legal  defect,  and  that  for  such  a  legal  defect  the  suit  was  liable  to  be 

dismissed. Furthermore, it was held as follows:-  

“Another most important aspect of the matter is that the instant suit 
has been filed by M/s. Ahan Saz Contractors which, admittedly, is a 
proprietary concern of one Muhammad Riaz Awan. Order 30, 
C.P.C. deals with the suit filed by or against the firms and persons 
carrying on business in the names other than their own. Rule 1 of 
Order 30, C.P.C. provides that any two or more persons claiming or 
being liable as partners and carrying on business in Pakistan may 
sue or be sued in the name of the firm, if any, of which such persons 
were partners at the time of the accruing of the cause of action. 
Order 30, Rule 10, C.P.C. provides that any person carrying on 
business in a name or style other than his own name may be sued in 
such name or style as if it were a firm name. Comparative study of 
Order 30, Rule 1, C.P.C. and Order 30, Rule 10, C.P.C. reveals that 
Order 30, Rule 1, C.P.C. which deals with suits by a partnership 
firm permits filing of suits by or against a partnership firm whereas 
Order 30, Rule 10, C.P.C. which deals with suit in the name of the 
proprietary concern specifically provides only for filing of suits 
against a proprietary concern in its name but does not provide for 
filing of a suit by a proprietary concern as it does not have any legal 
status/character as distinct from its proprietary. Thus a proprietary 
concern can be sued in its name but it cannot sue in its own name.” 

Law to the said effect has also been laid down in the following 

cases:- 

(a) 

In the case of Habib Bank Limited VS Iqbal I. Chundrigar 

(1983 CLC 1464), it has been held as follows:-  

 “As it has been established that Iqbal Chundrigar is the 
proprietor of Iqbal & Co. the question arises whether they are 
two  different  and  distinct  persons  for  the  purposes  of 
incurring liability. A proprietary firm cannot have any legal 
status as distinct from its proprietor. It is the proprietor who 
is the legal person entitled to all the benefits and liable for the 
liabilities that accrued in that account. In the eye of law the 
proprietor and proprietary firm are one and the same person. 
A reference can be made to AIR 1924 Bom. 109 and AIR 1930 
Bom. 216. It is well-established that a proprietary firm cannot 
sue in its own name. It is the proprietor who can sue for 
claims that may arise in the name of proprietary firm. It is thus 
established that each and every liability which the proprietary 
firm incurs is the liability of the proprietor himself. In fact it is 
the proprietor who is carrying on the business in the name 
and style of a firm taking upon himself the burdens and 
benefits.” 

(b) 

In  the  case  of  Islamabad  Law  College  VS  Higher 

Education  Commission  (2017  YLR  1399),  this  Court  held  that 

legal  proceedings  can  be  instituted  by  a  sole  proprietor  but 

not the sole proprietorship. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

R.F.A.No.65/2013 

(c) 

In the case of P.C. Advertising VS Municipal Corporation 

of  Delhi  (73  (1998  DLT  259)  =  (1998  (III  SD  Delhi  133),  it  was 

held as follows:- 

“Suit filed in the name of proprietorship firm which was 
neither  a  registered  company  nor  joint  family  nor  a 
partnership  firm,  in  the  absence  of  any  prayer  to  seek 
amendment to allow sole proprietor to sue in his own name 
was not maintainable.” 

(d) 

In the case of Miraj Advertising Corporation VS Vishaka 

Engineering (115 (2004) DLT 471), it was held as follows:-  

“A  proprietorship  firm  has  no  legal  personality  like  a 
registered firm. A suit cannot be instituted in the name of an 
unregistered proprietorship firm and the said suit is to be 
instituted in the name of the proprietor.” 

(e) 

In  the  case  of  Patodia  &  Co.  VS  The  Bombay  Woolen 

Mills  Ltd.  (1992  (22)  DRJ  611),  the  Delhi  High  Court  held  as 

follows:-  

“Under  Order  31  rule  1  Civil  Procedure  Code  it  is  a 
partnership which can sue or be sued in the name of the firm. 
Order 30 rule 10 CPC permits a plaintiff to sue a person 
carrying on business in the name and style other than his own 
name i.e. under any assumed name. This rule, however, does 
not permit a sole proprietor of a firm to file a suit in the 
assumed trade name under which he carries on business. 
This  proposition  of  law  is  well  settled.  In  Samrathrai 
Khetsidas VS Kasturbhai Jagabhai AIR 1930 Bombay 216 it 
was held that a firm consisting of a sole proprietor cannot 
bring a suit in the name of the firm but may sue in his own 
name as the proprietor of the firm. Again in Bhagvan Manaji 
Marwadi and others VS Hiraji Premuji Marwadi AIR 1932 
Bombay 516 it was laid down that a single person cannot 
constitute a firm and a person trading as a firm under an 
assumed trading name may only be sued in his trade name 
but he cannot sue in that name. It is not necessary to refer to 
other  decisions  on  this  aspect  as  the  legal  position  is 
unexceptional and admits of no doubt whatsoever. As a 
principle of law it can be safely stated that rules 1 and 10 of 
Order 30 of the Code of Civil Procedure do not envisage filing 
of a suit by a sole proprietor of a firm in the trade name under 
which he carries on business though they permit the business 
of a sole proprietary firm to be treated as an artificial person 
for  the  limited  purpose  of  suing  it.  Beyond  this  a  sole 
proprietary concern has no existence at all in the eye of law.” 

11. 

In  view  of  the  aforementioned  case 

law,  the 

inevitable 

inference is that a suit in the name of a sole proprietorship concern, 

which is not a legal entity, is not maintainable. The contention of the 

learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  that  the  suit  should  have  been 

filed by the proprietorship concern and not the sole proprietor is not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

R.F.A.No.65/2013 

tenable  since  a  proprietorship  concern  is  not  a  legal  entity  which 

can  sue  in  its  own  name.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  suit  has  been 

correctly filed by the sole proprietor in his name on behalf of his sole 

proprietorship  concern  and  not 

in 

the  name  of 

the  sole 

proprietorship concern. 

12.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  had  also  contended 

that the suit suffers from the fatal defect of non-impleadment of the 

party, which was the seller under the agreement dated  07.04.2003. 

Since the plaint in the appellant’s suit had not been rejected on this 

ground and since the appellant’s application for the impleadment of 

M/s Air Mech Engineering Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. has till date not been 

decided  by  the  learned  Civil  Court,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for 

this Court to express its views on this matter.  

13. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  appeal  is  allowed;  the 

impugned  order  dated  14.03.2013  is  set  aside;  and  the  matter  is 

remanded  to  the  learned  Civil  Court  for  further  proceedings  in  the 

suit. There shall be no order as to costs.  

               (TARIQ MEHMOOD JAHANGIRI)        (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

JUDGE 

    JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON 18.01.2022. 

     (JUDGE) 

               (JUDGE) 

  Ahtesham* 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Uploaded By IT Department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
