ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 3895 OF 2020 

HUMAIRA NAZLI. 
VS 
SHAUKAT ALI, ETC. 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

Date of hearing      

: 

: 

: 

Tahir Afzal Abbasi, Advocate.  
Mr. Shahzad Hussain, Advocate. 

Ms. Neeli Khan, Advocate. 

12.03.2021 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ, J. 

Through  present  petition, 

the  petitioner 

Humaira Nazli, has assailed order dated 17.11.2020, passed by learned Additional 

District Judge, West-Islamabad (hereinafter referred to as the ADJ), whereby, the 

appeal of the petitioner against order dated 07.01.2020, passed by the learned Trial 

Court,  has  been  dismissed,  whereas,  Respondent  No.1’s  appeal  filed  against  the 

said  order  has  been  accepted  and  order  dated  07.01.2020,  passed  by  the  learned 

Trial Court has been set aside.    

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  marriage  between  the  petitioner  and 

Respondent No.1 was solemnized on 16.01.2006 and they were blessed with two 

children namely Muhammad Abu Bakar and Zunaira Shaukat, Respondent Nos. 2 

& 3, respectively, out of the wedlock. Relation between the parties became strained 

and ultimately on 25.08.2019, the petitioner left the house of the Respondent No.1 

and  filed  a  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage,  which  was  decreed  in  her  favor. 

Petitioner then filed petition u/s 491  Cr.P.C. against Respondent No.1 which was 

accepted and temporary custody of the minors was handed over to the  petitioner. 

Respondent No.1 preferred petition u/s 25 of the Guardian & Wards Act, 1890 for 

permanent  custody  of  the  minors,  which  was  decided,  vide  judgment  dated 

07.01.2020, whereby custody of the minors/Respondent Nos. 2 & 3 was ordered to 

be  retained  by  the  petitioner,  however,  Respondent  No.1  was  allowed  visitation 

rights while chalking out the meeting schedule. Petitioner being, dissatisfied with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WP No. 3895 of 2020 

      2 

the  meeting  schedule,  preferred  appeal  before  the  learned  District  Judge, 

Islamabad. Respondent No.1 also filed appeal against the order dated 07.01.2020. 

Both the appeals were consolidated and were decided, vide impugned consolidated 

judgment  dated  17.11.2020,  whereby  appeal  filed  by  Respondent  No.1  was 

accepted, whereas, petitioner’s appeal was dismissed.  

3. 

After  being  unsuccessful  in  appeal,  petitioner  has  preferred  present  writ 

petition  against the  judgment  dated  07.01.2020, of learned  Trial  Court  as well as 

judgment  dated  17.11.2020,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 

respectively. 

4. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted the impugned judgments passed 

by the learned  Courts below suffer from misreading and non-reading of material 

evidence  produced  by  the  petitioner;  that  the  learned  courts  below  failed  to 

appreciate  the  proposition  that  in  cases  of  custody  of  minor  children  undeniably 

right of custody vests in the mother; that the Respondents No.1 during  the cross-

examination admitted that he is not capable of ensuring welfare of the minors; that 

there can be no substitute to the love, affection and commitment of a mother to her 

children as the lap of real mother is God’s cradle for a child; that a grave prejudice 

and miscarriage of justice have been meted out to the petitioner, by handing over 

custody  of  the  minors  to  Respondent  No.1.  Leaned  counsel  submitted  that  the 

impugned judgments have been passed in derogation to the settled law regarding 

custody of the minors, therefore, liable to be set aside.  

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.  1,  inter-alia, 

submitted  that  while  considering  the  welfare  of  the  minor  children  their 

intelligence  preference  cannot  be  ignored  and  in  the  present  case  the  minors  are 

emotionally attached with their father and are not willing to live with their mother; 

that the learned Appellate Court, while handing over custody of the minors to the 

Respondent  No.1, has  duly  appreciated the  fact  that  welfare  of  the  minor is  with 

their father.  Learned counsel  in support of  his  contentions placed  reliance on  the 

case law  reported  as  Mst.  Ayesha  Abdul maleek  VS Additional  District  judge, 

 
WP No. 3895 of 2020 

      3 

Sahiwal  and  others  (2020  YLR  401),  Imran  Ahmed  VS Mst.  Madiha  Younus 

and  others  (2018  YLR  649)  and  Mst.  Sardaran  (deceased)  through  L.Rs  VS

District Judge, Mianwali and others (2016 MLD 801) and prayed for dismissal of 

instant writ petition.  

6. 

Arguments heard. Record perused. 

7. 

It  is  established  principle  through  various  pronouncements  of  the  superior 

courts  of  the  country  that  while  deciding  matter  of  custody  of  minor  children 

preference should be given to his or her welfare amongst all other considerations 

and for this purpose capability of either of the parents is to be seen. In the present 

case  the  petitioner  /  mother  of  the  minors  is  a  working  lady  who  lives  in  a 

combined  family  system  with  her  brothers  and  mother.  The  petitioner,  being  a 

working  lady,  most  of  the  times  remains  outside  the  house  and  children  shall  be 

looked after by her mother and family of her brothers, whereas, the concept behind 

handing  over  custody  of  the  minor  children  to  the  mother  is  that  she  remains 

available all the time for taking care of the children and in case where the mother is 

a  working  lady  just  like  in  the  present  case,  the  other  circumstances  just  like 

suitable  atmosphere  for  the  children  is  also  to  be  seen.  On  the  other  hand, 

Respondent  No.1    lives  with  her  mother  alone  who  can  take  care  of  the  minors 

while father of the minors is on job. Moreover, as per Muhammadan Law, father is 

the natural guardian of the minor children and has preferential right of custody of 

minor.  

8 

In  addition  to  above,  both  the  minors/Respondent  Nos.  2  &  3,  who  also 

appeared before the learned appellate Court, were called in person. They appeared 

to be fully conversant with the situation and their attachment with their father was 

apparent as they showed no attraction towards their mother who was also present 

in  the  Court.  The  minors,  on  court’s  question  expressed  their  willingness  to  live 

with their father as their mother does not take care of them.  

 
WP No. 3895 of 2020 

      4 

9. 

Thus, I am of the considered view that, in the facts and circumstances of the 

case, the learned appellate court has rightly handed over the custody of the minors 

to  Respondent  No.1/father,  therefore,  I  am  in  agreement  with  the  findings  of 

learned ADJ that the welfare of the minors lies in living with their father.  

10. 

In view of the above, no reason to interfere with the judgments and decrees 

dated  07.01.2020  &  17.11.2020,  passed  by  the  learned  Courts  below  has  been 

found, therefore, present petition, being devoid of any merit, is hereby dismissed.   

Announced in the open Court on ______________________. 

(LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

Adnan 

 
 
 
 
 
 
