ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Appellant by; 

Crl Appeal No 90 of 2011 And 
Murder Reference No 01 of 2011 

Malik Mumtaz Qadri 
VS 
The State 

M/s  Khawaja  Muhammad  Sharif,  Mian  Nazir 
Akhtar, Malik Muhammad Rafique Khan, Ghulam 
Mustafa Ch., Muhammad Bilal Mughal, Ch. Khalid 
Mahmood,  Ch.  Abdul  Aziz,  Haroon-ur-Rashid, 
Riaz  Hanif  Rahi,  Malik  Jawad  Khalid,  Ch.  Naseer 
Ahmed,  Hafiz  Ahmad  Rasheed,  Rao  Abdul 
Raheem,  Muhammad  Tariq  Dhamial,  Raja  Shujar 
ur  Rehman,  Haji  Muhammad  Aadil  Naveed,  Syed 
Habib-ul Haq Shah, Nazeer Ahmed Ghazi, Pirzada 
Mamoon-ur-Rasheed,  Mian  Khalid  Habib  Elahi, 
Muhammad  Mubashir  Khalid  Hijveri,  Mian 
Muhammad  Saleem  Aftab,  Mehmood  H.  Mirza, 
Rao Abdul Jabbar Khan, Muhammad Hanif Khan, 
Shehbaz  Ali,  Muhammad  Iqbal  Zaki,  M.  Tahir 
Sultan  Khokhar,  Ch.  Muhammad  Qasim,  Rao 
NasimHayder  Khan,  Muhammad  Latif  Khawaja, 
Muhammad Amir Latif, Ch. Asghar Ali, Raja Yasir 
Shakeel Janjua, Masnoor Khan Abbassi, Ms. Tahira 
Shaheen Mughal, Ch. Hafeez Ullah Yaqoob, Hafiz 
Khizar  Hayat  &  Raja  Naveed  Arif,  Advocates  for 
Appellant  

State by; 

Mian Abdul Rauf, learned Advocate General. 
Mr. Jehangir Khan Jadoon, Standing Counsel  

Complainant by;  Nemo 

Date of hearing; 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
This  appeal  U/S  25  of  Anti 
SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI;J  

3rd Feb. 4th Feb. 6th Feb. 10th Feb and 11th Feb.2015  

Terrorism  Act  1997,  read  with  Section  410  Cr.P.C  is  directed against 

the  impugned  judgment  dated  01.10.2011  passed  by  the  Learned 

Special Judge (Court No II) Anti Terrorism Court Rawalpindi Division 

and Islamabad Capital Territory, whereof the appellant awarded death 

sentence U/S 302 (b) PPC and ordered to pay Rs 1,00,000/- (One Lac) 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 2 

as  compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  the    deceased    U/S    544  A    of  

Cr.P.C,  in  default  whereof  to undergo 06 months S.I. Appellant was  

further  awarded  death  sentence  U/S  7  of  Anti  Terrorism  Act  (ATA) 

and  to  pay  fine  Rs  1,00,000/-  (one  lac)  and  in  default  whereof  to 

undergo  06  months  S.I  in  case  FIR  No  06/2011  dated  04.01.2011 

registered at P.S Kohsar Islamabad. 

2. 

In terms of Section 374 Cr.PC, the Murder Reference No 

1  of  2011  has  also  been  sent  to  this  court  which  is  to  be  answered 

through instant judgment. 

3. 

Brief  Facts  of  the  case  are  that  law  was  set  into  motion 

through  complaint  Ex.PB  of  complainant  Shaheryar  Ali  Taseer  (PW-

10) who  narrated the murder ordeal of the  then  Governor of Punjab, 

Salman Taseer on 04.01.2011 at about 03.50 pm, when deceased was 

on  his  way  back  home  from  the  restaurant  at  Kohsar  Market;  that 

appellant  Malik  Mumtaz  Ahmed  Qadri  who  along  with  others  was 

deputed with the deceased as security Guard,  resorted to firing with his 

official  weapon,    resultantly  Salman  Taseer  who  received  serious 

injuries,  was  shifted  to  Poly  Clinic  Hospital  by  the  police  officials, 

where  doctors  confirmed  his  death.  According  to  complainant  his 

father  had  a  particular  view  point  on  national  issues,  due  to  which 

different  Religious  and  Political  groups  were  propagating  against  him, 

and threats to murder him were being issued. His father has been killed 

by accused on the instigation, connivance and conspiracy hatched up by 

these  religious  and  political  groups.  Appellant  was  overpowered  by 

other personnel deputed with the deceased and arrested from the place 

of  occurrence  along  with  his  official  weapon.  On  the  basis  of  this 

complaint formal FIR Ex PB/1 was chalked out. 

4. 

After formal investigation, the prosecution submitted final 

report  U/S  173  Cr.P.C  and  accused  was  put  to  charge  U/S  302,  109 

PPC read with Section 7(a) Anti Terrorism Act 1997, on 14.02.2011 by 

the  learned  trial  court.  In  order  to  prove  the  charge  against  the 

appellant prosecution produced the following witnesses namely;- 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 3 

“PW1  Dr.  Muhammad  Arshad  (Surgeon  Emergency  /  MO 

Federal  Government  Poly  Clinic  Hospital  Islamabad  who 

deposed  that  he  alongwith  Dr.  Aslam  Shah,  Dr.  Ashok  Kumar 

and  Dr.  Muhammad  Farrukh  Kamal  conducted  post  mortem 

examination  of the dead body of deceased and found following 

injuries;- 

1.  Multiple  bruises  on  the  face/  nose  /  forehead/  upper  lip. 

These  bruises  were  irregular  and  of  different  sizes  and 

shape. 

2. 

 A  large  irregular  wound  on  the  left  lower  mandibular 

region,  the  underlining  fractured.  Bone  can  been  seen 

through the wound. The wound measuring of 7cm x 6 cm. 

3. 

A wound of entry on the right shoulder front measuring 1 

cm  x  1.5  cm  there  was  no  burning,  blackening  and 

tattooing.   

4.  Wound of entry on the upper chest front measuring 3cm 

x 1 cm. There was no B/B/T.   

5.  Wound  of  entry  on  the  left  lower  chest  front  measuring 

3cm x 1cm. No B/B/T.   

6.  Wound  of  entry  on  the  right  lower  chest,  infrolateral    to 

the right nipple measuring 1cm x 3 cm. No B/B/T     

7.  Wound of entry on the right Hypochondrium measuring 

3 cm x 1.5 cm at the coastal margin. No B/B/T.   

8.  Wound of entry on the medial surface of left upper arm. 

No B/B/T     

9.  Wound of exit measuring 7cm x 2cm on the front of left 

axila. 

10.  An irregular wound measuring 3cm x 5cm on the interior 

aspect of the right axila. 

11.  Re-entry  wound  in  the  lower  part  of  left  axila  measuring 

1cm x 1.2 cm 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 4 

12.  Two  wounds  of  entries  on  the  lateral  surface  of  upper 

thigh (clutal region) measuring .5cm x .5cm. No B/B/T .   

13.  A  wound  of  entry  in  the  right  lateral  lumber  region  5cm 

above the illiac crest measuring 3cm x 1cm. No B/B/T.     

14.  Wound  of  exit  on  the  lateral  surface  of  right  buttock 

measuring 3 cm x 1.5 cm. Underlining tissues protruding 

out through the wound. 

15.  A  gutter  wound  on  the  right  forearm  9cm  x  4  cm 

underline. Bone can be seen to the wound. 

16.  Wound  of  entry  on  the  medial  surface  of  right  forearm 

measuring 1cm. No B/B/T.     

17.  A  bullet  fragment  can  be  palpated  on  the  medial  side  of 

the  right  elbow.  The  incision  was  made  and  the  bullet 

fragment was recovered. 

18.  A Small abrasion on the front of left knee. 

19.  A wound of entry on the back over to dorsal spine 16cm 

below the nape on the back. No B/B/T.      

20.  Wound  of  entry  on  the  left  lower  chest  on  the  back 

measuring 0.5 cm in diameter. 

21.  Wound  of  entry  just  below  the  scapular  region  on  the 

back measuring 5 cm x 0.8 cm. No B/B/T.     

22.  A group of wounds of entries, (six in numbers) on the left 

buttock each measuring .5 cm in diameter. No B/B/T.     

23.  Two wounds of exit on the right lateral side of chest at the 

back  close 

to  scapular  region  measuring  1.5cm 

in 

diameter. 

24.  A  wound  of  exit  on  the  lateral  surface  of  upper  lumber 

region on the back 1cm in diameter. 

25.  Two  wounds  of  exit  on  the  right  buttock  on  the  back 

measuring 3cm x 1.5 cm, underlying tissue protruding out. 

26.  Four  wounds  of  exit  on  the  right  buttock  at  the  back, 

irregular in shape and sizes 4cm x 1.5cm on average. 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 5 

27.  A  large  wound  exit  at  the  sacro-cocygal  region measuring 

7cm x 7 cm.  

28.  A graze wound of 11 cm in length and 1 cm in width at the 

secoral region on the back. 

This  PW  further deposed that in the opinion of medical 

team, the cause of the death was extensive injuries to both lungs, liver, 

stomach, small and large gut and pelvic structures. That all the injuries 

were  due  to  the  firearms  and  ante  mortem  and  such  injuries  were 

sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature. That X-Ray skull, 

chest,  abdomen  pelvic  and  limbs  taken  at  FGPC  before  dissection 

started, the bullet fragments recovered were handed over to the police 

under  seal  and  labeling.  That  the  bullet  fragment  lodged  at  the  chest 

could  not  be  recovered  after  an  extensive  effort.  He  further  deposed 

that  the  probable  time  between  the  injuries  and  death  was  immediate 

and  probable  time  between  death  and  post  mortem  examination  was 

within 06 hours (Defence did not opt to cross-examine this witness).  

PW2  Iftikhar  Ali  ASI/  Muharrar  P.S  Kohsar  Islamabad 

stated that on 04.01.2011 he received  complaint Ex.PB from the SHO 

through constable Abdul Raheem (PW-3) and he chalked out the FIR 

No 06 Ex.PB/1. He further deposed that on the same day he received 

three parcels containing blood stained cotton, empties and SMG Rifle 

respectively and he kept the parcels in Mall-Khana and on 07.01.2011 

after obtaining road certificate he  handed over the same to  Safdar Ali 

ASI  for  its  onwards  transmission  to  the  office  of  Chemical  Examiner 

and Forensic Science Laboratory Lahore.  

PW3  Abdul  Raheem  Constable  /  6147  stated  that  on 

04.01.2011 the SHO P.S Kohsar handed over to him complaint Ex.PB 

at  the  spot  and  he  took  the  same  to  the  police  station  and  handed  it 

over to the Moharrar for registration of the formal FIR and Moharrar 

handed over copy of the FIR to him after  registration  and  he  handed 

over the same to SHO at the spot. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 6 

 PW4  Safdar  Hussain  ASI  P.S  Kohsar  stated  that  in  the 

night between 06/07.01.2011 the Moharrar of P.S Kohsar handed over 

to him one sealed parcel said to contain blood stained cotton, second 

parcel said to contain 28 empties and third parcel said to contain SMG 

Riffle. He deposited the first parcel in the office of Chemical Examiner 

and  rest  of  two  parcels  in  the  office  of  Forensic  Science  Laboratory, 

Lahore.  

PW5 Muhammad Gulfraz SI P.S Kohsar deposed that on 

05.01.2011  he  collected  post  mortem  report  of  the  deceased  on  the 

direction  of  SHO  P.S  Kohsar.  Also  collected  07  X-Rays,  one  sealed 

parcel said to contain led bullet, last worn clothes of the deceased from 

CMO  PIMS  Hospital  and  handed  over  the  same  to  SHO  who 

prepared recovery memo Ex.PC.  

PW6  Khurram  Shahzad  draftsman,  stated 

that  on 

05.01.2011 he alongwith IO and PWs went to the place of occurrence. 

On the direction of IO and pointation of witnesses he obtained rough 

notes of  the  place of occurrence and thereafter  prepared  a  scaled site 

plan Ex.PD. On 09.01.2011 he handed over the same to the IO.  

PW7 Umer Farooq Constable/ 4382 deposed that he was 

performing duties as Naib Moharrar at  Elite Force, Rawalpindi. That 

on  03.01.2011  the  visiting  programme  of  deceased  Governor  Salman 

Taseer  came  to  the  security  branch.  That  Governor  arrived  from 

Lahore at  12.00 noon  through motorway. On 04.01.2011 he  sent two 

police  escorts  to  the  residence  of  Governor  at  F-6/3  Islamabad. 

Appellant was on another duty and he deputed him with the Governor, 

as appellant had desired that he intended to visit Islamabad.  

PW8  Salman  Ghani  stated 

that  on  04.01.2011  he 

identified dead body of the deceased Salman Taseer in PIMS Hospital 

and also signed the receipt Ex.PE.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 7 

PW9  Ch.  Muhammad  Ali  Assistant  Commissioner 

Islamabad  stated  that  he  recorded  the  confessional  statement  of 

appellant  U/S  164  Cr.P.C  on  10.01.2011  on  the  directions  of  the 

District Magistrate.  

PW10  Shaheryar  Taseer  is  complainant  of  the  case  who 

stated  that  on  04.01.2011  he  moved  written  application  Ex.PB  for 

registration of the case.  

PW11 Nadeem Asif ASI gunman to the Governor Punjab 

Pindi  Region  and  PW12  Muhammad  Ameer  Khan  Inspector, 

presently  posted  as  SHO  at  P.S  Makhdoom  Rasheed  Multan  have 

provided the eye witness count by deposing that on 04.01.2011 at about 

03.00  /  03.15  pm  deceased  left  his  house  for  Kohsar  Market  to  have 

lunch.  That  after  taking  lunch  deceased  came  out  of  the  hotel  for  his 

house along with covering party / security guards. Appellant was one of 

the  member  of  covering  party  and  all  of  sudden  he  resorted  to  firing 

with  his  official  weapon  at  deceased.  They  further  deposed  that  this 

episode continued for seconds where-after  appellant was overpowered, 

arrested and handed over to the local police. They further deposed that 

they had shifted  deceased in injured condition in police vehicle to the 

Poly Clinic Hospital Islamabad. PW12 also  witnessed  the recovery of 

the riffle, Ex.P4, magazine Ex.P5/1-2 and 28 live bullets, Ex.P6/1 to 28 

vide  recovery memo Ex.Ph. He further witnessed the personal search 

of the appellant. 

PW13  Tanveer  Ahmed  ASI  P.S  Secretariat  Islamabad 

deposed 

that  on  04.01.2011  he  remained  associated  with 

the 

investigation  of  the  case.  SHO  Hakem  Khan  collected  the  blood 

stained earth from the place of occurrence vide recovery memo Ex.PK, 

I.O further collected 20 empties of SMG from the place of occurrence 

vide memo of recovery Ex.PL, he also witnessed the recovery of  gun, 

28 live bullets and two magazine vide recovery memo Ex.PH. 

PW14  Hakem  Khan  Inspector  /  Investigating  Officer  

presently posted  at P.S Secretariat Islamabad  stated  that  on  04.1.2011 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 8 

received  information  of    occurrence  and  proceeded  to  the  place  of 

occurrence,  he  prepared  visual  site  plan  Ex.PP,  received  the  written 

application  Ex.PB  from  complainant  and  dispatched  it  to  P.S  Kohsar 

for  the  registration  of  the  FIR,  collected  28  crime  empties  from  the 

place of occurrence beside collecting blood stained earth. That he took 

the custody of appellant from PW12 Muhammad  Ameer Khan  along 

with  crime  weapon,  obtained  his  physical  remand  and  that  on  the 

request of appellant he produced him before the Magistrate to record 

his  statement  U/S  164  of  Cr.P.C.  He  dispatched  the  crime  weapon, 

cartridges and crime empties to the concerned laboratories. 

5. 

The 

learned 

trial  court  recorded 

the  statement  of 

appellant  u/s  342  Cr.P.C,  appellant  opted  not  to  make  any  statement 

u/s 340(2) Cr.P.C and to adduce any evidence in his defense, however, 

written  statement  u/s  265(F)  5  Cr.P.C  was  submitted,  press  clippings 

Mark “A to A”  with Book "Stranger to History" attached thereto.  

6.   After  conclusion  of  the  trial  appellant  was  found  guilty  of 

commission  of  the  offence  of  Qatl-e-Amd  of  deceased  and  awarded 

death  sentence  U/S  302  (b)  PPC  and  was  also  ordered  to  pay  Rs 

1,00,000/- (One Lac) as compensation to the legal heirs of the deceased 

U/S 544-A Cr.PC,  in default whereof to undergo 06 months S.I. The 

learned  trial  court  also  found  appellant  guilty  of  the  commission  of 

offence  U/S  7  (a)  (ATA)  and  after  convicting  him  awarded  death 

sentence  and  was  ordered  to  pay  fine  Rs  1,00,000/-  (one  lac)  and  in 

default  whereof  to  undergo  06  months  S.I.  The  appellant  filed  the 

instant  criminal  appeal.  The  trial  court  also  sent  Capital  Punishment 

Reference for confirmation of the death sentence. 

7. 

Learned counsel M/s Khawaja Muhammad Sharif & Mian 

Nazir Akhtar, Sr. ASC representing appellant argued that Section 6 of 

Anti  Terrorism  Act  1997,  does  not  attract 

to 

the 

facts  and 

circumstances  of this  case; that findings of the learned trial court, that 

act  committed  by  the  appellant  falls  in  the  category  of  terrorism  is 

completely  arbitrary  and  baseless;  that  the  learned  trial  court  wrongly 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 9 

held  that act of the appellant  had terrified  masses as  there was not  an 

iota of evidence on record to show that any panic or sense of insecurity 

was created in the general public and in-fact general public was relieved 

on the  death of the deceased in view  of  the notoriety of  his  character 

and  his  messy    utterance  about  the  blasphemy  laws.  The  act  of 

appellant  was  highly  appreciated  by  the  lovers  of  Prophet  (PBUH). 

They further argued that in the absence of evidence about elements of 

terrorism,  panic  or  sense  of  insecurity  amongst  the  general  public  the 

case ought to have been tried in the Sessions Court under the normal 

law  and  the  proceedings  of  trial  before  the  learned  trial  court  was 

corum-non-judice.  They  further  added  that  the  ingredients    to 

constitute the commission of offence U/S 6 of the Anti Terrorism Act 

1997,  are  not  established  from  the  prosecution  evidence,  therefore, 

conviction of the appellant U/S 7 (a) of the supra  Act is not sustainable. 

Learned  counsel  maintained  that  even  otherwise  no  incriminating 

material  was  put  to  accused  u/s  342  Cr.P.C,  therefore,  conviction  on 

this count is not sustainable.  

8. 

Learned  counsel  for  appellant  further  contended  that 

deceased  had  himself  committed  the  serious  offence  by  condemning 

the  blasphemy  laws  and  became  “  Shatim-e-Rasool  ”  and  “Muba-ud-

Damm” i.e. one who could legitimately be killed with impunity; that the 

learned  trial  court  failed  to  appreciate  this  aspect  of  the  case  as  the 

utterance of the deceased caused grave and sudden provocation to the 

appellant  in  particular  and  public  at  large  in  general.  Further  argued 

that learned trial court held that individual cannot be allowed to execute 

punishment  upon  persons  guilty  of  commission  of  offence  of 

blasphemy, ignoring the Islamic Law and the judgments pronounced by 

the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  in  a  number  of  cases;  that  the  Hon’ble 

Supreme Court has held in the case of “Zaheer ud Din VS Federation 

of  Pakistan”  “1993  SCMR  1718)  that  the  real  and  effective  law  in 

Pakistan is Islamic Law, therefore, the learned trial court was bound to 

follow this dictum of Apex Court of country and should have acquitted 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 10 

appellant.  Learned  counsel  added  that  learned  trial  court  failed  to 

appreciate and follow the provisions of Section 79 & 338 of PPC.  

It  has  also  been  argued 

that  prosecution  withheld 

independent  evidence  and  produced  less  number  of  witnesses,  who 

were  present  at  the  scene  of  occurrence.  Learned  counsel  further 

argued  that  impugned  judgment  of  the  learned  trial  court  is  result  of 

surmises and conjectures, that no offence of Qatl-e-Amd U/S 302 (b) of 

PPC was made out from the facts and circumstances of the case; that at 

the  most  the  case  fell  within  ambit  of  Section  302  (c)  of  PPC  and 

quantum  of  sentence  awarded  to  the  appellant  is  extremely  harsh, 

uncalled for in the peculiar circumstances of this case; that learned trial 

court had fixed the case for arguments of the parties on 01.10.2011 but 

had  illegally  announced  the  judgment,  without  hearing  arguments  on 

behalf  of  the  appellant  and  as  such  acted  in  unreasonable  and 

unjustified  haste  to  convict  the  appellant  and  pass  the  sentence.  The 

learned  counsel  submitted  that  appellant  is  entitled  to  be  acquitted 

keeping  in  view  the  principles  of  Islamic  Law  and  the  judgments 

rendered by the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) in a number of cases. 

9. 

Learned counsel of appellant further submitted that act of 

appellant, taking life of deceased can be ascribed as “extra judicial” but 

not  beside  the  law.  While  defining  law  learned  counsel  described  the 

Holy Quran and Sunnah of Prophet (PBUH).  

10. 

Learned counsel representing the appellant while stressing 

upon  the  plea  of  appellant  made  referrence  to  the  reported  cases  of 

“Haq  Nawaz  &  other  VS  Province  of  Punjab”  “1997  MLD  299”,  Yar 

Muhammad VS The State” “PLD 1997 Quetta 31”, “Zaheer ud Din & 

others  VS  The  State”  “  1993  SCMR  1718”  &  “Fida  Hussain  VS  Mst. 

Najma”  “PLD  2000  Quetta  46”    and  contended  that  act  of  the 

appellant  committing  the  murder  of  deceased  was  /  is  absolutely  no 

offence  as  under  the  Islamic  Law  which  is  supreme  and  fundamental 

law of the State of Islamic Republic of Pakistan and various judgments 

rendered  by the  Holy  Prophet Muhammad  (P.B.U.H) in the  cases of 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 11 

the  murders  of  the  contemnors  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H). Learned counsels for the appellant have further argued that 

deceased  had  committed  contempt  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H)  as  he  had  criticized  the  blasphemy  law  and  declared  it  as 

black law; that the State and its  functionaries failed to convict him for 

the  offence  U/S  295-C  of  PPC;  that  after  failure  of  the  State  it  had 

become responsibility of all Muslims of the State to enforce Hadd for 

the  crime  committed  by  the  deceased;  that  it  was  bestowed  on  the 

appellant from Allah Almighty to enforce Hadd by committing murder 

of  the  deceased  who  was  Mubah-ud-Dum,  therefore,  the  appellant 

having  found  the  chance  by  chance  discharged  his  lawful  obligations 

caste upon him by the Islamic law and judgments of the Holy Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  therefore,  act  of  appellant  is  totally  protected 

and  his  conviction  is  not  sustainable  as  such  he  is  entitled  to  be 

acquitted.  

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  argued  that 

impugned 

judgment of the learned trial court is result of surmise and conjectures, 

and is liable to be set-aside. They have further argued that it is a case of 

two versions, one introduced by the prosecution and the second taken 

by  the  appellant  and  it  is  settled  law  that  if  both  versions  in  the  case 

being  equally  possible,  the  version  favorable  to  the  appellant  is  to  be 

accepted. They further argued that there are number of instances that 

the  individual  Muslims  had  killed  the  contemnors  in  the  lifetime  of 

Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  without  seeking  his  prior 

permission and subsequently their acts were ratified and that appellant 

is  also  placed  in  a  similar    situation.  Reliance  has been  placed on  the 

case  law  “Babar  Ali  VS  The  State”  “PLD  2007  Lahore  650”, 

“Muhammad  Jhumman  VS  The  State”  “2001  PC.rLJ  1312”  “Hakam 

Din  VS  The  State  “PLD  2006  SC  (AJ&K)  43”,  “Javed  VS  The  State” 

“PLD  1994  SC  679”,  &  “Israr  Ahmed  VS  The  State”  “2008  P.Cr.L.J 

1000”.  

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 12 

11. 

Conversely 

learned  Advocate  General  and  Standing 

Counsel  for  the  State  have  rebutted  the  arguments  of  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  appellant  by  contending  that  judgment  of  the  learned 

trial  court  did  not  warrant  any  interference  as  appellant  had  admitted 

the charge with the specific plea to the effect that;  

“I  have  not  committed  the  murder  of  an  apostate  like 

Salman Taseer (the then Governor of Punjab) contrary to 

dictums of Holy Quran and Sunnah” 

Therefore,  as  per  provision  of  Article  121  of  Qanun-e-

Shahadat Order, 1984 he was required to prove that he was justified in 

committing murder of the deceased and that his act did not attract any  

penal provision as it was not an offence but appellant miserably failed 

to  prove    his  plea,    the  eye  witness  count  furnished  by  the  PW11  & 

PW12  is  confidence  inspiring  which  is  duly  supported  by  the 

corroborative piece of evidence in shape of medical evidence furnished  

by the PW1, recovery of crime weapon from the appellant, the blood 

stained earth from the place of occurrence and matching of the crime 

empties with the crime weapon. It is further argued that appellant was 

deputed  to  protect  the  deceased  who  was  Governor  of  Punjab  at  that 

time but instead of discharging his duties, appellant committed murder 

of  the  deceased  in  a  preplanned  and  brutal  manner  which  is  evident 

from  the  medical  evidence  furnished  by  PW1  as  the  deceased  had 

received  28  injuries  due  to  the  firing  of  appellant  with  his  official 

weapon.  It  is  further  argued  that  the  plea  of  appellant,  that  he  was 

justified  in  committing  murder  of  the  deceased  and  that  it  was  not  an 

offence,  is  absolutely  ridiculous  and  against  the  settled  principle  of 

Islamic Law and it is also against the fundamental rights of every citizen 

of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and that murder Reference should 

be  answered  in  affirmative  and  appeal  of  appellant  is  liable  to 

dismissed. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 13 

12. 

We  are  fully  conscious  of  the  fact  that  matter  in  hand  is 

delicate  in  nature,  sensitive  in  terms  and  serious  in  consequence.  We 

are  totally  convinced  that  best  guidance  comes  from  Allah  Almighty, 

WHO  through  commands  enshrined  in  The  Holy  Quran,  leads 

everyone to just decision, as directed in Surah Nisa (Verse 135).  

"O you who believe! stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to Allah, 

even though it be against yourselves, or your parents, or your kin, be 

rich or poor, Allah is a better Protector to both (than you). So follow 

not the lusts (of your hearts), lest you avoid justice; and if you distort 

your witness or refuse to give it, verily, Allah is Ever Well - Acquainted 

with what you do" 

13. 

The  grace  and  honour  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H) is not only well entrenched in various verses of Holy Quran but 

in  other  divinely  testaments.  It  would  be  appropriate  to  quote  a  few 

examples  about  the  greatness  of  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  from  Holy 

Quran;- 

In Surah “Al-Najm” verse No 1 to 4 it is ordained that  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 14 

“By the Star. When it set, your companion is neither gone astray nor 
deluded. He does not speak of his own desire; it is but a Revelation 
which is sent down to him” 

In Surah “Al-Inshirah” it is ordained that  

(O  Prophet!)  have  We  not  opened  up  your  breast  for  you? And 
removed  from  you  the  heavy  burden  that  was  weighing  down  your 
back, and exalted your renown for you. So, the fact is that along with 
every hardship there is also ease. Indeed, with every hardship there 
is also ease! Hence, when you are free, devote yourself to the labor 
of worship, and turn all your attention to your Lord” 

In Surah Al-Ahzab in Verse No 56 to 58 it is ordained that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 15 

“Indeed,  Allah  confers  blessing  upon  the  Prophet,  and  His  angels 
[ask him to do so]  O  you who have believed, ask [Allah to confer] 
blessing upon Him and ask [Allah to grant him] peace.  
Allah has cursed in this world and in the Hereafter those who cause 
trouble  to  Allah  and  His  Messenger,  and  has  prepared  for  them  a 
disgraceful punishment.  
And those who cause trouble to the believing men and women for no 
fault of theirs, have indeed born on their head the burden of a grave 
slander and a manifest sin” 

In Surah “Al-Hujrat Verse No 1 to 3” it is ordained that 

“O  you  who  have  believed,  do  not  go  in  advance  of  Allah  and  His 
Messenger,1 and fear Allah: Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing” 

“O  you  who  have  believed,  do  not  raise  your  voices  above  the 
Prophet's  voice,  nor  speak  to  him  loud  as  you  speak  loud  to  one 
another lest  all  your  works  be  rendered  void,  while  you  do  not 
know. Those  who  lower  their  voices  in  the  presence  of  the 
Messenger  of  God,  are,  in  fact,  those  whose  hearts  Allah  has 
disposed to piety. For them is forgiveness and a great reward” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 16 

In Verses No 12 & 13 of Surah-e-Anfal it is ordained that;- 

And remember when your Lord was inspiring the angels with this: "I 
am with you: so keep the Believers steadfast. I am now going to fill 
the hearts of the disbelievers with awe: so smite their necks and beat 
every joint of their bodies. This is because they have opposed Allah 
and His Messenger; whoso opposes Allah and His Messenger, surely 
Allah is very severe for him in retribution”.  
(Translation By Zafar Iqbal Ansari) 

"Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said 

Narrated Abu Huraira: 

"  ِهِﺪَﻟ َو َو  ُﻦِﻣ ْﺆُﯾ ْﻢُﻛُﺪَﺣَأ ﻰﱠﺘ َﺣ  َنﻮُﻛَأ  ﱠﺐ َﺣَأ ِﮫْﯿَﻟِإ  ْﻦِﻣ ِهِﺪِﻟا َو  َﻻ   ِهِﺪَﯿِﺑ ﻲِﺴْﻔَﻧ يِﺬﱠﻟا َﻮَﻓ ". 

, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, none of you will have faith till he loves me 
more than his father and his children 

( Sahih Al-Bukhari. Volume 1, Book No.2, Hadith No. 13) 

Great Allama Iqbal pays tribute to Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) in the 

following words. The status on which a believer cannot compromise.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 17 

14. 

The  above  mentioned  verses  of  the  Holy  Quran  and  sayings 

of Prophet (P.B.U.H) reveals that it is the verdict of the Allah Almighty that 

in  no  case,  the  case  of  the  person  who  gives  any  sort  of  complaint  to  the 

Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) is to be condoned. The prophet hood 

of Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) was entrenched in the Heavens and 

all  the  other  great  prophets  aspired  to  have  been  included  in  the  group  of 

followers of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H). To respect and love 

Him more than any person(s) on the global face is the requirement of Faith. 

In the old testaments revealed to the prophet of Bani Israel, there is mention 

of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) with grace, respect and honour. 

Similarly, in new testament (version Bible Barnabas) the name of the Holy 

Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) is specifically mentioned in the words that 

the ultimate messenger of the God would come to rescue the human being 

and  humanity.  In  the  old  books  (Purans)  of  subcontinent  the  reference  is 

there  to  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  with  love  &  respect.  Gautam  Budh 

who also told his followers that one day the ultimate cause of the universe 

would arrive and he would lead his forces. Even the strongest opponents of 

the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) had admitted the greatness of the 

personality. The famous historian Gibbon in his book “Rise and Fall of the 

Roman Empire” narrated the incident in the court of Constantine when after 

Sulah-e-Hudaibia  the  prophet  had  sent  the  ambassador  to  various  kings  & 

kingdom invited them to accept the message  of God and Abu Sufyan was 

there  in  the  court  in  connection  with  his  trade  and  dialogue  between  the 

Constantine  and  Abu  Sufyian  is  mentioned  in  the  book.  Despite  the  fact 

that  Abu  Sufyan  was  most  dangerous  enemy  of  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H) 

having  waged  many  wars  against  the  Islam  was  constrained  to  admit  the 

greatness,  truthfulness  and  fairness  of  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H).  Thomas 

Carlyle  in  his  book  “Hero  and  Heros-worship”  has  written  that  “a  light 

emerged and it emerged from such a barren land about which it used to be 

said that there was no chance of growth of human independence there but 

the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  made  the  atom  of  sand  the  rising  sun  which 

ultimately  not  only  illuminated  and  enlightened  East  and  west  but  also 

filled  the  heaven.  The  writer  further  says  that  he  loves  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H)  and  he  believes  that  there  is  not  any  iota  of  proudness  and 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 18 

snobbery  in  the  personality  of  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H).  The  greatness 

of the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) is narrated by the Napoleon Bonaparte King 

of  France,  Jean  Jacqus  Rousseau  in  his  famous  book  “Social  Contract”, 

H.G.  Wales  in  his  book  “Outline  of  History”,  Leon  Tolstoy  the  famous 

Russian  Scholar  and  Novelist.  Michael  H.  Heart  a  famous  writer  of  “The 

100,  Most  Influential  Persons  in  History”  has  respectfully  declared  the 

Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) as the greatest person in human history though the 

writer himself was follower of Jesus Christ but he kept the Jesus Christ at 

serial  No  3.  The  Holy  Quran  has  itself  declared  that  all  the  messenger  of 

God  are  equal  having  the  similar  status  but  with  the  exception  that  Allah 

Almighty  has  given  some  priority  to  some  messengers  over  the  other 

without lowering the status of those others in any sense of the word.   

15. 

The  Hon’ble  Federal  Shariat  Court 

in  case 

titled  as 

Muhammad  Ismail  Qureshi  VS  Pakistan,  reported  as  “PLD  1991  Federal 

Shariat  Court  10”    which  is  binding  upon  this  Court  in  terms  of  Article  

203-GG  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973, 

observed;-  

“The  Holy  Qur’an,  as  a  glorification  of  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H)  prohibited  even  the  slightest  cause  of  annoyance 

and declared that marriage with the wives of the Prophet after 

his  death  is  prohibited  for  the  believers  so  as  to  avoid  not 

being  means  of  the  contempt  of  the  Prophet.  Holy  Quran 

says:--  

“O ye who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for 

a meal without waiting for the proper time, unless permission 

be  granted  you.  But  if  ye  are  invited  enter  and  when  your 

meal is ended, then disperse. Linger not for conversation. Lo! 

that would cause annoyance to the Prophet, and he would be 

shy of (asking) you (to go); but Allah is not shy of the truth. 

And when ye ask of them (the wives of the Prophet) anything, 

ask  it  of  them  from  behind  a  curtain.  That  is  purer  of  your 

hearts and for their hearts. And it is not for you to cause 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 19 

annoyance to the messenger of Allah, nor that ye should, ever 

marry his wives after him. Lo! that in Allah’s sight would be 

an enormity. (33:53).”  

The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  is  the  best  interpreter  of  the 

above-noted  verses  of  the  Holy  Our’an  and  it  is  also  proved 

by  his  Sunnah  that  his  contemner  is  liable  to  the  penalty  of 

death. Reference may be made to the following Ahadith:-  

(i) 

It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of  Hazart  Ali  that  Holy 

Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  said:  “Kill  the  person  who  abuses  a 

Prophet  and  whip  by  stripes  the  one  who  abuses  my 

companions.” (Al-Shifa, Qazi, Ayaz Vol.11, page 194).  

(ii) 

It has been related on the authority of Ibn Abbas that a blind 

person in the period of Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) had a female 

slave  who  used  to  abuse  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H).  This 

blind person bade her to abstain from it and warned her not to 

do  so  but  she  didn’t  care.  One  night  when  she  was  as  usual 

abusing the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H), this blind person took a 

knife  and  attacked  her  belly  and  killed  her.  Next  morning 

when  the  case  of  murder  of  this  woman  was  referred  to  the 

Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H),  he  collected  the  people  and  said, 

“who  has  done  this  job.  Stand  and  confess  because  of  my 

right on him for what he has done.” On this the blind person 

stood  and  came  rolling  the  people  before  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H)  and  said,  “O  Prophet,  I  have  killed  this  slave 

woman because she abused you. I have constantly forbade her 

but she didn’t care for that. I have two beautiful sons from her 

and  she  was  my  very  good  companion,  but  yesterday  when 

she started abusing you, I took my knife and attacked on her 

belly  and  killed  her.”  The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  said,  “O 

people!  be  witnesses  that  the  blood  of  this  woman  is  vain. 

(Abu Daud, Vol.II, pages 355-357).  

(iii) 

It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of  Hazrat  Ali  that  a  jew 

woman used to abuse the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) and thus a 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 20 

person  killed  her.  The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  declared  her 

blood as vain (ibid).  

(iv) 

It has been related on the authority of Abu Barzah who said, 

“I  was  sitting  with  Abu  Bakar  when  he  became  furious  at  a 

person.”  I  said  to  him,  “O!  Caliph  of  the  Prophet  of  Allah. 

“Order me to kill him”. On this he became normal and stood 

up  and  went  inside  and  called  me  and  said,  “What  did  you 

say? I said, “Order  me to kill him.” He said,  “Had I ordered 

you,  would  you  have  killed  him?”  I  said,  “Yes.”  He  said, 

“No,”  I  swear  by  Allah  that  no  one  other  than  the  Holy 

Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  is  in  the  position  that  his  contemner  be 

killed.” (ibid).  

(v) 

It has been related on the authority of Jabir Ibn Abdullah that 

Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) said, “who will help me against Kaab 

bin Ashraf. He has indeed teased Allah and His Prophet.” On 

this Muhammad Ibn Maslamah stood and said, “O Prophet of 

Allah!  Do  you  want  me  to  kill  him.”  Prophet  said,  “Yes”. 

Then he went alongwith Abbas Ibn Hiber and Ibad Ibn Bishar 

and killed him. (Bukhari, Vol.II, page 88).  

(vi) 

It has been related on the authority of Bara Ibn Azib who said 

that  Holy  Prophet  sent  some  persons  of  Ansar  under  the 

headship of Abdullah Ibn Atik to a jew named Abu Rafia who 

used to tease the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) and they killed him. 

(Assarimul Maslul by Ibn Taimiyyah, page 152).  

(vii) 

It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of  Umair  Ibn  Umayyah 

that he had a ‘mushrikah’ sister who teased him when he met 

the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  and  used  to  abuse  the  Holy 

Prophet  (P.B.U.H).  At  last  one  day  he  killed  her  with  his 

sword. Her sons cried and said, “We know her murderers who 

killed  our  mother  and  the  parents  of  these  people  are 

‘mushrik’, (infidels).” When Umair thought that her sons may 

not  murder  wrong  persons,  he  came  to  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H)  and  informed  him  of  the  whole  situation.  The 

Prophet said to him, “Have  you  killed  your  sister?” He said, 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 21 

“Yes.” Prophet said, “Why” He said that she was harming me 

in your relation. The Prophet called her sons and asked about 

the  murderers.  They  showed  other  persons  as  murderers. 

Then Prophet informed them and declared her death as vain. 

(Majmauz Zawaid wa Manbaul Fawaid, Vol.V, page 260).  

(viii)  It  has  been  narrated  that  after  the  conquest  of  Makka,  the 

Holy  Prophet, after giving general pardon, ordered killing of 

Ibn  Khatal  and  his  sheslaves  who  used 

to  compose 

defamatory poems about the Holy Prophet. (Al-Shifa by Qazi 

Ayaz, Vol. II, page 284 Urdu Translation).  

(ix) 

It  has  been  narrated  by  Qazi  Ayaz  in  Shifa  that  a  person 

abused  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H).  The  Prophet  said  to 

Sahaba “Who will kill this person.” On this Khalid Ibn Walid 

said, “I will kill him.” The Prophet ordered him and he killed 

him (ibid).  

(x) 

It  has  been  narrated  that  a  person  came  to  the  Holy  Prophet 

and said, “Oh Prophet! My father abused  you and I couldn’t 

bear  it  thus  killed  him.”  The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H) 

confirmed his action.”(ibid), page 285).  

(xi) 

It  has  also  been  related  that  a  woman  who  belonged  to  Bani 

Khatmah tribe used to abuse the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H). The 

Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  said  to  his  companions,  “who  will 

take  revenge  from  this,  abusive  woman.”  A  person  of  her 

tribe  took  the  responsibility  and  killed  her.  He  then  came  to 

the Holy Prophet who said “In this tribe the two goats will not 

quarrel and the people will live in unity and integrity.” (ibid), 

page 286).  

Abdur  Razaq  in  his  Musannaf  has  related  the  following 

Traditions about the contempt of the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) and its 

punishment:  

(i) 

Hadith  No.9704:  It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of 

Ikrimah  that  a  person  abused  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H). 

The Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) said, “who will help me against 

my  (this)  enemy.”  Zubair  said,  “I”.  Then  he  (Zubair)  fought 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 22 

with  him  and  killed  him.  The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  gave 

him this goods. 

(ii)  Hadith No.9705: It has been related on the authority of Urwah 

Ibn  Muhammad  (who  relates  from  a  companion  of  the 

Prophet)  that  a  woman  used  to  abuse  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H). The Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) said, “who will help 

me against my (this) enemy.” On this Khalid Ibn Walid went 

after her and killed her.  

(iii)    Hadith No.9706: It has been related on the authority of 

Abdur Razaq who relates from his father that when Ayub Ibn 

Yahya  went  to  Adnan,  a  man  was  referred  to  him  who  had 

abused  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H).  He  consulted  (the 

Ulama)  in  this  matter.  Abdur  Rahman  Ibn  Yazid  Sanani 

advised him to kill him and he killed him. Abdur Rahman had 

related  to  him  a  hadith  in  this  regard  that  he  had  met  Umar 

and had got a great knowledge from him. Ayub also referred 

this  action  to  Abdul  Malik  (or  Walid  Ibn  Abdul  Malik).  He 

replied him appreciating his action.  

(iv)    Hadith No.9707: It has been related on the authority of 

Saeed      Ibn  Jubair  that  a  person  falsified  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H). The Prophet sent Ali and Zubair and said to them, 

“kill him when you find him.”  

(v)   Hadith  No.9708:  It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of  Ibn 

Taimi who relates from his father that Hazrat Ali ordered the 

person  who  blamed  (abused)  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  be 

killed. (Musannaf Abdur Razaq, Vol.V, pages 377-378).  

It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H) 

had  pardoned  some  of  his  contemners  but  the  Jurists  concur 

that Prophet himself  had the right to pardon his contemners 

but  the  Ummah  has  no  right  to  pardon  his  contemners. 

(Assarumal Maslul, Ibn Taimiyyah, pages 222- 223).  

Ibn  Taimiyyah  writes,  “Abu  Sulaiman  Khattabi  said,  “When 

the  contemner  of  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  is  a  Muslim 

then his punishment is death and there is no difference of the 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 23 

opinion  among  the  Muslims  about  this  matter  in  my 

knowledge.” (Assarimul Maslul, page 4).  Qazi Ayaz writes, 

“Ummah is unanimous on the point that the Punishment of a 

Muslim who abuses the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) or degrades 

him is death. (Al-Shifa, Vol.II, page 211). Qazi Ayaz further 

writes,  “Every  one  who  abuses  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H), 

points out any defect in him, his lineage, his religion or in any 

of his qualities, or makes allusion with him or resembles him 

with  another  thing  as  his  insult,  disrespect,  degradation, 

disregard or his defect, he is contemner and he will be killed, 

and there is consensus of the ulema  and Jurists on this  point 

from  the  period  of  Sahaba  till  this  time.  (Al-Shifa  By  Qazi 

Ayaz, Vol.II, page 214).  

Abu  Bakar  Jassas  Hanafi  writes,  “There  is  no  difference  of 

opinion  among  the  Muslims  that  a  Muslim  who  maligns  or 

insults  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  intentionally  becomes 

apostate liable for death. (Ahkamul Quran Vol.III, page 106). 

It will be useful to note one Hadith here:-  

“It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of  Abdullah  Ibn  Abbas 

that Prophet (P.B.U.H) said, “Kill the person who changes his 

religion (Islam).” (Bukhari, Vol.II, page 123).  

It has been related by Qazi Ayaz that Haroonur Rashid asked 

Imam  Malik  about  the  punishment  of  the  contemner  of  the 

Prophet and told him that some Jurists of Iraq had suggested 

the punishment of whipping him stripes. Imam Malik became 

furious  on  that  and  said,  “O  Amir  ul  Muainin!  how  the 

Ummah has the right to exist when her Prophet is abused. So 

kill  the  person  who  abuses  the  Prophet  and  whip  stripes  to 

one  who  abuses  the  companions  of  the  Prophet.”  (Al-Shifa, 

Vol.II, page 215).  

Ibn  Taimiyyah,  while  relating  the  opinions  of  the  Jurists  in 

this  connection,  writes,  “Abu  Bakar  Farsi  Shafie  has  related 

that there is consensus of opinion among the Muslims that the 

punishment  of  contemner  of  the  Prophet  is  death,  if  he  is 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 24 

Muslim.” (Assarimul Maslul, page 3).  The above discussion 

leaves no  manner  of doubt that according to  Holy Qur’an as 

interpreted  by  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  and  the  practice 

ensuing  thereafter  in  the  Ummah,  the  penalty  for  the 

contempt of the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) is death and nothing 

else.  We  have  also  noted  that  no  one  after  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H) exercised or was authorised the right of reprieve or 

pardon. The next question arising in the case is thus to specify 

or clearly define the offence of contempt of the Holy Prophet. 

The words Shatam and Azi have been used for the contempt 

of the Prophet in Holy Qur’an and Sunnah means to suffer, to 

harm, to molest, to contemn, to insult, to annoy, to irritate, to 

injure,  to  put  to  trouble,  to  malign,  to  degrade,  to  scoff. 

(Arabic English lexicon, E.W. Lane, Book-I, Part-I page 44). 

The word Shatam means to insult, to abuse, to revile, to scold, 

to  curse,  to  defame.  (Ibid.,  pages  212,  249).  Allama  Rashid 

Raza,  while  explaining  the  meaning  of  the  word  Azi  writes, 

“It  means  anything  with  which  the  body  or  the  mind  of  a 

living  person  is  pained  though  very  lightly.”  (Al-Manar, 

Vol.X, page 445).  

Allama  Ibn  Taimiyyah,  while  explaining  the  significance  of 

the contempt writes, “It means to curse the Prophet, prays for 

any  difficulty  for  him,  or  refers  to  him  such  a  thing  which 

does not behove with his position or uses any insulting, false 

and  unreasonable  words  or  imputes  ignorance  to  him  or 

blames  him  with  any  human  weakness  etc.”  (Aasarinul 

Maslul,  Ibn  Taimiyyah,  page  526).  Ibn  Taimiyyah,  while 

concluding 

the  discussion  about 

the  scope  and  what 

constitutes  the  offence  of  the  contempt  of  the  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H)  writes,  “Sometimes  a  word  in  a  situation  may 

amount  to  injury  and  insult  while  such  a  word  may  not 

amount to injury and insult on another occasion. This shows 

that  the  interpretation  of  the  words  which  bear  different 

meanings  and 

senses  changes  with 

the  change  of 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 25 

circumstances  and  occasions.  And  when    (insult,  contempt) 

has  neither  been  defined  in  Shariah  nor  in  dictionary,  the 

custom  and  usage  will  be  relied  upon  in  determining,  its 

interpretation.  So  what  is  considered  contempt  and  insult  in 

the  custom  and  usage  that  will  be  considered  contempt  and 

insult in Shariah as well and vice versa.” (Assarimul Maslul, 

Ibn Taimiyyah, page 540)”. 

16. 

The  Hon’ble  Federal  Shariat  Court  concurred  that  the 

alternate punishment of life imprisonment as provided in Section 295-C of 

PPC was repugnant to the Injunctions of Holy Quran and Sunnah and said 

words be deleted therefrom.  Now the only penalty for the contemnor of the 

Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  is  penalty  of  death.  It  is  further 

observed  that  the  blasphemy  is  offence  which  is  recognized  in  every 

religion  and  in  this  regard  the  judgment  of  House  of  Lords  in  the  case  of 

“Whitehouse & Lemon & Whitehouse VS Gay News Limited” is classical 

example  in  that  case  the  appellants  were  the  editors  and  publishers  of  a 

magazine called "Gay News", the readership of which consisted mainly of 

homosexuals,  though  it  was  on  sale  to  the  general  public  at  some 

bookstalls. An issue published in June 1976 contained a poem entitled "The 

Love  that  Dares  to  Speak  its  Name"  and  accompanied  by  a  drawing 

illustrating subject matter. It purported to describe in explicit detail acts  of 

sodomy and fellatio with the body of Christ immediately after his death and 

to  ascribe  to  Him  during  His  lifetime  promiscuous  homosexual  practices 

with the Apostles and with other men. Their lordship discussed the history 

of blasphemy and observed that;-  

“Two things emerge clearly from the earlier history, first that 

between the 17th century and the last quarter of the 19th, when 

Sir,  James  Fitzjames  Stephen  published  his  history  of 

criminal  law  of  England  (1883),  the  characteristics  of  the 

substantative  offence  of  blasphemous  libel  had  undergone 

progressive changes, and secondly that, as Stephen reluctantly 

acknowledges  in  his  chapter  on  “Seditious  Offences”(vol  II 

p.298),  those  changes  (which  she  personally  regretted)  were   

largely  shaped  by  the  procedural  changes  in  the  trial  of 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 26 

prosecution  for  all  forms  of  criminal  libel  resulting  from  

Fox’s Libel Act 1792 and by the passing of Lord Campbell’s 

Libel Act of 1843.  

In  the  post-Restoration  politics  of  17th  and  18th  century 

England,  Church  and  State  were  thought  to  stand  or  fall 

together. TO cast doubt on the doctrine of established church  

or to  deny  the truth  of the  Christian faith upon which it was 

founded  was  to  attach  the  fabric  of  society  itself;  so 

blasphemous  and  seditious  libel  were  criminal  offences  that 

went hand in hand. Both were originally what would now be 

described  as  offences  of  strict  liability.  To  constitute  the 

offence  of  blasphemous 

libel 

it  was  enough  for 

the 

prosecution to prove that the accused, or someone for whose 

act the law of libel held him to be criminally responsible had 

published matter which (in trial held before Fox’s Libel Act) 

the judge ruled, or (in trial held after that) the jury found, to 

be blasphemous whether the accused knew it to be so or not.  

Furthermore,    criminal  libel  in  its  four  manifestation---

seditious,  blasphemous,  obscene  and  defamatory-  that  was 

unique  among  common  law  offences  in  imputing  to  any 

person who carried on the business of publisher or bookseller 

vicarious  criminal  liability  for  act  of  publication  done  by 

person  in  his  employment  even  though  these  were  done 

without his authority, consent or knowledge. Since in practice 

prosecution were brought against publishers and book sellers 

rather than against author so long as this remained the law, as 

it did until the passing of Section 7 of Lord Campbell’s Libel 

Act 1843, it could not logically be reconciled with the notion 

that  accused’s  own  actual  intention  was  relevant  element  in 

the offence 

The  severity  of  the  law  of  blasphemous  libel  had, 

however,  been  somewhat  mitigated  before  1843  by  judicial 

rulings not as  to the  mens rea but as  to the actus reus of the 

offence.  To  publish  opinion  denying  the  truth  of  doctrine  of 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 27 

the  established  church  or  even  of  Christianity  itself  was  not 

longer held to amount to the offence of blasphemous libel so 

long  as  such  opinion  were  expressed  in  temperate  language 

and  not  in  terms  of  offence,  insult  or  ridicule.  Reg  v 

Hetherington  (1841)  4  St.  Tr.N.S  563  .  This  introduces  into 

the  concept  of  the  actus  reus  in  addition  to  the  publication 

itself, the effect that material published is likely to have upon 

the minds of those to whom it is published”.  

17. 

In  the  Indo-Pak  subcontinent  during  the  British  rule  the 

blasphemy  towards  the  prophet  was  not  specifically  an  offence  and  such 

like matters were dealt with U/S 153-A of Indian Penal Code. The wretched 

Rajpal publisher of blasphemous book at that time was tried U/S 153-A of 

Indian Penal Code and was convicted in January 1927, his conviction was, 

however, set aside by the High Court  in May 1927 and ultimately he was 

done  to  death  by  Ghazi  Ilm  Din  on  06.04.1929.  During  that  era  first  time 

offence U/S 295-A was included in Indian Penal Code. The Constitution of 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  1973  through  Principles  of  Policy  ensured 

gradual Islaminzation of the existing laws and inconsequence thereof In the 

year  1984,  offence  U/S  295-C  was  inserted  in  PPC  through  Act  of 

Parliament.  The  Government  of  Pakistan  had  filed  appeal  in  the  August 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  against  the  judgment  of  Federal  Shariat  Court 

reported as PLD 1991 FSC 10 and subsequently that appeal was withdrawn, 

therefore  now    the  punishment  for  the  commission  of  offence  U/S  295-C 

PPC is death.   

18. 

In the judgment supra, the learned full Bench of FSC further 

held; when the words attributed to the suspected contemnors are ambiguous 

in nature giving two interpretations then how the said incident is to be dealt 

with is provided in the judgment of Federal Shariat Court “PLD 1991 FSC 

10” wherein the Hon’ble Court observed that;-  

“Criminal  liability  may  require  the  wrongful  act  to  be  done 

intentionally or with some further wrongful purpose in mind, 

or it may suffice that it was done recklessly; and in each case 

the mental attitude of the doer is such as to make punishment 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 28 

effective.  If  a  person  intentionally  chose  the  wrong  doing, 

penal  discipline  will  furnish  him  with  a  sufficient  motive  to 

choose the right instead, for the future. If, on the other hand, 

he  committed  the  forbidden  act  without  wrongful  intent,  yet 

realising the possibility of the harmful result, punishment may 

be an effective inducement for better conduct in the future.  

Yet  there  are  other  cases  in  which,  for  sufficient  or 

insufficient  reasons,  the  law  is  content  with  a  lower  form  of 

mens  rea.  This  is  the  case  with  crimes  of  negligence.  A 

person may be held responsible for some crimes if he did not 

do his best as a reasonable  man to  avoid the  consequence in 

question.  In  another  case  the  law  may  go  even  beyond  this; 

holding,  a  man  responsible  for  his  acts,  independently 

altogether  of  any  wrongful  state  of  mind  or  culpable 

negligence. Wrongs which are thus independent of fault may 

be distinguished as wrongs of Strict liability.  

The wrongs thus are of three kinds:--  

(1) Intentional  or  Reckless  Wrongs,  in  which  the  mens  rea 

amounts to intention, purpose, design, or at least foresight.  

(2) Wrongs  of  Negligence,  in  which  the  mens  rea  assumes  the 

less  serious  form  of  mere  carelessness,  as  opposed  to 

wrongful intent or foresight. With these wrongs defences such 

as mistake will only negative mens rea if the mistake itself is 

not negligent. 

(3)  Wrongs  of  Strict  Liability,  in  which  the  mens  rea  is  not 

required,  neither  wrongful  intent  nor  culpable  negligence 

being  recognised  as  a  necessary  condition  of  responsibility, 

and  here  defences  like  mistake  are  of  no  avail.  An  intention 

thus  is  the  purpose  or  design  with  which  an  act  is  done. 

Suppose  one  buys  a  gun.  His  intention  may  be  to  shoot  for 

sport or  game, to use  in selfdefence or to shoot some  one to 

cause  his  death.  However,  if  the  latter  act  is  proved  as  not 

shooting  for  defence  but  as  killing  then  the  intention  can  be 

said to be to do this very thing i.e., to kill him.  

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 29 

An  unintentional  act  is  the  one  lacking  such  purpose  or  design. 

An  act  such  as  killing,  which  consists  of  a  cause  and  an  effect, 

may  be unintentional  when the actor brings  about consequences 

which he does not intend. One may kill by mistake, say firing at a 

game  or  wrongly  imagining  him  to  be  someone  else.  In  the 

former cases he fails to foresee the consequences, in the latter he 

is  ignorant  of  some  of  the  circumstances.  A  system  of  law, 

however,  could  provide  that  a  man  be  held  liable  for  such 

consequences,  even  though  he  did  not  intend  them.  In  the  first 

place,  such  a  rule  would  obviate  the  need  for  difficult  inquiries 

into  the  mental  element.  But  secondly,  and  more  important,  the 

rule  could  be  justified  on  the  ground  that  a  man  should  not  do 

acts which he foresees will involve consequential harm to others, 

whether  or  not  he  intent  to  cause  this  harm.  Such  behaviour  is 

clearly  reckless  or  blameworthy,  unless  the  risk  can  be  justified 

by  reason  of  the  social  interest  of  the  act  itself.  Both  in  this 

special  connection  and  generally,  then  it  is  to  be  observed  that 

the  law  may,  and  sometimes  does,  impute  liability,  outside  the 

strict  definition  of  intention,  for  what  is  called  constructive 

intention.  Consequences  which  are  in  fact  the  outcome  of 

negligence merely are sometimes in law dealt with as intentional. 

Thus he who intentionally does grievous bodily harm to another, 

though  with  no  desire  to  kill  him,  or  certain  expectation  of  his 

death, is guilty of murder if death ensues.  

Law  frequently,  though  by  no  means  invariably,  treats  as 

intentional,  all  consequences  due  to  that  form  of  negligence 

which  is  distinguished  as  recklessness  that  is  to  say,  which  the 

actor  foresees  as  the  probable  results  of  his  wrongful  act.  The 

foresight of the reasonable man is of course an obviously useful 

evidential test, whereby to infer, what the actor himself foresaw, 

but the rule just mentioned has transformed it into a presumption 

of  law  which  cannot,  as  it  seems,  be  rebutted.  Intention  thus 

covers acts expressly intended or those done recklessly.  

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 30 

In  the  Shariah,  it  makes  no  difference  whether  the  criminal 

intent  precedes  the  offence  or  synchronizes  with  it.  In  either 

case the penalty is identical. This principle is substantiated by 

the following Tradition of the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H):-  

“Allah  condones  all  those  sinister  ideas  coming  into  the 

minds  of  the  members  of  my  Ummah  which  they  have  not 

expressed or put into practice.”  

That is why the Shariah draws no line of distinction between 

homicide or infliction of injury decided upon beforehand and 

unpremeditated  homicide  or  injury  and  lays  down  identical 

penalty  in  both  the  cases.  The  prescribed  punishment  for 

murder  is  ‘qisas’  whether  it  is  premeditated  or  not.  The 

intention  may  be  definite  or  indefinite.  The  intention  of  an 

offender to do a definite wrong to an indefinite person will be 

regarded as definite intent. If the offender is conscious of the 

potential  results  of  his  act  and  does  intend  to  produce  all  or 

some  of  those  results  his  offence  would  in  spite  of  its 

indefinite  results  be  treated  as  a  definite  act,  whatever  the 

results  produced  by  it.  The  Hanafites  and  the  Hamblites  as 

well  as  some  Jurists  of  the  Shafi’ee  School  do  not 

differentiate  between  definite  and 

indefinite 

intents 

in 

criminal  cases  including  homicide.  Hence  if  the  act  of  the 

offender  results  in  homicide  he  is  a  willful  killer  whether  or 

not his intention of murder involves a definite victim. Further, 

in determining the accountability of the offender and the sort 

of  offence  he  is  guilty  of,  the  Jurists  place  both  definite  and 

indefinite intents on equal footing and regard them as subject 

to  the  same  injunction  except  when  the  offence  consists  of 

homicide and the criminal intent is indefinite.  

The Shariah has kept in view the difference between criminal 

intent and the motive of crime, right from its very beginning 

but  has  not  admitted  of  the  bearing  of  the  motive  on  the 

commission  and  pattern  of  the  crime  and  the  punishment 

entailed by it. Thus, it matters little in the Shariah whether the 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 31 

motive  of  offence  is  noble,  just  as  killing,  in  retaliation,  for 

the murder of one’s next of kin or for the indignity suffered at 

the hands of the victim, or whether the motive is ignoble just 

as  killing  in  lieu  of  pecuniary  compensation  or  to  commit 

larceny. In other words, the motive of crime has nothing to do 

with the criminal intent; nor does it affect the pattern of crime 

or  its  punishment.  So  it  is  practically  possible  to  reject  the 

effect  of  motive  so  far  as  the  ‘hadd’,  ‘qisas’  offences  are 

concerned  but  it  is  not  so  in  the  case  of  penal  punishment. 

The  motive  does  not  affect  the  ‘hadd’  or  ‘qisas’  offences 

because the law-maker has confined the Powers of the Court 

to the prescribed punishments, admitting of no consideration 

of the motive behind the commission of offences. But in the 

case  of  ‘tazeer’  punishments  the  law-maker  empowers  the 

Court  to  determine  the  quantum  of  Penalty  and  choose  the 

kind of penalty so that it may be possible for the Court to take 

into  account  the  motives  of  offences  in  the  determination  of 

the quantum of Punishment”.  

In other words the difference between the man made laws in 

force  and  the  Islamic  Shariah  is  that  the  latter  does  not 

recognize the effect of motives in the case of offences which 

are categorised as ‘Hudood’ or ‘Qisas’ but in the case of other 

offences,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Shariah  inhibiting  the  Court 

to take into account the motive of crimes although it does not 

theoretically admit of its effect on Punishment. It will be seen 

from the above discussion that Shariah recognises an offence 

liable  to  Hadd  only  if  it  is  accompanied  by  an  express 

intention.  Shariah  also  waives  the  penalty  of  Hadd  if  any 

doubt  occurs  therein.  It  is  also  based  on  a  Tradition  of  the 

Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) that doubts dispel sentences of Hadd. 

So the wrongs of the first category only in para. 37 above will 

attract the penalty of Hadd and it will apply to the contemner 

of the Holy  Prophet (P.B.U.H). Further, as intention is to be 

gathered from the facts surrounding the event, the acts falling 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 32 

in  the  second  and  third  categories  will  not  attract  the 

sentences of Hadd, provided the accused shows that he never 

intended  to  commit  the  offence  and  is  penitent  if  the  words 

said,  jesture  made  or  the  act  done  were  ambiguous  or  they 

could  show  some  straits  of  guilty  mind  or  malice.  We  may 

also clarify that penitence, in an alleged offence of contempt 

of the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H), would be availed to show that 

mind  of  the  accused  had  no  guilty  straits  or  malice  and  the 

penalty  will  be  dispelled  on  that  account  and  not  for  the 

reason 

that  penitence 

can  wipe  out 

an 

intended 

contempt.(underlining is supplied by us)  

The Holy Qur’an says:  

“33:5  And  there  is  no  sin  for  you  in  the  mistakes  that  ye  make 

unintentionally,  but  what  your  hearts  purpose  (that  will  be  a 

sin for you), Allah is forgiving, merciful.”  

“6:54  When  those  come  to  thee  who  believe  in  Our  Signs,  Say: 

“Peace be on  you; Your Lord had inscribed  for Himself (the 

rule of) Mercy: verily, if any of you did evil in ignorance, and 

thereafter repented and amended (His conduct), lo! He is oft-

Forgiving, Most Merciful.”  

“16:106Anyone  who,  after  accepting  faith  in  Allah,  utters  unbelief, 

except  under  compulsion,  His  heart  remaining  firm  in  faith 

but  such  as  open  their  breast  to  unbelief,  on  them  is  Wrath 

from Allah, and theirs will be a dreadful penalty.”  

“40:19 (Allah)  knows of (the  tricks) that deceive  with the  eyes, and 

all that hearts (Of men) conceal.”  

It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of  Hazrat  Umar  that  he 

heard  the  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  say  “the  reward  of  deeds 

depends  upon  the  intention  and  every  person  will  get  the 

reward  according  to  what  he  had  intended.  So  whoever 

emigrated  for  worldly  benefits  or  for  a  woman  to  marry,  his 

emigration  was  for  what  he  emigrated  for.”  (Bukhari,  Vol.I, 

page  1,  Hadith  No.l).  It  has  been  related  on  the  authority  of 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 33 

Ubbaye  Ibn  Ka’b  who  said,  “There  was  a  person  among  the 

Ansar  whose  house  was  situated  at  the  farthest  end  of 

Madina,  but  he  never  missed  any  prayer  along  with  the 

Messenger of Allah. We felt pity for him and said to him: O, 

so  and  so,  why  don’t  you  buy  a  house  near  the  Prophet’s 

house so as to save you from the troubles of the heat and the 

coming from a long distance. He said: Listen! by Allah, I do 

not like my house to be situated by the side of Muhammad. I 

took (these words of his) ill and came to the Apostle of Allah  

and informed him about (these words). He (the Holy Prophet) 

called  him  and  he  said  exactly  like  that  (which  he  had 

mentioned  to  Ubbaye  Ibn  Ka’b)  but  made  a  mention  of  this 

also)  that  he  wanted  a  reward  for  his  steps.  Upon  this  the 

Apostle of Allah  said: in fact for you is the reward which you 

intend.  (Muslim,  Vol.  I,  English  Translation  by  Abdul 

Hameed  Siddiqui,  pages  323-324,  Hadith  No.1404).  The 

above Tradition clearly shows that on the face of it the words 

said sounded contemptuous but 289 that was not the intention 

of  the  ulterer  and  so  he  was  absolved  of  any  penalty. 

(underlining is supplied by us)   

It has been related on the authority of Yahya Ibn Sayyed that 

the Apostle of Allah was seated while a grave was being dug 

at Madina. A  man suddenly looked  down into the  grave  and 

said:  Bad  is  the  sleeping  place  of  a  believer.  The  Apostle  of 

Allah  retorted:  What  a  bad  thing  you  have  said!  The  man 

explained: I have not meant that, but I meant that fight in the 

way  of  Allah  (is  better).  Then  the  Apostle  of  Allah  said 

thrice: There is nothing like death in the way of Allah. There 

is no other tract of land in the world in which I would prefer 

my  grave.  (Mishkat,  Vol.III,  pages  662-663,  English 

Translation by Fazlul Karim, Hadith No. 575). It is relevant to 

mention  here  that  the  mere  fact  that  the  words  uttered 

sounded contemptuous of the Prophet is not an offence until it 

is  based  on  malicious  action  or  degration.  For  example, 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 34 

speaking  loudly  has  been  prohibited  before  the  Prophet.  The 

Holy  Qur’an  says,  “O  ye  who  believe!  Raise  not  your  voice 

above the voice of the Prophet nor speak aloud to him in talk, 

as ye may speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds become 

void and  ye perceive not.” (49:2). In  this connection Allama 

Qurtubi  while  explaining  Verse  49:2  writes,  “this  is  the 

prohibition of shouting and raising the voice over the voice of 

Prophet  which  actually  injured  him.  However,  it  will  be  no 

offence if it is done for the cause of battle or for frightening 

the enemy etc. (underlining is supplied by us) 

The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  didn’t  punish  Mistah,  Hassan 

and  Hamnah  who  had  actually  participated  in  the  accusation 

of  Hazrat  Aisha  and  he  also  did  not  declare  them  as 

hypocrites.  Ibn-e-Taimiyyah,  explaining  that  position  writes, 

“they had not intended the injury of the Prophet and there was 

not any-sign of that, while Ibn Ubayy had intended the injury. 

This was because at that time it had not been told to them that 

the  wives  of  the  Prophet  in  this  world  will  be  his  wives 

hereinafter  and  it  was  possible  about  their  wives  in  general 

sense.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H) 

hesitated  in  their  matter  and  consulted  Ali  and  Zaid  and 

enquired from Barirah and consequently  didn’t declare those 

who  didn’t  intend  the  injury  of  the  Prophet  as  hypocrites  on 

the  possibility  in  their  mind  that  Holy  Prophet  might  have 

divorced the accused  wife. But after the order that his wives 

in  this  world  will  be  his  wives  hereinafter  and  that  they  are 

the  mothers  of  the  believers,  their  accusation  would  be  the 

injury  of  the  Prophet  at  any  cost.”  (Assarimul  Maslul,  ala 

Shatimir  Rasul,  page  49).  Maulana  Ahmad  Yar  Khan 

Badayuni  writes,  “intention”  of  the  contemner  is  necessary 

for  proving  the  offence  of  contempt  of  the  Holy  Prophet 

(P.B.U.H).  If  a  person  said,  “The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H) 

was poor and was not a fortunate.” So he will become infidel 

only when he intends the contempt of the Prophet with that.” 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 35 

(Nurul  Irfan,  Part  X,  page  74).  Some  of  the  Jurists  are, 

however,  of  the  opinion  that  if  the  contempt  of  the  Holy 

Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  is  in  manifest  and  express  words,  the 

contemner will not be asked as to what was his intention but 

if  the  words  are  such  which  bear  or  have  the  capacity  of 

bearing different meanings and senses out of which only one 

amounts  to  contempt,  he  will  be  asked  as  to  what  was  his 

“intention.”  (Al-Shifa  by  Qazi  Ayaz,  Vol.II,  page  221). 

(underlining is supplied by us)   

We,  however,  do  not  agree.  Firstly,  the  meaning  and  import 

of  words  differ from  place  to  place.  Again  context  may  also 

suggest  different  meaning.  The  accused  therefore,  must  be 

allowed  an  opportunity  to  explain  lest  an  innocent  person  is 

punished. It is related that Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) said, The 

mistake  of  Qazi  judge)  in  releasing  a  criminal  is  better  than 

his  mistake  in  punishing  an  innocent.”  (Sunan  Al-Baihaqi, 

Vol.  VIII,  page  184).  The  Holy  Qur’an  also  confers  right  of 

hearing on every accused. It is to be noted that though Allah 

Almighty knows, that whatever is written in the scrolls by the 

guardian Angels, about the deeds of a person in this world, is 

correct  beyond  any  doubt,  yet  we  find  that  the  man  will  be 

heard  and  if  he  objects  to  the  writings  of  the  angels,  Allah 

shall  call  witnesses  including  his  hands,  feet,  eyes  and  ears. 

See  alQur’an  17:13,  14,  36:65,  27:20,  22,  16:93  and  21:23. 

We  also  find  from  the  Traditions  referred  to  in  paras.36-41 

above  that  the  right  of  an  accused  to  explain  is  there  and 

cannot  be  taken  away.  It  is,  therefore,  only  after  the 

explanation  that  the  Court  can  decide  whether  the  words  so 

said were intended to malign, were they used maliciously and 

contemptuously  or  were  uttered  innocently.  (underlining  is 

supplied by us) 

19.         In the light of above, we have given our anxious thoughts to 

the  arguments  advanced  at  the  bar,  perused  the  prosecution  evidence 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 36 

and appreciated the plea of appellant with the valuable assistance of the 

learned counsel for the parties: 

20. 

During trial, framing of charge to recording of statement  

u/s 342 Cr.P.C, appellant’s stance/version/plea surfaced in the following 

words:  

In response to Question No. 2:  

“Do you plead guilty.” 

Appellant answered as under:- 

“  I  have  not  committed  murder  of  an  apostate  like 

Suleman Taseer (the then Governor Punjab) contrary to dictum 

of the Holy Quran and Sunnah”  

As  per  stance  of  the  appellant  before  resorted  to  firing 

following  conversation  took  place  between  him  and  deceased. 

Put 

to  an  eye  witnesses  (PW-11  Nadeem  Asif,  ASI  & 

Muhammad Amer Khan, PW-12.  

PW-11:  Honorable Governor you have labeled the blasphemy 

law as  black  law despite you are also  “Umati” follower of Holy 

Prophet (PBUH) 

Ans:          “It is not only a black law but my shit” 

PW-12     Honorable Governor you are Umati and follower of 

prophet (PBUH) even then you  have labeled the blasphemy law 

as black law” 

Ans:         “It is not only a black law but my shit”  

On  conviction  to  one  Asia  Bibi  in  a  blasphemy  case,  deceased 

went to kotlakhpat, Jail, met with her and got arranged mercy petition 

from her and said that he would forward it to the president of Pakistan 

and he also stated that it was a black law” put to PW-11,12 & 14). 

PW-10: Sheharyar Taseer, complainant:- 

“I  have  heard  about  my  father  that  he  was  zani,  drunk, 

never offered a prayer, not kept fast and ate pork” 

“it is incorrect that my father was given Holy Quran when he was 

behind  bars  during  Zia  regime.  It  is  further  incorrect  that  he 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 37 

returned  the same with remarks “There is nothing in this book 

for me”. 

It is incorrect to suggest that my father contracted marriage with a 

Sikh lady during the year 1980-82 

It is incorrect to suggest that my father was fond of merry making 

and gay time particularly in the late hours of night 

It is correct that Atish Taseer had written book “Stranger 

to  History”.  I  have  not  read  that  book.  I  do  not  know  that  the 

said  writer  claimed  himself  to  be  a  son  of  Sikh  lady.  I  do  not 

know  that  it  was  published  in  section  of  press  that  this  Atish 

Taseer was born from the wedlock of Taseer with Sikh lady 

PW-12:          It  is  incorrect  that  deceased  used  filthy  language 

showing disrespect to the Holy name, Holy Prophet (PBUH). It 

is incorrect that under Islamic teachings the accused was right to 

cause death of Suleman Taseer who was a known prostrate. It is 

incorrect  that  in  spite  of  all  that  appellant  has  shown  resistance 

and lastly in the eventuality the deceased uttered filthy, nasty and 

disrespectful  words  pertaining  to  the  personality  Of  Holy 

Prophet  (PBUH)  appellant    could  not  abstain  and  that  under 

sudden and grave occasion, appellant shot him dead.  

Statement u/s 342 Cr.P.C.  

Question  No.  8:  Why  this  case  is  against  you  and  why  PWs 

deposed against you?  

Ans. Salman Taseer, at relevant time, was acting as Governor of 

the  Province of  Punjab,  He  was  a  representative  of  the  Federal 

Government  of  Punjab.  While  holding  the  position  of  the 

Governor of a Province of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, he 

publically  exposed  himself  as  a  sympathizer  of  condemned 

prisoner  namely  Mst.  Aasia,  who  was  sentenced  to  death  by  a 

court  of  law  for  use  of  derogatory  remarks  about  the  Holy 

Prophet  Mohammad  (PBUH)  and  directly  defiled  the  name  of 

the  Holy  Prophet    (PBUH).  Needless  to  point  out  that  the 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 38 

sentence awarded to the above lady was still holding field and the 

judgment  passed  by  the  trail  court,  was  yet  to  undergo  judicial 

scrutiny  in  the  courts  of  appeal.  However,  Salman  Taseer  in  a 

very derogatory manner on his visit to Jail at Lahore, arranged a 

“Darbar”  for  making  himself  available  to  receive  only  self 

arranged mercy  petition of the condemned prisoner.  It  was  not 

that  simple,  But  Salman  Taseer  also  in  his  interview  published 

on 23.12.2010, in a very shameful manner called Blasphemy law 

as “black Law”. To criticize such law and to challenge it as it was 

manmade law tantamount to directly defiling the sacred name of 

the  Holy  Prophet  Mohammad  (PBUH)  and  was  an  attempt  to 

lower down this sacred provision of law, which is in consonance 

with the dictates of Quran and Sunnah.  In this connection Daily 

Express  Tribune of 5.12.2010. (portion  highlighted Mark  A  to 

A)  and  the  Daily  Express  tribune  (urdu)  dated  23.11.2010, 

marked B to B at page 8 and marked C to C at page 5 are worth 

mentioning.  It  is  pointed  out  that  the  news  items  mentioned 

above were never denounced by Salman Taseer in his life time. 

This  situation  reveals 

that  Salman  Taseer  himself  was 

responsible  for  commission  of  n  offense  U/S  295-C  of  PPC 

punishable to death or life imprisonment. In spite of that he was 

not  dealt  with  in  accordance  with  law,  obviously  he  was  the  left 

hand  of  President  Asif  Zardari  and  a  bully  of  Americans.  So 

nature had to take its own course and justice was to be done. It is 

a lesson for all the apostates as finally they have to meet the same 

fate.  

I  may  put  a  question  to  the  prosecution  “If  a  Muslim  due  to 

“Sub-o-Shattim”  and  “Ertad”  does  not  render  himself  liable  to 

dual  liability  of  being  killed?  That  act  which  is  embedded  with 

both “Sub-o-Shattim” and “Ertad” touches the heights of gravity. 

Here Prosecution has to show that due to Shattum one does not 

become “Murtad” (apostate) and that “Murtad” is not liable to be 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 39 

killed ? This proposition would definitely settle fate of the case, 

one way or the other. Personal life of Salman Taseer shows that 

right  from  early  times,  he  proved  himself  as  an  infidel.  He 

married  three  times,  his  one  wife  was  Sikh  by  religion.  He 

arranged his so called marriage in a secret way with that lady in 

New  Delhi  in  India.  From  the  wedlock  a  son  named  Atish 

Taseer  was  born.  On  attaining  youth  Atish  adopted  Journalism 

in  London  and  once  or  twice  traveled  to  Pakistan  to  see  his 

father. Atish Taseer wrote a book. Stranger to history and it was 

published  by  MC  CLELLAND  STEWART  OF  LONDON” 

The  author  while  describing  his  father  Salam  Taseer  writes  at 

page 21 & 22 of the Book "Stranger to History" (Book Attached).  

“My  father  who  drank  scotch  every  evening,  never  fasted  or 

prayed even ate pork and once said “ It was only when I was in 

jail  and  all  they  gave  me  to  read  was  the  Kuran-  and  I  read  it 

back to front several times-that I realized there was nothing in it 

for me, “ 

His  lifestyle,  faith  and  living  with  a  lady  of  non  Muslim  faith, 

reflects his act of living in constant state of Zinna under pretext of 

marriage  (not  permissible  in  Islam)  speaks  volume  of  his 

character and associated matters.  

On  the  fateful  day,  I  being  member  of  Elite  Force  I  was 

deployed  as  one  of  the  member  of  Escort  Guard  of  Salman 

Taseer,  The  Governor  of  Punjab.  In  Kohsar  Market,  the 

Governor with another after having lunch In  restaurant walked 

to  his  vehicle.  In  adjoining  mosque  I  went  for  urinating  in  the 

washroom  and for making ablution, When I came out with  my 

gun,  I came across Salman Taseer. Then I had the occasion to 

address  him.  “your  Honor  being  the  Governor  had  remarked 

about  blasphemy  law  as  black  law,  if  so  it  was  unbecoming  of 

you” Upon this he suddenly shouted and said, Not only that it is 

black  law,  but  also  it  is  my  shit”  Being  a  Muslim  I  lost  control 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 40 

and  under  grave  and  sudden  provocation,  I  pressed  the  trigger 

and he lay dead in front of me. I have no repentance and I did it 

for  “Tahafuz-i-Namoos-i-Rasool”  Salman  offered  me  grave  and 

sudden  provocation.  I  was  justified  to  kill  him  kindly  see  my 

accompanying written statement U/s 265 (f) of Cr. PC.  

In  crux,  appellant’s  accusation  against  deceased  reflected 

from the words mentioned here under;  

Being Apostate, Blasphemous Accused of offence 

U/S  295-C  PPC,  “Mubal-ul-dum”  Womeniser, 

having habits of drinking and eating of pork, merry 

making and gay time ... 

As is evident from above, appellant admitted that he had 

committed the murder of deceased but with a very specific plea that this 

act  of  commission  of  the  murder  was  not  contrary  to  the  dictums  of 

Holy Quran and Sunnah.  

21. 

Appellant  admitted  the  factum  of  committing  murder  of 

deceased but took a specific plea. It is well settled law that initial onus 

to  prove  case  against  an  accused  is  upon  the  prosecution,  but  when 

accused takes up a specific plea that onus is upon him to prove the plea 

raised  by  him.  Article  121  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  order,  deals  with 

this preposition which for convenience, reproduced hereunder:- 

Article 121:- 

“Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exception. 

"When a person is accused of any offence the burden of 

proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within 

any of the General Exceptions in the Pakistan Penal Code (Act 

XLV  of  1860),  or  within  any  special  exception  or  proviso 

contained  in  any  other  part  of  the  same  Code,  or  in  any  law 

defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume 

the absence, of such circumstances.”  

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 41 

The  Honorable  Supreme  Court  through  different  authoritative 

pronouncements observed as under in the case of   

YARA  VS  The  State  reported  as  2005  SCMR  829,  it  has  been  held 

that 

" S.302--- Burden of proof---Principles --- when a specific defense 

plea  is  raised  by  an  accused  burden  to  prove  the  same  shifts 

upon him" 

In the case of Mst. Dur Naz & another VS Yousaf & another, reported 

as 2005   SCMR 1906,"  it has been held that   

S.302  ---Burden  of  proof  ---  Initial  burden  to  prove  the  guilt  of 

accused lies upon prosecution , but when a specific plea is raised 

by the accused in his defense the burden to prove the same lies 

on him and both are to be considered in justa-position and  the 

one nearer to the truth is to given weight"  

Similarly  in  the  case,    Anwar  Shamim  VS  The  State,  2010 

SCMR 1791," the apex Court maintained as under:- 

Art.121 --- Criminal trial--- Specific plea --Proof --- It is duty and 

obligation  of  accused  to  prove  the  plea  taken  by  him  in  his 

defense in terms of Art.121 of Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984.” 

22. 

The  preamble  of  the  Constitution  started  with  the  words 

that the sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to Allah Almighty 

alone and the authority to be exercised by the people of Pakistan within 

the  limits  prescribed  by  Him  is  a  sacred  trust.  With  the  above 

mentioned  opening  statement  the  people  of  Pakistan  represented 

through the constituent assembly framed the Constitution of 1973 and 

became the subject of a sovereign independent State with the belief that 

State  shall  exercise  its  powers  and  authority  through  the  chosen 

representatives of the people, observing all the principles of democracy, 

freedom,  equality,  tolerance and  social  justice  as enunciated by Islam. 

The  people  of  Pakistan  further  vowed  that  the  people  would  be 

guaranteed 

fundamental  rights 

including  equality  of  status,  of 

opportunity and before law, social, economic and political justice, and 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 42 

freedom  of  thought,  expression,  belief,  faith,  worship  and  association, 

subject  to  law  and  public  morality  and  they  have  also  vowed  that 

independence of the Judiciary shall be fully secured  with the aim that 

people  of  Pakistan  may  prosper  and  attain  their  rightful  and  honored 

place  amongst  the  nations  of  the  World  and  make  their  full 

contribution towards international peace and progress and happiness of 

humanity.  Through  the  preamble/objection  resolution  the  people  of 

Pakistan  surrendered  their  rights  in  favour  of  the  State  and  agreed  to 

abide by the boundaries / limits set out by the Constitution. This reveals 

that subject of the State of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan by virtue of 

the framing of the Constitution had executed a social contract and they 

agreed to surrender their individual authority in favor of the State to be 

exercised  through  the  chosen  representative  of  the  people.  After 

framing of the Constitution of 1973 no individual person or individual 

citizen of the State was left with any authority to take the law in his own 

hands and to pass the judgments for himself touching the rights of the 

others  and  it  was  only  for  the  State  and  its  various  pillars  /  organs  to 

resolve  the  controversies  and  disputes  between  the  individuals,  the 

citizens of the State and to ensure that the principles of the Islamic law 

would be implemented in every sphere of life qua individual, social and 

international  level.  Furthermore,  the  preamble/objective  resolution 

itself provided that judiciary of the State would be fully independent so 

as to ensure the dispensation of the justice to the entire satisfaction of 

the  people  who  opted  to  exercise  the  powers  and  authority  through 

their chosen representative. 

23. 

The  Constitution,  being  the  organic  law  of  the  country  

provide certain guarantees to its citizens and other person, for the time 

being in Pakistan. For the purpose of this matter Articles, 4, 5, 9, 10-A, 

14  &  25  are  of  some  significance,  therefore,  same  are  reproduced 

herein below:- 

4.  

Right of individuals to be dealt with in accordance with law, etc.−  
(1)  To  enjoy  the  protection  of  law  and  to  be  treated  in 
accordance  with  law  is  the  inalienable  right  of  every  citizen, 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 43 

wherever  he  may  be,  and  of  every  other  person  for  the  time 
being within Pakistan.  
(2) In particular-  
(a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or 
property of any person shall be taken except in accordance with 
law;  (b)  no  person  shall  be  prevented  from  or  be  hindered  in 
doing that which is not prohibited by law; and (c) no person shall 
be compelled to do that which the law does not require him to 
do.  

5.  

9.  

Loyalty to State and obedience to Constitution and law.−  
(1) Loyalty to the State is the basic duty of every citizen. 
(2)  Obedience  to  the  Constitution  and  law  is  the  inviolable 
obligation of every citizen wherever he may be and of every other 
person for the time being within Pakistan. 
Security of person.− 
No person shall be deprived of life or liberty saves in accordance 
with law. 

[10A.  Right to fair trial.−  

14.  

For the determination of his civil rights and obligations or in any 
criminal  charge  against  him  a  person  shall  be  entitled  to  a  fair 
trial and due process.] 
Inviolability of dignity of man, etc.−  
(1) The dignity of man and, subject to law, the privacy of home, 
shall be inviolable.  
(2)  No  person  shall  be  subjected  to  torture  for  the  purpose  of 
extracting evidence. 

25.   Equality of citizens.−  

(1) All citizens are equal before law and are entitled to equal 
protection of law.  
(2) There shall be no discrimination on the basis of sex.  
(3) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from making 
any special provision for the protection of women and children. 

24.                  Above  Articles  provide  rights,  put  obligations  and  give 

assurances ,Order in which these articles are placed in the constitution 

is of great significance. Article 4 & 5 fall under Part I and articles 8 to 

28 under Part II , Chapter I dealing with fundamental rights. Article 4 

speaks about Rule of Law, Protection of Law, to be dealt in accordance 

with law.  Article 4 is valuable that it provides guarantee to be dealt in 

accordance  with  law  ,  even  when  fundamental  rights  under  Part  II, 

Chapter  I  are  suspended.      Loyalty  to  the  state  is  basic  duty  and 

 
  
  
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 44 

obedience  to  the  Constitution  and  law  is  the  inviolable  obligation  of 

every  citizen  wherever  he  may  be  and  of  every  other  person  for  the 

time being within Pakistan. Plain reading of above articles manifest that 

after  assurance  of  protection  of  law  through  inalienable  right  (which 

cannot  be  taken  away).  The  constitution  demands  loyalty  from  the 

citizens,  it’s  obedience  and  of  the  law,  then  come  the  fundamental 

rights enshrined under Article 8 to 28. 

For every citizen most valuable thing is " life" and liberty. Article 

9  gives  guarantee  to  every  person  that  he  will  not  be  deprived  of  his 

most valuable thing i.e. life and liberty and he can enjoy the pleasures 

of life, fruits of liberty but, he has to remain within the limits prescribed 

by law. And if someone cross the limits and break the law the guarantee 

can  be  withheld.  How  great  are  the  constitutional  guarantees  that  if 

someone loses his status under Article 9, article 10 and 10-A are there 

to provide him protection of law. Security of life and liberty cannot be 

taken away by the individuals or group of individuals, rather state, that 

to  as  per  law  of  the  land  and  in  accordance  with  the  procedure 

prescribed  therein.  If  someone  commits  a  crime,  law  is  there  to  deal 

with him and no one is authorized to take law into his own hands. Fair 

trail  and  due  process  is  entitlement  of  every  person  and  it  is  a 

constitutional guarantee.   

25.              Similarly  dignity  of  man  and,  subject  to  law,  the  privacy  of 

home,  shall  be  inviolable  and  no  person  shall  be  subjected  to  torture 

for  the  purpose  of  extracting  evidence.  Article  25  of  the  Constitution 

provides that all citizens are to be equal before law and entitled to equal 

protection of law and there shall be no discrimination. Hon’ble Justice 

® Fazal Karim in his famous book “Judicial Review of Public Actions, 

Vol. 1 Chapter 1, Page 607 while referring 71 U.S (4 Wallace)2 (1867) 

provided under mentioned historical phrase recorded by Justice Davis:- 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 45 

“By the protectin of the law human rights are secured; 
withdraw the protection and they are at the mercy of 
wicked rulers or the clamor of an excited people.” 

26. 

We  have  discussed  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973, and the importance which it gives to 

the  human  life  and  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  State  that  no  one 

should  be  deprived  from  his  life  save  in  accordance  with  law.  These 

provisions  of  the  Constitution  compelled  the  legislatures  to  the 

formation  /  adoption  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  Cr.P.C,  law  of 

evidence  /  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order  1984,  and  other  substantive  and 

procedural penal laws like Anti Terrorism Act 1997 etc. Section 44,45 

of the Criminal Procedure Code 1898 caste a duty upon every person 

aware  of  the  commission  of  any  offence  to  the  local  police  /  law 

enforcing agencies etc.  

27. 

With  reference  to  the  above  narrated  legal  position  it  is 

observed that as per the plea of appellant the deceased had committed 

the  offence  U/S  295-C  of  PPC  declaring  blasphemy  law  as  black  law. 

The  version  of  appellant  as  recorded  through  his  statement  U/S  342 

Cr.PC does not reflect that he had ever made any effort to report the 

commission of attributed offence by the deceased to any law enforcing 

agency.  He  did  not  file  any  petition  U/S  22-A  of  Cr.P.C  to  obtain  a 

direction  for  the  registration  of  the  criminal  case  against  the  deceased 

for the commission of offence U/S 295-C of PPC and though as per his 

version and as highlighted by the learned defense counsel the State had 

failed to enforce the Hadd against the deceased and he was dissatisfied 

from the role of the State and its law enforcing agencies, even then he 

continued to reap the fruits from the system of Governance established 

through  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  1973,  and 

kept on serving as soldier in the Elite Force. In this way appellant was 

getting  all  the  benefits  from  the  State  in  the  shape  of  the  salary  / 

protection of job and all other allied benefits in accordance with law but 

he opted  to take the law in  his own hands which  is totally unjustified, 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 46 

uncalled for and unwarranted to any citizen of the State of the Islamic 

Republic  of  Pakistan  and  especially  from  the  member  of  disciplined 

force established to  protect the State from the internal aggression and 

threats posed to the State.  

The plea of the appellant  might have carried some weight 

if he would have made any effort to set the law in motion by reporting 

the  alleged  commission  of  the  offence  of  blasphemy  by  the  deceased 

and  the  different  departments  of  the  State  designated  to  redress  the 

grievances and dispensation of the justice would have failed to take the 

appropriate  action  against  the  deceased.  In  his  written  statement 

recorded U/S 342 Cr.P.C appellant has himself stated that an accused 

with the name of Mst. Asia Bibi was convicted by the learned trial court 

for  the  commission  of  the  offence  U/S  295-C  of  PPC  and  after  such 

conviction the deceased had declared the blasphemy law as black law, 

therefore, to the knowledge of the appellant the law enforcing agencies 

and the courts established under the Constitution were discharging their 

obligations  in  accordance  with  law.  In  these  circumstances,  there  was 

ample opportunity with appellant to initiate the proceedings for the trial 

of  the  deceased  an  if  the  learned  courts  would  have  found  the 

allegations to be true, then the deceased would have been liable to be 

sentenced to death.   As per Article 248 of the Constitution of Islamic 

Republic  of  Pakistan  the  deceased  being  the  sitting  Governor  of  the 

most  populous  Province  of  the  State  was  enjoying  the  immunity  and 

during  his  tenure  in  office  he  was  not  liable  for  any  criminal 

prosecution but registration of case was no bar. 

28. 

We have appreciated the case law along with the relevant 

Ahadiths  and  the  VS of  the  Holy  Quran.  It  is  evident  that  neither 

the appellant nor his learned defense counsel are oblivious of the fact 

that  in their  endeavor to  provide the shelter to the criminal act of  the 

appellant  by  referring 

to 

the 

judgments  of 

the  Holy  Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  they  have  confused  the  reality  that  the  Holy 

Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  was  not  only  a  human  being  but  was 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 47 

also 

the  Messenger  of  Allah.  The  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H) in the post migration era was head of the State, Commander 

in Chief of the army, the Chief Executive of the State and also the Chief  

Judge, ultimate legislative authority of his territory and therefore, if the 

Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  ordered  the  killing  of  some 

contemnors  or  he  ratified  some  individual  acts  of  killing  of  the 

contemnors  by  the  Muslims,  he  was  exercising  the  power  which 

accumulated  in  his  personality  with  above  status.  Now  the  question 

arises  that  whether,  after  the  time  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H)  left  us,  who  is  supposed  to  exercise  that  authority  and  the 

reply  is  found  in  the  elevation  of  the  firstly  rightly  guided  Caliphate 

Hazrat  Abu  Bakar  Siddique  (R.A)  as  all  the  Muslims  chose  him  to 

succeed  him  to  the  office  of  Head  of  the  State  to  manage  the  affairs. 

This  reveals  that  no  single  person  can  claim  to  have  inherited  the 

unique  /  multiple  authorities  as  enjoyed  by  the  Holy  Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  in  his  own  right  without  the  assent  of  the 

people of the State. 

29. 

Admittedly  appellant  is  neither  the  Chief  Executive,  nor 

Head  of  the  State  and  not  even  a  Judge,  he  was  a  soldier  in  the 

uniformed  force,  under  the  legal  obligation  to  obey  the  orders  of  his 

superiors  and  beside  this  there  was  no  other  duty  of  appellant.  With 

reference  to  the  contention  of  the  learned  defense  counsel  that  the 

deceased  was  Mubah-ud-Dum  like  any  other  contemnor  and  that 

appellant was justified in murdering him, it is observed that the golden 

time of the history when the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) had 

been dictating / changing the obsolete culture of the ancient world and 

was imparting the knowledge to the humanity may very conveniently be 

divided into two eras, one pre-migration and second post migration era. 

In depth perusal of the renowned Tafaseers of the Holy Quran and the 

books  of  Seerat,  Ahadiths  prove  beyond  any  shadow  of  doubt  that  in 

the  pre  migration  era  the  struggle  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H) was the struggle of the individual who was striving to spread 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 48 

the  message  of  Allah  Almighty  as  a  result  of  which  the  Holy  Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H) faced exemplary resistance from the pagans of 

Makkah  and  even  from  his  near  relatives.  The  history  quoted  the 

hardships  which  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  faced  during 

this  period  and  he  was  also  physically  tortured  by  Mushriks.  In  this 

period  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  went  to  Taif  in  the  hope  that 

people of that city would listen and accept the message of God but they 

turned  to  be  more  brutal  then  Makkans  as  they  injured  the  Holy 

Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  by  pelting  stones.  This  era  also 

witnessed a period of three years when the Holy Prophet Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H) was socially boycotted by infidels and he alongwith his tribe 

was forced to live in an inhabited valley of Shaib Abi Talib where the 

family  members  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  had  no 

other  stuff  to  eat  except  the  leaves  and  barks  of  the  trees.  This  era 

witnessed that any contemnor of Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) 

was  never  sentenced  as  at  that  time  the  struggle  of  the  Holy  Prophet 

Muhammad (P.B.U.H) was individual in  capacity and at that time the 

Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  was  not  heading  any  State  and 

there was  no Islamic law concerning the Governance of the State,  the 

inviolability  of  the  head  of  the  State  and  the  prestige  and  honor 

attached  to  the  office  of  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H).  That 

era only witnessed two incidents whereby the persons who had tortured 

the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) were reprimanded as in the 

1st case one Mushrik namely Abu Jahal had injured  the Holy Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  and  the  Imam  of  Martyrs  Amir  Hamza  who 

was the uncle of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) and at that 

time had not yet converted to Islam punished that person in individual 

capacity and the second example is of Hazrat Umer (R.A) as the great 

second  Caliph  soon  after  converting  to  Islam  snapped  a  person  who 

had  humiliated  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H).  In  that  era  the 

Allah  Almighty  was  consoling  his  Prophet  through  various  VS of 

Holy Quran i.e. Surah Kausar, Surah Lahab, Surah Mawah and Allah 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 49 

Almighty promised that who ever would torture, humiliate or give stress 

to the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H)  would readily face the fire 

on day of resurrection and no responsibility was caste on the Muslims 

at that time or upon the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H) to show 

the resistance and to punish the contemnors. 

" We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, but for 

just ends. And the Hour is surely coming (when this will be manifest). 

So overlook (any human faults) with gracious forgiveness" 

30. 

With 

the  migration  “Hijrat”  of 

the  Holy  Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  a  radical  change  took  place  as  soon  as  after 

reaching  Madina  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  made  a 

social  contract  with  the  different  tribes  settled  in  great  city  of  Madina 

which 

is 

called 

as  Misaq-e-Madina. 

Through 

this 

agreement/Constitution Islamic State was established and Holy Prophet 

Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)    became  the  head  of  the  State  having  all  the 

legislative,  executive,  judicial  and  military  powers  beside  being  the 

Messenger  of  Allah  Almighty.  This  was  the  time  when  the  verses  of 

Holy Quran setting out all the principles governing the social, national 

and  international  issues  revealed  to  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H). Now the newly created Islamic State was under threats from 

the pagan of Makkah and others resulting in Ghazwa e Badr in which 

the  Muslims  under  the  command  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H)  were  victorious.  Even  during  the  early  years  of  post 

migration  era  the  history  did  not  quote  any  example  that  any 

contemnor  was  done  to  death  on  the  order  of  the  Holy  Prophet 

Muhammad (P.B.U.H) or the Holy Prophet ratified any individual act 

of  any  Muslim  killing  any  contemnor.  It  was  the  era  after  Ghazwa  e 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 50 

Badar  that  Islamic  State  fully  established  its  ground  and  became 

formidable  power  in  the  Arab  Peninsula.  In  this  period  there  are  the 

examples of the killing of the contemnors on the orders / judgments of 

the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  and  the  ratification  of  the 

individual  acts  of  the  Muslim  murdering  the  contemnors  but  it  has 

already been observed that at that time the Islamic State was in the state 

of war with the Jews who were expelled from Madina and they were not 

only guilty of the individual contempt of the Holy Prophet Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H) but they were also rebels of the State. In view of the above 

discussion it is evident like the broad day light that act of appellant of 

murdering the deceased can never be justified on the touchstone of the 

decisions of  the  Holy Prophet  Muhammad (P.B.U.H) and the settled 

principle of the Islamic law about the subject of blasphemy.  

31. 

The  plea  of  appellant  that  he  was  justified  to  kill  the 

deceased as he had committed the offence U/S 295-C PPC has already 

been discussed. Appellant took the second plea that the deceased had 

provoked him and in the state of aggression and sudden provocation he 

lost  his  self-control  and  killed  him.  Learned  defense  counsel  have 

argued  that  it  is  established  from  the  record  that  it  was  the  deceased 

who  had  provoked  the  appellant  by  declaring  that  the  blasphemy  law 

was  a  black  law  and  his  shit,  therefore,  the  act  of  the  appellant  of 

committing  the  murder  of  the  deceased  becomes  no  offence.  With 

reference  to  this  contention  the  learned  counsel  have  placed  reliance 

upon  the  cases  laws  “Ali  Muhammad  VS  The  State”  “1993  PC.rLJ 

557”, & “Ghulam Farid VS The State “1997 P.Cr. LJ 1411”. But here 

we are fortified with the dictum laid down by august Supreme Court in 

the case reported as PLD 2001 S.C 96 wherein observed as under:- 

“Legally and morally speaking, nobody has any right nor 

can anybody be allowed to take law in his own hands to 

take the life of anybody in the name of “Ghairat”. Neither 

the law of the land nor religion permits so-called honour 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 51 

killing which amounts to murder (Qatal-i-Amd) simplicter. 

Such iniquitous and vile act is violative of fundamental 

right as enshrined in Article 9 of the Constitution of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan which provides that no 

person would be deprived of life or liberty except in 

accordance with law and any custom or usage in that 

respect is void under Article 8(1) of the Constitution.  

This  plea  of  the  appellant  that  he  had  talked  to  the 

deceased  and  the  deceased  had  replied  that  blasphemy  law  was  not 

only a black law but also his shit is not established as PW11 Nadeem 

Asif  ASI  and  PW12  Muhammad  Ameer  Khan  Inspector  who  have 

narrated  the  eye  witness  count  have  absolutely  denied  any  conversion 

between  the  deceased  and  the  appellant.  Later  on  in  his  statement 

stated in narration form that " There was no talk/ conversation between 

appellant and deceased just before occurrence"   They have also ruled 

out  any  possibility  of  such  like  conversation  as  they  have  stated  that 

appellant was in second layer of security. Learned trial court considered 

the plea of the appellant and rightly observed that  

“accused claimed that deceased was uttering remarks time and 

again against blasphemy law. Deceased went to Jail at Lahore to 

who  solidarity  with  the  condemn  prisoner  of  blasphemy. 

Remarks of the deceased were being published in the press. 

However the documents / press clippings produced by the 

appellant  in  this  regard  provides  that  said  remarks  were 

published lastly in the month November 2010 while occurrence 

of this case did take place on 04.01.2011. Meaning thereby 

accused had no sudden provocation. More so it is pertinent to 

add here that it is not case of the defence that deceased, in the 

past made the remarks against the blasphemy law in presence of 

the accused. As such element of sudden provocation of the 

accused is missing” 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 52 

32. 

As  to  the  defence  plea  that  accused  was  returning  after 

urination when he had chance to pose question to the deceased, it is to 

be  observed  that    Ex.PD  scaled  site  plan  provides  that  accused  was  8 

feet  away  from  the  deceased  at  the  time  of  occurrence.  Meaning 

thereby he had no occasion to ask question from the deceased to clarify 

as to why the deceased was commenting upon blasphemy law.  

33. 

However,  if  for  the  sake  of  arguments  it  is  admitted  that 

Appellant had chance to be conversant with the deceased even then he 

cannot  be  given  benefit  of  sudden  provocation  for  the  reasons  that  it 

spells out even from the plea of appellant that it was he who sought for 

provocation. The deceased himself did not utter even a single word in 

the presence of the accused just before the occurrence. In the case of 

NASRULLAH KHAN and 2 others  VS The State,  reported as “2011 

SCMR 613” the Honorable Supreme Court held as under:- 

“----S.  7(a)---- Appreciation of evidence--- Defence plea---

Grave and sudden provocation -----Principle -------Benefit 

of grave and sudden provocation can only be given, if the 

provocation was not sought by the accused himself.  

“----S.    7(a)----  Grave  and  sudden  provocation---

Provocation, nature of ---- Provocation must be such as will 

upset not merely a hasty, hot-tempered and hypersensitive 

person, but would upset also a person of ordinary sense 

and calmness---Law does not take into account abnormal 

creatures reacting abnormally in given situations, but 

contemplates  the  acting  of  normal  beings  in  given 

situations, and the protection that is offered by the 

exception is the protection of normal beings reacting 

normally in a given set of circumstances---Provocation 

sought by the accused cannot furnish any defence against 

the charge of murder.  

34. 

Perusal of the impugned judgment and dictum laid down 

by  apex  court  reveals  that  the  learned  trial  court  rightly  rejected  the 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 53 

possibility regarding the plea of grave and sudden provocation as first of 

all  this  plea  is  not  established  and  it  is  not  proved  and  even  if  it  is 

presumed  that  the  appellant  somehow  went  to  the  deceased  and  had 

the chance to be conversant with him then it is obvious that it was the 

appellant who was searching for an excuse to do what he wanted to do. 

With reference to the above said findings of the learned trial court the 

learned  defense  counsel  have  argued 

that 

the  deceased  was 

undoubtedly  guilty  of  the  commission  of  offence  U/S  295-C  of  PPC, 

the recurring provocation was there for the accused as the remarks of 

the deceased were published in the  newspapers and the appellant has 

produced  the  clipping  of  these  news  papers.  Learned  counsel  have 

referred to some case law cited as “Abdul Ghani VS The State” “2007 

YLR  969  &  “Mohtarma  Benazir  Bhutto  VS  President  of  Pakistan” 

“PLD  1998  SC 388”  that  the  press  clipping  can  be  relied  and  can be 

looked  into.  We  have  considered  this  contention  of  the  learned 

defense counsel and it is observed that in the presence of some other 

direct  unimpeachable  and  confidence  inspiring  evidence  the  press 

clippings can be considered and looked into as corroborative material 

but on their own strength, these press clippings are not enough to prove 

the  existence  of  certain  facts.  If  we  accept  the  accusation  of  appellant 

that  deceased  committed  offence  of  295-C  PPC,  then  question  arises 

that  to  prove  such  a  serious  charge  and  getting  approval  of  his  act  of 

killing, what  evidence has been adduced by the  defense? Not a single 

witness  to  state  that  deceased  used  derogatory  words  in  his  presence. 

Article  71  &  72  of  Qanun  e  Shahadat  Order  1984  put  certain 

conditions which are mandatory, which reads as under" 

71.  Oral evidence must be direct.  Oral evidence must, 
in all cases whatever, be direct; that is to say: 
If it refer to a fact which could be seen, it must be the 
evidence of a witness who says he saw it; 
If it refers to a fact which could be heard it must be the 
evidence of a witness who say he heard it;  
If it referrers to a fact which could be perceived by any 
other sense or in any other manner, it must be the 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 54 

evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that 
sense or in that manner;  
If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that 
opinion is held, it must be the evidence of the person who 
holds that opinion on those grounds;  
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any 
treatise commonly offered for sale, and the grounds on 
which such opinions are held, may be proved by the 
production of such treatises, if the author is dead or 
cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving 
evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an 
amount of delay or expense which the court regards as 
unreasonable;  
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the 
existence or condition of any material thing other than a 
document, the court may, if it thinks fit, require the 
production of such material thing for its inspection; 
Provided further that, if a witness is dead or cannot be 
found or has become incapable of giving evidence, or his 
attendance cannot be procured without an amount of 
delay or expense which under the circumstances of the 
case, the court regards as unreasonable, a party shall have 
the right to produce shahada ala al-shahada by which a 
witness can appoint two witnesses to depose on his behalf 
except in the case of hadood.  

72.  Proof of contents of documents.  The contents of 
documents may be proved either by primary or by 
secondary evidence.   

35. 

Assuming  that,  deceased  had  actually  committed  the 

offence  punishable  U/S  295-C  of  PPC  than  what  course  was  left  for 

appellant to take the deceased to the task. Was he authorized to hold a 

court at the place of occurrence i.e. Kohsar Market, ask a question to 

seek  explanation  from  the  deceased  about  the  remarks  allegedly 

attributed  to  him,  hear  the  explanation  of  the  deceased  in  a  single 

sentence,  without  framing  any  charge  or  recording  any  evidence  then 

and there declare in his heart that deceased was liable to be murdered 

and to execute that sentence then and there. No body on earth would 

dare  to  justify  this  conduct  of  the  appellant  as  we  are  living  in  a  State 

governed by the Constitution, law, rules and regulation and everyone is 

required  to  proceed  within  the  limits  prescribed  by  the  State.  It  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 55 

observed 

that 

through  his  reply  appellant  has 

left 

it  for 

the 

determination of the court to seek verdict in his favour that his act be 

justified under the principles of Islamic law but at the cost of repetition 

it  is  observed  that  we  have  already  held  that  criminal  act  of  the 

appellant is  not  justified under the principles of Islamic law governing 

the subject of blasphemy. This reveals that the appellant is himself not 

certain that his act of committing murder of the deceased was justified.   

36. 

There 

is  no  denial  that  punishment  of  “Shatam-e-

Rasool”is capital punishment, but question arises that can it be awarded 

and  executed  without  production  of  evidence/  answer  is  in  negative. 

Even  otherwise  it  is  held  by  the  superior  courts  of  the  country  that  if 

element  of  bad  intent  missing  or  some  doubt  created,  it  is  better  to 

withheld  punishment  than  awarding.  Now,  question  arises  that  what 

plausible,  convincing  and  cogent  evidence  has  been  led  by  defense, 

make  us  to  believe  that  deceased  committed  the  offence  attracting 

provisions  of  Section  295-C  PPC?  We  are  afraid  that  there  is  no 

material before us on the basis of which we may presume that deceased 

infact  committed  the  offence  and  he  was  “Mubah-ud-Dum”  being 

prostrate.  Guidance  in  this  regard  sought  from  the  case  reported  as 

“Ayub Masih VS The State” “PLD 2002 SC 1048”, the Apex Court of 

Pakistan observed that  

“in  the  present  case  the  defiling  words  highlighted  in  the 
FIR  certainly  constituted  the  offence  U/S  295-C  of  PPC 
but the prosecution has failed to prove its case against the 
accused  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt.  The  accused  is, 
therefore,  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  doubt  which  was 
withheld  by  the  two  courts  without  any  support  of  sound 
reasons”.  

In  that  case  the  accused  Ayub  Masih  was  not  only 

convicted by the learned trial court but his conviction was also upheld 

by the Honorable Lahore High Court so there would have been strong 

case against the accused of the commission of offence punishable U/S 

295-C of PPC yet the august Supreme Court of Pakistan acquitted him 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 56 

of the charge and did not issue the direction to kill the accused though 

he was accused of the offence U/S 295-C of PPC.  Nature 

of 

the 

accusations  overwhelmed  the  Trial  Court  to  such  an  extent  that  the 

Court  became  oblivious  of  the  fact  that  the  standard  of  proof  for 

establishing  such  an  accusation  and  as  required,  was  missing.  Mere 

accusation should not have created a prejudice or a bias and they duty 

of the Court as ordained by the Holy Prophet was to ascertain the facts 

and the circumstances and look for the truth with all the perseverance 

at its command. Accused had not confessed and had stated that he had 

not committed any offence and through his affidavit he had expressed 

his  profound  respect  for  the  Holy  Prophet  in  his  own  words.  Held 

faithfully following the traditions of the Holy Prophet and his directions 

and  ordinances  and  while  keeping  in  view  the  standard  of  proof 

brought on record and the statement of the accused both made under 

S.342,  Cr.P.C  and  through  his  affidavit,  the  present  case  was  the  one 

ridden  with  doubts,  Accused,  in  circumstances,  was  ordered  to  be 

acquitted  of  the  charge  and  released  forthwith  if  not  required  in  any 

other case”. 

37. 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Mahboob  Alias 

Booba  VS  The  State,    reported  as  PLD  2002  Lah.  587  (upheld  by 

S.C). Learned Division Bench held as under:- 

“Section 295-A, 295-B & 295-C- blasphemy- increase in 

the  number  of  registration  of  blasphemy  cases  and 

element of mischief involved therein calls for extra care at 

the end of the prosecuting officers- Failure, inefficiency 

and incompetence of the Investigation in handling the case 

of blasphemy- Directions by High Court with regard to 

Investigation and trial of cases of blasphemy- High Court 

in circumstances directed the Inspector General of Police 

of Province to ensure that whenever such a case is 

registered, the same may be entrusted for the purpose of 

investigation to a team of at-least two gazetted investigating 

 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 57 

officers  preferably  those  conversant  with  the  Islamic 

Jurisprudence  and  in  case  they  themselves  are  not 

conversant with Islamic law, a scholar of known reputation 

and integrity may be added to the team at the team should 

then investigate as to whether an offence is committed or 

not and if the team comes to the conclusion that the 

offence is committed, the police may then proceed further 

in the matter- Trial in such a case be held by a Court 

presiding by a Judicial Officer who himself is not less than 

the Rank of District & Sessions Judge”.        

38. 

In the case in hand the complainant, the IO, Investigating 

Officer,  learned  trial  court,  learned  High  Court  and  Apex  Court  of 

Pakistan  apparently  joined  in  one  personality  i.e.  the  appellant  who 

done  away  with  all  the  provisions  of  the  criminal  law  and  the 

Constitution  which  guarantee  a  free  trial  to  every  citizen.  He  passed 

judgment and assumed the role of assassin and executed the sentence at 

the spot. It is amazing to note that appellant took protections and rights 

guaranteed  by  the  constitution  but  deprived  deceased  from  all 

constitutional guarantees. 

It is pertinent to note that State being the guardian of the 

rights  of the people and being oblivious  of the  fact that sovereignty  in 

the entire universe belongs to Allah Almighty and it has to protect the 

tenets  of  Islam,  introduced  the  legislation  for  the  protection  of  the 

respect  and  dignity  of  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  inserted 

Section 295-C by virtue of Act III of 1986 in Pakistan Penal Code. It 

has provided the sentence of death.  

Even in murder case the sentence is death or life imprisonment 

or U/S 302 (c) PPC it may extend to 25 years.  Under Section  345 of 

Cr.P.C the offence of murder may be compounded, it may be waived 

off  by  the  Wali  of  the  victim  /  deceased  U/S  309  of  PPC  and  it  may 

also be compounded U/S 310 of PPC but in the case of conviction for 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 58 

the offence  U/S 295-C  of PPC, it cannot be compounded or  forgiven 

by  any  complainant  as  the  State  is  custodian  of  protecting  the  honor 

and  dignity  of  our  last  and  beloved  prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H)  

and the complainant of the such offence reporting the matter to the law 

enforcing agency is a mere informer. 

45. 

Since one of the arguments of the learned counsel is that learned 

trial  court  did  not  follow  the  mandate  of  Section  338-F  PPC.  For 

convenience said provision is reproduced here.  

“338-F.  Interpretation.    In  the  interpretation  and 

application of the provisions of this chapter, and in respect 

of matters ancillary or akin thereto, the court shall be 

guided by the injunction of Islam as laid down in the Holy 

Quran and Sunnah. 

It  is  nobody’s  case  that  provision  of  Section  295-C, 

Chapter XVI of PPC related to offences affecting the human body and 

Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order  1984  have  not  been  promulgated 

in 

accordance with the injunctions of Islam. We failed to understand that 

how learned trail court fell in error by not following the codified law? 

This argument of learned counsel is of no substance. It is also beyond 

our comprehension that how by declaring the act of appellant as “extra 

judicial”  learned  counsel  describe  it  in  accordance  with  law?  Section 

295-C  PPC  is  a  valid  law,  how  approval  can  be  accorded  to  any 

individual to take law in his own hands and use it as sword to eliminate 

those, to whom he consider as contemnor or prostrate. The injunctions 

of  Islam,  law  of  the  land  and  globally  accepted  principles  of  safe 

administration  of  criminal  justice  do  not  permit  so.  Extra  judicial  act 

itself is unlawful. Mistake of law becomes no excuse as it is embedded 

in the human being that what is the right and what is the wrong. There 

may  be  some  excuse  to  a  person  about  delicate  procedure  of  law 

enunciated  through  the  rules  and  regulations  but  there  can  be  no 

mistake  by  a person  that how the life of another person can be taken 

under the Constitution and the law.  

 
 
 
  
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 59 

39. 

As  far  number  of  witnesses  is  concerned,  it  is  also  well 

established law that prosecution is not bound to produce all witnesses, 

material and natural witnesses have been produced, which to our mind 

are  sufficient.  In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Mansha,  reported  as  2001 

SCMR 199 august S.C para to be reproduced.  

“---S. 302 ------- Qanun-e-Shahadat (10 of 1984), Art. 17(2) 

(b) ----Conviction based upon evidence of single witness---

Competence  and  number  of  witnesses  required  for 

conviction-----Scope-----If testimony of the single witness is 

found by the Court to be entirely reliable, there is no legal 

impediment to the conviction of the accused person on 

such proof----Even as the guilt of an accused person may 

be proved by the testimony of a single witness, innocence 

of accused person may be established on the testimony of 

a single witness, even though considerable number of 

witnesses may be forthcoming to testify to the truth of the 

case of the prosecution----Court is concerned with the 

quality and not with the quantity of the evidence necessary 

for proving or disproving a fact----Particular number of 

witnesses is not required for the proof of any fact and the 

same can be produced by a single witness under the 

provisions of Aert. 17(2) of Qanune-e Shahadat 1984.  

The contention of the learned defense counsel that the act 

of  the  appellant  was  no  offence  being  protected  by  the  provision  of 

Section  79  of  PPC.  For  convenience  same  is  being  reproduced  here 

under:- 

“79.  Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact 

believing himself justified, by law.---- Nothing is an offence 

which is done by any person who is justified by law, or 

who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a 

mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified 

by law, in doing it.  

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 60 

We  failed  to  understand  that  on  what  basis  learned 

counsel  brings  appellant  under  the  umbrella  of  this  provision,  as  we 

have  not  been  able  to  find  any  lawful  “justification”  for  appellant  to 

deprive the deceased from his life.  

40. 

There is  no cavil with the proposition that Supreme  Law 

of  the  State  is  Islamic  law  and  all  of  our  laws  whether  procedural, 

substantive or penal are to be interpreted in the light of the injunctions 

of  the  Holy  Quran  and  Sunnah  of  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad 

(P.B.U.H) but from whatever angles it is considered neither the Islamic 

law  nor  the  law  of  the  land  gives  any  justification  to  the  act  of  the 

accused  and  searching  for  any  justification  for  the  act  of  the  accused 

would  defeat  the  purpose  for  which  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  was 

established  and  the  social  contract  amongst  its  people  in  the  shape  of 

the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  was  promulgated 

resulting in anarchy, lawlessness, and rule of might is right.  

41. 

We are convinced that the learned trial court appreciated 

the  evidence  in  complete  adherence  to  the  principles  settled  by  the 

Apex Courts of Pakistan in various pronouncements and it has reached 

a just conclusion. The learned trial court held that  

“PW11  Nadeem  Asif  ASI  was  one  of  the  security 

personnel  who  was  also  deputed  to  safeguard  the  life  of 

the  deceased.  He  deposed  that  accused  on  04.1.2011  all 

of sudden resorted to firing with his official weapon at the 

deceased.  This  episode  was  completed  within  seconds. 

Same  is  statement  of  PW12  Muhammad  Amir  Khan 

Inspector. They were correctly recorded on these lines by 

PW14  Hakeem  Khan  Inspector  /  IO.  Presence  of  these 

witnesses  at  the  relevant  time  is  not  disputed  by  the 

defense,  they  were  members  of  security  escorts    deputed 

with  the  deceased.  They  are  natural  witness  there  is 

nothing on file to establish that they were hostile or have 

any  animosity  towards  the  accused.  These  PWs  were 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 61 

subjected to lengthy cross examination  but  defense  could 

not  get anything in its  favor. There is  not even  a  slightest 

discrepancy  in  their  statements  regarding  mode  of  the 

occurrence, time of occurrence and place of occurrence”.  

It  is  further  observed  that  it  will  be  appropriate  to 

reproduce last suggestion put to PW11 Nadeem Asif ASI  which is as 

under;- 

“It  is  also  incorrect  that  the  deceased  himself  was 

responsible  for  his  own  end  at  the  hands  of  the  accused 

present in the court” 

42. 

Presence of eye witness PW11 and PW12 at the place of 

occurrence being natural witnesses is not disputed by the defense. No 

ill will or animosity suggested against them, rather in answer to question 

put to appellant that why PW’S deposed against him, appellant did not 

say a word.  It is proved through the statement of PWs that the crime 

weapon  was  recovered  from  the  accused  at  the  place  of  occurrence 

where he was arrested, 28 crime empties were recovered from the place 

of occurrence and as per report of Forensic Science Laboratory Lahore 

Ex.PH  the  empties  matched  with  the  crime  weapon.  The  medical 

evidence 

furnished  by  Dr.  Arshad  has 

fully  corroborated 

the 

prosecution  case  to  the  extent  of  numbers  of  injuries,  time  of  injuries 

and 

time  of  occurrence.  In 

the  presence  of 

this  convincing 

unimpeachable  and  un-interested  evidence, 

the  prosecution  has 

remained  successful  to  prove  that  the  appellant  had  committed  the 

murder of the deceased on 04.01.2011 at 03.50 pm. The contention of 

the  learned  defense  counsels  that  the  version  of  the  appellant  that  he 

was  justified  in  killing  the  deceased  is  plausible,  it  has  already  been 

observed that those incidents of the murders of the contemnors which 

were ratified by the Holy Prophet Muhammad (P.BU.H) relates to the 

era  when  the  Islamic  State  was  at  war  with  the  enemies  and  it  was 

strengthen its ground in the Arabian Peninsula.  

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 62 

43. 

As  far  as  the  findings  of  the  learned  trial  court  that  the 

appellant is also guilty of commission of offence punishable U/S 7 (a) of 

Anti-Terrorism Act is concerned,  to our  estimation this  finding of  the 

learned  trial  court  is not sustainable as only PW12  Muhammad Amir 

Khan Inspector stated that the incident created panic and no other PW 

has  stated  that  occurrence  resulted  in  intimidating  and  terrorizing  the 

public. It is note worthy that I.O of the case did not utter any word in 

this regard. Moreover, if any incriminating material was there, same not 

put  to  appellant  in  his  statement  u/s  342  Cr.P.C.  The  PWs  have  not 

stated that act of the appellant committing the murder of the deceased 

created  sense  of  fear  and  sense  of  insecurity  in  the  society.  Even  the 

prosecution  evidence  by  itself  reveals  that  appellant  was  motivated 

against deceased due to certain reasons and he has no other intention 

except to murder the deceased. Appellant murdered the deceased and 

he did not injure or assault any other person standing nearby the place 

of occurrence. In these circumstances, findings of the learned trial court 

that  the  appellant  was  also  guilty  of  commission  of  the  offence  of 

terrorism  as  defined  in  Section  6  of  Anti  Terrorism  Act  1997,  is  not 

sustainable and resultantly conviction of sentence awarded to the extent 

U/S  7 of Anti Terrorism  Act 1997, is liable to be  set-aside. However, 

we  are  convinced  that  learned  trial  court  had  the  jurisdiction  to  hold 

trial.  

44. 

Learned  defense  counsel  have  also  argued  that  there  are 

mitigating circumstances and in this case the maximum punishment of 

death  is  unwarranted.  They  have  argued  that  the  deceased  had 

provoked  the  appellant  and  under  the  influence  of  said  grave  and 

sudden  provocation  the  appellant  lost  self-control  and  committed  the 

murder of the deceased, therefore, he should have been punished U/S 

302  (c) of PPC and that  too  for  a minimum period of imprisonment. 

They  have  further  argued  that  the  appellant  has  unblemished  service 

record  and  prior  to  this  he  has  committed  no  other  offence  and  they 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 63 

have  prayed  that  sentence  of  the  appellant  be  reduced  to  minimum 

period  of  imprisonment  as  provided  in  Section  302  (c)  of  PPC.  The 

learned  counsels  for  the  appellant  have  supplement  their  arguments 

with  the  case  laws  “Shafique  Ahmed  VS  The  State”  “1997  PC.rLJ  1”, 

“Iftikhar Mehmood VS Qaiser Iftikhar” “2011 SCMR 1165”, “Naveed 

VS The State” “2014 SCMR 1464” & “Muhammad Nadeem Waqas VS 

The State” “2014 SCMR 1658”.  

45. 

We  have  considered  the  contentions  of  the  learned 

defense  counsel  and  have  also  perused  the  case  law  referred  by  the 

defense.  In  the  case  in  hand  it  is  established  beyond  any  reasonable 

doubt  that  the  murder  of  the  deceased  at  the  hands  of  appellant  was 

preplanned,  cold  blooded  and  gruesome.  Intent,  preparation;  and  act 

with mensrea  manifest  from  the  prosecution  evidence  and  stance  of 

appellant  itself.  The deceased had suffered 28 firearms wounds on his 

body, entire magazine containing 28 bullets made empty appellant. The 

principles of mitigating as provided in the case law are not applicable to 

the  facts  of  the  present  case,  therefore,  the  sentence  awarded  by  the 

learned  trial  court  to  the  appellant  U/S  302  (b)  PPC  warrants  no 

interference. Case law relied by the learned counsel, not attracted to the 

facts and circumstances which cannot be applied in general.  

46. 

The  appellant  in  this  case  may  be  a  pious  man  in  his 

personal life but admittedly neither he is  scholar nor a Qazi and it is 

the job of the courts to go in the depth of the words and then to declare 

that words attributed to a person amounts to commission of offence of 

blasphemy  or  not.  The  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H)  was  the  blessing  for 

whole  mankind  and  the  instances  where  the  Holy  Prophet  (P.B.U.H) 

forgave the contemnors are more in number than the instances where 

the contemnors  were done to death.  It is quite strange that appellant 

leveled  allegations  of    “Kaba’ir”  (major  sins)  without  any  proof  and 

merely  on  perceptions.  This  act  of  appellant  cannot  be  termed  as 

Islamic  and  moral.    If  the  deceased  had  made  any  irresponsible 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 64 

statement  about  the  blasphemy  law  he  should  have  been  taken  to  the 

courts of law for the trial and it was for the court to decide whether he 

have  committed  any  offence  or  not.  Prosecution  proved  its  case 

through oral and medical evidence, recoveries made  and stance taken 

by  the  appellant.  Although  much  emphasis  has  been  put  on  non-

proving  of motive set  up in the  FIR, but to our mind  act  of  appellant 

and stance taken by him itself exhibit the  motive. Moreover,  it  is well 

settled  law  with  the  mandate  of  the  dictums  of  superior  courts  of  the 

country  that  motive  or  no  motive  becomes  irrelevant  when  case  is 

otherwise proved beyond shadow of doubt. Prosecution proved its case 

beyond  shadow  of  doubt  and  in  our  estimation  motive  has  also  been 

proved.   

47. 

The crux of above discussion is that the conviction of the 

appellant  recorded  by  the  learned  trial  court  U/S  7  (a)  of  Anti-

Terrorism  Act  is  set-aside,  the  appeal  to  this  extent  is  allowed  and 

appellant  is  acquitted  form  the  said  charge  whereas,  conviction  and 

sentence recorded U/S 302 (b) PPC is upheld and appeal to this extent 

is dismissed. The murder reference is answered in affirmative. 

(NOOR-UL-HAQ N.QURESHI)     (SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI) 
                JUDGE   

       JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on  09.03.2015. 

      JUDGE   

       JUDGE 

Approved for Reporting.   

“Waqar Ahmad” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
  
  
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 65 

Crl. Appeal No.90 & Murder Reference No.01 of 2011                                 66 

 
