ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,ISLAMABAD

IUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT
W.P.  No.2498  of 2013
Syed  Shabi  Hassan
VS

S. No. of
order
proceedings

Date of
order/
proceedings

The Guardian

-West Isb Etc
Order with signafure  of ]udge and that  of parties or counsel
where  necessary.

20.11,.2013  Mr. Aleem Baig Chughtai, learned  ASC  for petitioner,
Syed Ishfaq  Hussain  Naqvi,  Advocate for respondent.

ORDER

MUHAMMAD  ANWAR KHAN KASI,  CI:-

The petitioner [respondent in main petition  under
Guardian  & Wards Actl, assails the order dated 04.6.2013,
passed by learned  Guardian ]udge  Islamabad, whereby his
application seeking dismissal  of the guardian petition filed

by the respondent  No.2  on the ground of jurisdiction  was

rejected by observing  that where the plaintiff  wife resides,
that court has jurisdiction for all the matters including  the

custody of minor.
2. 
Briefly the facts are that the respondent  No.2 [Mst.
Sitwat  Fatimal filed an application  under Section 25 &.12 of
the Guardian & Wards Act, 1890, for the custody  of her
minor son Amaan Hassan aged about L1 years. The
petitioner  through  an application raised  objection  qua
territorial  jurisdiction, which  was accepted and resultantly

main application under Section 25 of the Act was dismissed

vide  order dated 30.5.2012.
3.  On Appeal filed by the respondent No.2, order
impugned  was set aside and the case was remanded with
the direction  to  decide the question of  territorial
jurisdiction  first and then to proceed  with the merits of the

case.
4. 
The learned  Guardian  |udge vide ex-parte order
dated  7.3.2013  accepted the petition  under Section  25 of the
Act and directed the present petitioner  to handover the

immediate custody of the minor to respondent  No.2.
5. 
parte order, which was allowed vide judgment  dated

The petitioner then  filed an appeal against the said ex-

2

w.P.249E-2013
Syed  Shabi  Hassan  VS The  Guardian  Judge  Isb

27.5.2012 and the case was remanded  for second time with
the same direction to decide the question of jurisdiction
first and then to proceed with the merits  of the case.
6. 
The learned  Guardian ]udge,  after hearing both the
sides, rejected  the objection of the petitioner regarding
territorial jurisdiction,  vide order dated 4.6.20L3 which is
being  assailed through this constitutional  petition mainly
i  12001

relying  on case of Anne

VS Tahir Ali

scMR 20001.
7. 
It is the contention  of learned counsel that the case of
the respondent  No.2  does not qualify the pre-requisites
contained in Rule 6 of the West  Pakistan Family  Courts

Rules,  1965,  therefore,  the impugned  order  is liable to be set-

aside:  on the other hand  learned  counsel for respondent  No.2
is of the view that the amendment  in the family laws  has
overriding  effect on Section 9 of Guardian  & Wards  Act,
1890, therefore,  petition can be filed at a place where wife

ordinarily  resides  and the present petition  is nothing but to

delay  the process  as such it is liable to be dismissed.
8.  Heard & record  perused.
9. 
It is purely a question  of law and for resolving  the
same, guidance may be solicited from the case of Maior
Muhammad  Khalid Karim VS Mst. Sadia Yaqoob PLD

2012Supreme  Court 66 wherein  after discussing  various  case
laws including case of Anne  Zahra [Supra],  it was held that
under  Section  5 of the Act, 1964, the Family  Court has the
exclusive  jurisdiction to entertain,  hear & adjudicate  all the

matters, which fall within the first schedule  to the Act. This

admittedly  includes the custody  and guardianship  matter
and the jurisdiction of a Family  Court is to be determined

under Rule 6 of Family Court Rules,  1965, where there is no

composite  claim in terms of Section  7(2) of Family  Court Act,

t964 andproviso to said Section  is not attracted.

10.

For ready reference  Rule 6 is reproduced hereunder:-

"The Court  which shall have jurisdiction  to try a
suit will be that within the local limits  of which;

3

w.P.2498-2013
Sycd  Shabi  Hassan  VS The  Guardian  Judge  Isb

a.

b.

the cause of action wholly or in part
has arisen, or
where the parties  reside  or last resided
together:
Provided that in suits for dissolution of
marriage or dower, the Court within  the
local limits of which  the wife ordinarily
resides shall also have jurisdiction."

1L.  It is thus clear that the controversy  contained  in the
case regarding  jurisdiction  will be decided pursuant to Rule
6 and in order to ascertain whether  the learned Guardian
|udge  Islamabad,  is competent  to adjudicate upon the
petition under  Section 25, the contents of the petition have

been perused which reflect  that after the marriage,  the

spouses lived at Peshawar and thereafter at Lahore and then
settled in Abu Dhabi. It is no where the case of the
respondent No.2 that she ever lived in Islamabad. Her case

does not fulfiIl any of the pre-requisites contained in Section
6 [ibidl and, therefore, it can safely  be held that the learned
Guardian ]udge Islamabad  has no jurisdiction  to entertain
petition under  Section  25 of the Guardian  & Wards Act, filed

by the respondent  No.2.
12.  hr view of above, the instant petition is allowed.
Impugned  order dated 04.6.2013,  is  set aside  and
consequently,  main petition under  Section  25 of the
Guardian & Wards Act filed by the respondent  No.2  is

ordered  to be returned  for its presentation  before  the court of

competent  jurisdiction. No orders  as to costs.

belmebad
206  Nmvobq,2ol3

Suheil

Approved for reportins

