ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.105/2020 

Intikhab  Hussain 
VS 
Additional  District  & Sessions  Judge, Islamabad-West,Etc. 

Petitioner  By: 

Sardar  Jahanzeb  Khan  and  Malik  Muhammad 
Akbar, Advocates. 

Respondents  No.  4 & 5  By: 

Mr.  Nasir Azeem  Khan, Advocate. 

State  By: 

Mr.  Zohaib  Hassan  Gondal,  State  Counsel 
alongwithYaseen,  Sub-Inspector. 

Date of Hearing: 

03.02.2020. 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANLI:  The  petitioner  through  the 

instant  petition  assailed  the  validity  of  order  dated  08.01.2020 

(the  impugned  order),  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

[udge-V,  Islamabad-West,  in  his  capacity  as  Ex-Officio Justice  Of 

the  Peace,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  petition  filed under  Section  22- 

A Cr.P.C  filed by the  petitioner  was  dismissed. 

2. 

Briefly stated  facts  of the  case  are  that  the  petitioner  filed a 

petition  under  Section  22-A  &  22-B  Cr.P.C  for  registration  of  an 

F.l.R  against  the  private  respondents  namely  RanaRafaqat  and 

RanaShahroz,  alleging  therein 

that  the  petitioner  acquired  a 

residential  house  No.869,  Service  Road  East,  Sector  I-10/4, 

Islamabad,  on  rent  through  an  agreement  dated  18.12.2019,  and 

2 

~p  No.105/ZOZO 

shifted  in  the  said  house  with  his  family along  with  household 

items.  The  petitioner  submitted  the  verification  form  in  Rescue 

15, Islamabad. It has been further  alleged that  on 22.12.2019, the 

respondents  Rana  Rafaqat  and  Rana  Shahroz  came  to  the  said 

house  and  extended  threats  to  the  petitioner  for vacation  of the 

house  and the  petitioner  on the  very next day filed a suit against 

them  and  obtained  injunctive  orders  from  the  learned  Court of 

Civil  Judge,  Islamabad-West,  on  23.12.2019.  It  has  also  been 

alleged that  on  24.12.2019, the  above named  respondents  again 

came to  the  house  of petitioner  started  quarrelling  with  him. In 

the  meantime,  local  police  of  the  Police  Station  Sabzi  Mandi 

reached  there  and  the  petitioner  alongwith  them  and  kept  him 

behind  the  bars.  Thereafter,  on  25.12.2019,  the  respondents 

along-with some other unknown persons  duly armed  with deadly 

weapons  entered  into the  said house, badly beaten  the  family of 

the  petitioner,  broken 

the  household 

items  and  forcefully 

dispossessed  the  family of the petitioner  from the  said house and 

also extended  threats  of killing them. It has also been  stated  that 

on  25.12.2019,  the  petitioner  approached  the  concerned  police 

station  and  submitted  an  application  for registration  of case but 

they  refused  to entertain  the  same. He  also approached  the  high  

ups  of  the  police  but  his  grievance  was  not  redressed.  The 

petitioner  filed a petition under  Section 22-A& 22-8  Cr.P.C before 

the  Ex-Officio of  Justice  of  Peace/ Additional  Sessions  [udge-V, · 

3 

W:.P No. l 0518080 

Islamabad-West/respondent  No.1,  who  after  calling for a  report 

from the concerned S.H.O, dismissed the petition vide order  dated 

08.01.2020. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for the  petitioner  contended  that  the 

impugned  order  passed  by the  learned  Ex-Office Justice of Peace, 

is contrary  to  the  facts and  circumstances  of the  case;that  there 

are  various  illegalities, irregularities  and  improprieties,  on  the 

basis whereof the impugned order  is not sustainable  and liable to 

be  set-aside  and  direction  be  issued  to  the  S.H.O  Sabzi Mandi 

Islamabad/respondent  No.2  to  register  an  F.l.R  against  the 

proposed  accused/respondents. 

4. 

Conversely, learned  counsel  for  the  proposed  accused, as 

well as, learned  State counsel strongly opposed the contentions of 

the 

learned  counsel 

for  petitioner  contending 

that 

the 

respondents  namely Rana Bakhatwar Ali,  Rana Rafaqat Ali,  Rana 

Shahroz Ali  are  the  registered  owners  of the  house  in  question; 

that  the  petitioner  forcibly intends  to  occupy the  said house  and 

the  allegations are baseless; no any such act has been  committed 

by the respondents. 

5. 

Heard  arguments  and  perused  the  available  record  with 

their able assistance of the learned counsel for the parties. 

6. 

Perusal of the record reveals that  on the direction of learned 

Justice of Peace, respondent  No.2/S.H.O has filed a detailed report 

dated  07.01.2020  wherein,  it  has  been  mentioned  that  the 

4 

W.P  No.105/ZQZO 

petitioner  through  a tenancy agreement  alleged himself as tenant, 

but  despite  opportunity,  failed to  produce  the  owner, mentioned 

in the tenancy agreement. 

7. 

The S.H.O  obtained  a report  from the  Capital Development 

Authority, Islamabad, wherein, the private respondents  have been 

shown  owners  as  per  record.  It has  been  mention  in the  report 

submitted  by  the  S.H.O  that  false  allegations  have  been  leveled 

against the respondents  by the petitioner just to grab the house in 

question on the garb of  above said agreement. 

8. 

It  is  necessary  to  mention  here  that 

in  the  case  of 

Muhammad Bashir VSStation House Officer. Okara Cantt. And 

others(PLD  2007  SC 539),the  Hon'ble Supreme  Court of Pakistan 

has been pleased to observe as under:- 

in 

the 

Therefore, 

our  opinion, 

"40. 
only 
jurisdiction  which  could  be  exercised  by  an  Ex-officio 
justice  of the  Peace under  section  22-A(6),  Cr.P.C.  was 
to  examine  whether  the  information  disclosed  by  the 
applicant  did or did not constitute  a coqnizable  offence 
and  if it  did  then  to  direct  the  concerned  S.H.O.  to 
record  an  F.l.R.  without  9oin9  into  the  veracity  of the 
in  question,  and  no  more.  Offerin9  any 
information 
other 
in  question 
would  be  doin9  violence  to  the  entire  scheme  of  the 
Cr.P.C.  which could not be permitted. 

to  the  provisions 

interpretation 

the  exercise  of  discretion  under 

We  are  conscious  of  the fact  that  in 
41. 
pursuance  of petitions  filed  under  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution,  the  Hi9h  Courts, at  times,  did  refuse  to 
issue writs  directing  recording of F.l.Rs.  Suffice it to say 
that 
the  said 
jurisdiction  was  not  dependent  only  on  an  tlleqaltty 
committed  by  a  competent  authority  but  was  also 
controlled  by  some  other  important  considerations 
such as the seeker  of a  writ  beinq  an a99rieved  person; 
availability  of alternative  remedies  such  as filin9  of a 
complaint  etc.  in  criminal  matters  and  the  applicant 

5 

~p  No.105/ZQZO 

being  qualified,  in  equity, for  the  grant  of the  sought 
relief  The powers  of the  Ex-officio justice  of the  Peace 
under  section  22-A  (6)  of the  Cr.P.C.  could,  therefore, 
not  be  equated  with  the  constitutional  jurisdiction 
vesting  in a High Court. 11 

9. 

In view of the above legal position, I  am clear in my mind to 

observe  that  Ex-Officio  Justice  of  Peace, under  Section  22-A(6) 

Cr.P.C  have to examine whether  the  information  disclosed by the 

petitioner  did  or  did not  constitute  a cognizable offence and  if it 

did, then  to  direct  the  concerned  S.H.O  to  register  an  F.l.R.  The 

impugned order  is reproduced  herein below:- 

"From perusal  of record and police report  it  transpires 
that  petitioner  himself  has illegally occupied  the house 
of  the  proposed  accused,  so,  no  cognizable  offence  is 
made  out  Under  these  circumstances,  no  direction  is 
required  to  be  issued  to  the  local  police.  Resultantly, 
the  petition  in  hand  needs  no further  consideration, 
thus  the same  is hereby  dismissed. File be consigned  to 
the record room after  due completion/compilation.  11 

10.  The  record  shows  that  there  is  a  dispute  between  the 

parties  over  the  said  house  and  the  parties  are  claiming 

ownership  of the same. In the instant  case, as per impugned order 

which was  based  on the  report  of S.H.O,  according to which, the 

private  respondents/proposed  accused are the registered  owners 

of the  house  in-question  and  the  Ex-Officio Justice of Peace has 

passed  a well reasoned  order.  Further,  it is a settled  principle of 

law that  the  Ex-Officio Justice of Peace while seized  of a petition 

under  Section  22-A/22-B  Cr.P.C  is  not  to  act  mechanically  by 

issuing a direction  for registration  of a criminal case in each and 

every case, which have to be decided on its own peculiar facts and 

6 

W.P No.lOStaoao 

circumstances  as has been held by the Hon'ble Lahore high Court, 

Lahore in case Mian Abdul Waheed VS Additional Sessions Judge. 

Lahore  and  seyen  others  (2011  P.Cr.L.j  438).  In  any  case,  the 

allegations  leveled against the  accused persons  by the  petitioner 

cannot  be  addressed  by  this  Court  while  exercising  its  extra 

ordinary  constitutional  jurisdiction,  as  the  same  entail  a  factual 

inquiry. 

11.  For what  has been  discussed  hereinabove,  learned  counsel 

for  the  petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  or 

irregularity  in the impugned order  calling for interference  by this 

Court  in  its  constitutional  jurisdiction.  Resultantly,  the  instant 

petition having no force, is dismissed. 

lGffilLAM; rBRANI) 

JUDG 

ANNOUNCED  IN  OPEN  COURT  ON  /I-),  /2020 

•Rana.M.Ift" 

-JUDGE 

