ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.1454/2019 
Syed Ali Ahmad Shah Shamsi 
VS
Judge Family Court, Islamabad and others.  

Petitioner: 

In person.  

Respondents No. 2 & 3 by:  Mr. Muhammad Usman Shahzad 

Khanzada, Advocate.  

Date of Decision: 

17.02.2021 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  This petition is challenging the 

order dated 07.03.2019, passed by learned Family Judge/Guardian Judge, 

1st  Class  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  half  net  salary  of  the  judgment 

debtor was attached.    

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  this  case  are  that  respondent  No.2/Mst. 

Sajiha  Shah  and  her  daughter  Noor  Fatima  (minor)  filed  suit  for 

Dissolution of Marriage, Recovery of Maintenance Allowance and Dowry 

Articles,  which  was  decreed  by  the  Judge  Family  Court,  Sahiwal  vide 

judgment  and  decree  dated  16.06.2015  and  the  execution  has  been 

transmitted  to  this  Court  as  the  petitioner  is  serving  as  employee  of  the 

Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan.  During  the  course  of  execution 

proceedings,  the  objections  were  filed  by  the  petitioner,  whereby 

attachment  of  half  basic  salary  of  judgment  debtor  was  ordered  on 

18.07.2018, but the same was not given effect till passing of the impugned 

order due to a clerical mistake in the order of attachment of salary, where 

Rs. 400/- has been referred and the learned Executing Court rectified the 

order. 

 
 
 
W.P. No.1454/2019  

        Page 2 

3. 

Petitioner in person contends that his counsel is not available due 

to strike, however, he has been given sufficient time to assist this Court or 

to  justify  his  contention,  but he  refused to argue his case,  therefore, this 

Court has no other option, but to proceed with the matter accordingly on 

the basis of record as well as on the basis of arguments of respondents.  

4. 

Learned counsel for respondents contends that instant writ petition 

is  not  competent  as  the  same  is  arising  out  of  the  interlocutory  order  of 

the  executing  Court  for  correction  only.  He  further  contends  that  the 

petitioner is not entitled for any discretionary relief as he has not come to 

this Court with clean hands, even has not been paid the due maintenance 

till  date,  despite  the  fact  that  judgment  passed  by  the  Family  Court  is 

against the petitioner.   

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard and record perused.  

Perusal of record reveals that sufficient opportunities were granted 

to  counsel for  petitioner  to argue his  case, even today  is the  11th date of 

hearing  qua  issue  relating  to  maintenance  of  minor,  hence  the  claim  of 

petitioner qua adjournment due to strike of the Lawyers is not accepted, 

even such conduct has been deprecated by the Courts of law. Reliance is 

placed upon 2017 MLD 535 [Lahore (Multan Bench)] (Asghar Ali VS The 

State  and  another)),  AIR  2000  Delhi  266  (Dr.  B.  L.  Wadehra  VS  State 

(NCT of Delhi) and others). 

7. 

Record further reveals that the judgment and decree was passed by 

learned Judge Family Court, Sahiwal against the petitioner on 16.06.2016, 

whereby the petitioner was directed to pay maintenance allowance to the 

minor daughter @Rs.4,000/- per month from the date of institution of the 

suit till solemnization of her marriage with 10% annual increment, but the 

same was not paid.   

 
W.P. No.1454/2019  

        Page 3 

8. 

During  the  course  of  execution  of  the  maintenance  decree,  the 

petitioner  has  raised  the  objection,  though  at  that  time  the  previous 

maintenance was calculated, even it has been observed in the impugned 

order  that  the  rate  of  monthly  maintenance  of  the  minor  is  more  than  

Rs. 5,000/- after application of 10% annual increment, but petitioner has 

not  paid  any  amount,  despite  the  fact  that  he  while  appearing  before 

Judge  Family  Court  in  response  to  non-bailable  warrants  of  arrest, 

undertook to pay the same as reflected from the orders dated 18.07.2018 

and  09.11.2018.  He  has  also  undertook  to  get  attached  his  half  of  the 

salary  voluntarily.  The  petitioner  is  employee  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  and  letter  has  also  been  addressed  from  Registrar, 

Supreme Court of Pakistan, whereby a clarification has been sought from 

the  Family  Court  regarding  attachment  of  "

or 

    as 

reflected  from  letter  dated  13.03.2019,  therefore,  all  these  aspects  were 

considered  by  the  learned  Executing  Officer  and  it  has  specifically  been 

ordered  that  from  onwards  the  half  net  pay  of  judgment  debtor  will  be 

attached  for  payment  of  outstanding  decretal  amount  with  reference  to 

monthly maintenance of the minor. As such this aspect demonstrates that 

it is an interlocutory order, whereby writ petition is not competent, even 

otherwise,  there  is  no  illegality  in  the  impugned  order,  which  has  been 

passed within four corners of law. 

9. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  writ  petition  stands 

DISMISSED.  Copy  of  this  judgment  be  sent  to  learned  Judge  Family 

Court for further necessary action. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

                                 JUDGE 

RAMZAN 

 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
