ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLA]UIABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAi'IABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Crl. M isc.  N o.294-Bl2O1  I
AbdulWahab
VS
The State and another

S. No. oforder  /
proceedinos

Date of order/
Proceedinos
28.05.2019 M/s lmran Ullah Khan and Mian Saifullah,

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties  or
counsel  where  necessa

Advocates for the peUtloner
Mr. Sadaqat All Jahangir,  learned State
Gounsel wlth Yaseen S.l.
Mr. Mohsln Khan Abbasl, Advocate for
respondent  No.2laomplalnant
Through  the 

instant  criminal
miscellaneous  application, the petitioner, Abdul
Wahab, seeks post-arrest bail in case F.l.R.
No.29, dated 2'a.O',.2019,  under  Sections  406,
448, 506(ii), 511, '148, 149 and 109 of the
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (,'P.P.C.")  registered
at Police  Station Khanna, lslamabad.
2.  Earlier the petitioner's post-arrest  bail
petitions were dismissed by the learned  Courts
below, vide orders dated 03.04.2019 and
19.O4.2O19.  Thereafter,  the petitioner filed the
instant petition for post-arrest bai!.
3.  Learned  counsel 
the
accused/petitioner submitted  that the petitioner
has falsety been implicated in this case; that the
possession of house in question was not
forcibly  taken by the petitioner from the
complainant; that the petitioner sold the house
in question  to the complainant's wife vide
registered  sale deed dated  26.09.2018 and its
possession was also given to her; that no
recovery of firearm was effected from the
petitioner;  that in the FlR, no specific role has
been ascribed to the petitioner; that from the

for 

2

Crl.Misc.No  .29  4-B / 20 19

contents of the FlR, the alleged  offences  do not
attract  in the petitioner's case; that there is a
substantial delay in lodging the FIR; that the
offences  alleged to have been committed  by the
petitioner do not fall within the ambit of the
prohibitory clause of Section  497 of the Criminal
Procedure Code,  1898 ("Cr.P.C."); and that the
petitioner is in judicial custody  since 24.03.2019
and not required for any further  investigation.
Learned  counsel for the petitioner  prayed  for
the petition to be allowed and for the petitioner
to be released on bail.
4.  On the other hand, learned counsel  for the
complainanUrespondent  No.2 assisted by
learned State  Counsel, vehemently opposed the
petition by stating that the petitioner  is
nominated in the FIR and the role ascribed  to
him was that he, in connivance  with other co-
accused, after selling the four marla single
storey house in khasra No.2763 situated  at
Khanna Dak Tehsil  and District, lslamabad, to
the complainant's wife, tried to dispossess  the
complainant and his family from their house;
that the petitioner is a member ol qabza mafia
and in order to dispossess  the complainant  and
his family, on 23.11.2018,  co-accused  Majid
made a telephonic  call to the complainant and
extended him threats to  handover the
possession  of the house  in question;  and that on
24.11.2018, co-accused  Majid and five/six
unknown persons along with firearms came to
the complainanfs house and again extended
the complainant and his wife threats of dire
consequences and  directed them  to
immediately  leave the house and its possession

3

Crl.Misc.No  .29  4 -B /20 19

be given to them. Learned counsel  prayed for
the bail petition to be dismissed.
I  have heard the contentions  of the
5. 
learned counsel for the contesting  parties and
perused  the record with their able assistance.
6.  Brief facts as stated in the FIR are that the
complainant  had purchased a house measuring
four marlas in khasra  No.2763  situated at
Khanna DakTehsil and District lslamabad from
co-accused Muhammad Fayyaz vide iqrarnama
against the sale consideration of Rs.21,00,000/-.

It is also reported  in the FIR that the said house
was mutated/transferred  in the name of the
complainant's wife by the accused/petitioner
(Abdul Wahab), vide registered  sale deed
No.16263, dated 26.09.2018.  On 23.11.2018, co-
accused  Majid made a telephonic  call to the
complainant  and extended threats to him of dire
consequences  in case he failed to hand over the
possession of the house in question.  On
24.11.2018, said Majid and five/six other
unknown persons  came to the complainant's
house and extended  threats again and tried to
dispossess  the complainant and his family from

their house.
7.  Perusal of  the FIR shows that the
complainant  had purchased the house  in
question through co-accused  Muhammad
Fayyaz  Khan against the sale consideration  of
Rs.21,00,000/-.  As per the contents  of the FlR,
the said house was in the name of the
accused/petitioner, who transferred/mutated
the same in the name of the complainant's  wife
vide registered sale deed No.16263, dated
26.09.2018. The photocopy  of  the  said
registered  sale deed was appended  with the

4

Crl.Misc.No  .29  4 -B  120 L9

record  on the basis of which the complainant
claims to be the owner  of the house  in question.
The role ascribed to the accused/petitioner  in
the FIR was apparently  that an iqrarnama was
executed  between  co-accused Muhammad
Fayyaz  Khan and the complainant  and as a
result,  the accused/petitioner  (Abdul Wahab)
transferred the land in question in the name  of
the complainant's  wife vide registered  sale
deed referred to  above. As regards  the
complainant's  contention 
that
accused/petitioner  in connivance  with other co-
accused after selling the house in question
extended threats to the complainant and his
family of dire conseguences  so as to deprive
them of the house  in question,  there is no direct
allegation  levelled in the FIR against the
accused/petitioner that he either extended
threats of dire consequences  or even attempted
to dispossess  them from the house in question.
Undoubtedly,  the house  in question has a long
chequered  history as revealed  through  the
report dated 17.01.2019, which was sent by
D.S.P./S.D.P.O.  Shehzad Town Circle to the
Superintendent  of  Police Rural Zone,
lslamabad. The said report further shows that
house in question  was earlier sold to different
persons,  including the complainant who also
claims to be its owner  on the basis of registered
sale deed referred to above. The record also
shows that civil litigation in respect of the house
in question  is also pending  before  the learned
Civil Court. There is nothing on the record  to
show that the petitioner  had made any effort to
forcibly dispossess the complainant  and his
family from the house.  Even otherwise, there is

5

Crl.Mi  sc.No  .29  4 -B  120  19

an unexplained delay of more than one and a
half  month in  lodging the  FlR. The
accused/petitioner's connivance  with the co-
accused  Majid, who was alleged to  have
extended  threats to the complainant and his
family in order to dispossess them of their
house,  and all the accused belonged lo a qabza
mafia are yet to be proved at the trial stage. As
such, in  the circumstances of  the case
mentioned above, I have found the case against
the petitioner,  in my tentative assessment  of the
material  placed  on record,  as one of further
inquiry as envisaged under subsection (2) of
Section 497 Cr.P.C. The petitioner  has
remained  incarcerated since 24.03.2019 and
the investigation  is  said to  have been
completed.
8. 
ln this view of the matter, the instant
petition is allowed and the petitioner  is admitted
to bail subject to furnishing  of bail bonds  in the
sum of Rs.10,00,000/- with two sureties in the
like amount to the satisfaction of the learned
Trial Court. lt is clarified that the observations
made herein above are tentative in nature and
the same shall not prejudice either party during
the course of the trial. The grant of bail is also
subject to the condition that the petitioner shall
appear on each and every date of hearing
before  the learned Trial Court unless exempted
by the learned Trial Court. ln case, the
petitioner fails to appear before the learned
Trial Court on any date of hearing,  the bail shall

stand cancelled.

Qamar Khan*

(MTANGUL

GZEB)

JUDGE

