ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Crl. Appeal No.23 of 2019 

Mst. Hafsa Babar 
VS
Advanced Diagnostic Centre, etc 

Appellant  by: 

M/s  Muhammad  Asif  and  Muhammad 
Furqan Shabbir, Advocates. 

Respondents No.1 to  3  by:  Mian Ahmed Khan; Advocate. 
Respondent No.4 by: 
Respondent No.5 by: 

Mr. Obaid Ullah, Advocate. 
Mr. Arif Saeed Qureshi, Advocate 

Date of  Hearing: 

08.09.2020. 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambranl,  J: -  Through the  instant appeal 

the appellant has made the following prayer:- 

"In  view  of  the  above  it  is  most  respectfully  prayed 
from  this Honorable Court that:- 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

the 

the  fees  for  multiple  blood 

The  instant  appeal  is  kindly  accepted  and  the 
impugned judgement  is set aside; 
The respondent  No.1,  2  and  3  are  penalized  as 
envisaged  under 
Islamabad  Consumer 
Protection Act, 1995; 
The  appellant  is  kindly  awarded  compensation 
for 
tests  she 
undertook  as  well as  the  hassle; mental  torture, 
stress and danger she  underwent  at the hands of 
the respondent  No.1, 2 and 3; 
The appellant  is  also  awarded  damages  for  the 
said 
victimization  and 
respondents  as  well as  the  danger  that  she  was 
exposed to at the hands of the said  respondents 
The appellant  may  be  awarded  any  other  relief 
that  this  Honorable Court deems  fit  and just  in 
the interest of justice, equity and fair play." 

illegal  act  of 

the 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  appellant  filed  a 

Consumer  Complaint  against 

the  respondents  under  the 

Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1995  against  the  illegal 

acts and  unfair trade practices of respondents  No.1  to 3  stating 

therein  that  she  approached  respondents  No.1  to  3  for  her 

2 

Crl. Appeal  No.23 of 2019 

blood test and respondent No.1  prepared the laboratory reports 

and delivered the same to the appellant on 29.08.2017 with the 

report "Negative". The appellant being sensitive about the child, 

went  to  another  Laboratory  i.e.  Excel  Labs,  respondent  No.4, 

on  30.08.2017  to  get  another  report of the  said  blood test  and 

the  result  of  the  said  laboratory was  completely  opposite; that 

the  appellant  again  to  her satisfaction,  got  her  blood test from 

Islamabad  Diagnostic  Centre,  respondent  No.5  on  01.09.2017 

and  the  test  report  of  said  laboratory  confirmed  the  report  of 

respondent  No.4.  Being  aggrieved, 

the  appellant 

filed 

Complaint  under  Consumer  Protection  Act,  Islamabad,  1995 

before  the 

learned  Consumer  Court,  Additional  Sessions 

Judge,  Islamabad, but the learned Judge Consumer Court after 

hearing the  learned counsels for the parties held that the above 

mentioned  offences  are triable  by  Magistrate  and  directed that 

the file  be sent to the  concerned  Magistrate for  the  purpose of 

trial  and fixed  the  next date  as  07.11.2018.  Feeling aggrieved, 

the appellant has filed the instant appeal. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  she 

moved  from  one  lab to  another  due  to  the  act  of  respondents 

No.1 

to  3;  the  whole  family  of  the  appellant  suffered  mental 

torture  whereas  respondent  No.1 

is  not  actually  having  the 

facility  of  such  test,  but  this  factum  was  not  disclosed  to  the 

appellant. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents 

vehemently  opposed  the  arguments  advanced  by  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  appellants  contending  that  the  respondents 

have  purchased  the  said  laboratory  on  18.11.2017,  whereas 

the  complaint  has been filed  by the  name  of accused  persons, 

hence the instant appeal is  not maintainable against them. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Before proceeding further with the main case, in  intend to 

decide the instant  C.M No.02 of 2019 . 

3 

en. Appeal  No.23 of 2019 

7. 

This  is  an  application  for  condonation  of  delay  under 

Section  5  of  the  Limitation  Act,  1908.  This  application  was 

contested by the learned counsel for the respondent contending 

that  the  appeal  has  been  filed  after  an 

inordinate  and 

unexplained  delay  of  21  days.  The  record  reveals  that  the 

instant  appeal  has  been  filed  on  01.12.2018  against  the 

judgement  dated  22.09.2018  but  the  diary  branch  raised 

various  objections  including  that  the  object  appeal  is  time 

barred  for  21  days.  This  objection  is  misconceived.  The 

judgement  was  passed  on  22.09.2018.  The  application  for 

obtaining  certified  copies  of  said  judgement  was  filed  on 

09.10.2018  which  was  ready  on  27th  October  2018  but  the 

appellant  was  not  informed  by  the  Copying  Agency  about  the 

preparation  of  the  certified  judgment.  Whereas,  the  appellant 

received the  certified  copy of the  impugned judgement  on  19th 

November  2018,  as  such,  all  the  circumstances  were  beyond 

control  of  the  appellant,  therefore,  the  time  consumed  in 

obtaining  the  certified  copy  of  judgement  was  beyond  the 

control  of  the  appellant,  therefore,  keeping  in  view  the  above 

facts  and  circumstances,  the  delay  caused  in  filing  the  instant 

appeal  after  21  days  is  condoned.  For the  reasons  mentioned 

in  the  application,  supported  by  an  affidavit,  the  same  is 

allowed.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon  the  case 

reported  as  "Shujahat  Hussain  VSMuhammad  Habib And 

Another'  (  2013  SCMR  176)  wherein,  it  has  been  held  as 

under:- 

reveals 

judgment 

A  perusal  of  impugned 
that 
petitioner  could not  get relief, as  application filed  by 
him  under  section  115,  C.P.C.  being  revision petition 
was  found  to  be  barred  by  time  because  petitioner 
was not held entitled for exclusion of the  time spent  in 
obtaining  certified  copies  of  the  judgment  under 
section  12(2)  of  the  Limitation  Act.  In  this  behalf 
reliance  was  placed  by  the  High  Court  on  the 
judgment  in  the  case of Said Muhammad  (ibid). There 
is  no  cavil with  the  proposition  that  under subsection 
(2) of section  12  of the  Limitation Act,  time  spent  in 
obtaining  certified copies of the judgment  for tiling of 
revision  petition  is  not  excluded  and  this  view  is 
prevailing  when  a judgment  in  the  case  of  Tahir Ali 
and others  v.  Chief Judge, Karachi Small Causes Court, 

4 

Crl. Appeal  No.23 of 2019 

Karachi  and  another  (PLO  1960  Karachi  795}  was 
pronounced  by the High Court of Sindh. However, even 
then  implication of subsection  (1)  of section  12 of the 
Limitation Act was not  considered, according to which 
in  computing  the  period  of  limitation  prescribed for 
any  suit,  appeal  or  application  the  day  from  which 
such period is  to be reckoned shall be excluded.  There 
is  no  doubt  that  by  invoking revisional jurisdiction  of 
the  High Court, an application is  moved  under section 
115,  C.P.C.,  therefore,  in  the  instant  case  one  of the 
question  for  consideration  would  be  as  to  whether 
time  spent 
in  obtaining  certified  copies  of  the 
documents  for filing  of  an  application  under  section 
115,  C.P.C.  (revision  petition)  cannot  be  excluded 
under ,subsection  (1).  of section  12  of the  Limitation 
Act.  Besides it,  there  would be  another  aspect  of the 
case  namely  assuming  that  neither  subsection  (1) nor 
subsection  (2) of section 12 -of the Limitation Act were 
attracted  and  as  per  proviso  of  subsection  (1)  of 
section  115,  C.P.C:,  if  revision  was  filed  beyond  the 
period  of 90  days,  Court had  powers  to  condone  the 
delay in  view of the judgment  of this Court in  the  case 
of  Mian  Muhammad  v.  Syed  Shamimullah  and  2 
others  1995 SCMR 69 wherein Mr. Justice Abdul Qadir 
Chaudhry (as then  he  was) speaking  on  behalf  of the 
Bench observed that revision even though filed beyond 
the  period of 90 days could, however,  be  entertained, 
if Court was satisfied as to the reasons for delay. 

Main Case:- 

8. 

From perusal of the record, it transpires that the appellant 

approached  respondent  No.1  for  a  laboratory  test  of  R.H. Anti 

Bodies  and  the  report  given  by  the  respondent  No.1  showed 

the  R.H.  Antibody 

"Negative".  Thereafter, 

the  appellant 

approached  Excel Labs/ respondent  No.4 for  the  said test  and 

the  report  received  by  the  appellant  was  shocking  because  it 

was totally  opposite to that of the  result showed  by respondent 

No.1.  The  appellant  being  worried  again  approached  for  the 

said test from  Islamabad Diagnostic Center  and the  result was 

same  as  given  by  respondent  No.4.  Perusal  of  the  record 

further  reveals that respondent No.1  is  not having the facility of 

test  relating  to  R.H.  Anti  Bodies  and  without  having  the  said 

facility they have issued, prima facie, forged and fictitious report 

to the  appellant, which falls within the  definition  of  professional 

misconduct  and  the  jurisdiction  for  the  said  offence  lying  with 

5 

Crl. Appeal  No.23 of 2019 

the  Consumer  Court.  Islamabad  Consumer  Protection  Act, 

1995 has been enacted to provide an efficacious remedy to the 

customer for  effective  redressal of  his grievance  and to  protect 

the  society  from  exploitation,  therefore,  such  enactment  must 

be  given  purposive  interpretation  keeping  in  view  its  basic 

intent. As per Section 5  of the Islamabad Consumers Protection 

Act,  1995, it  is  mandatory for the Consumer Court to decide the 

controversy  and  penalized  the  offender  where  infringement  of 

rights protected  under Section 5  is  established  whereas,  under 

Section  6  (1)  of  the  Act,  ibid,  the  authority  is  to  receive  the 

complaints  for  the  purpose  of  investigation  and  determination. 

And  as  per  Section  9  of  the  Act,  ibid,  it  is  not  discretionary 

rather  mandatory on the  authority to  penalized the  responsible 

where  the  authority is  of the  opinion that a  right of a  consumer 

protected under the Act has been infringed. For ready reference 

Sections 5,  6  (1) and 9 are reproduced hereunder:- 

5. Objects and /unctions  of the  Council, etc.-- (1) The 
objects  and  functions  of  the  Council shall  be  to 
determine, 
rights  of 
promote 
consumers, including-- 

and  protect 

( a) the right of protection  against marketing 
of  goods  which  are  hazardous  to  life  and 
property; 

(b)  the  right  of  information  about 
the 
quality,  quantity,  potency,  purity,  standard 
and price of goods and services; 

(c)  the  right of access  to  a  variety of goods 
at competitive  prices; 

(d) the right for  redress against  unfair trade 
practices  of  unscrupulous  exploitation  of 
consumers; 

(e) the right of Consumers' education; and 

(f) the  right of easy  availability of essential 
services. 

(2)  The Council shall be  responsible for formulation 
of  the  policies for  promotion  and  protection  of the 
rights of consumers, fair  and  honest  trade  practices 
by  the  manufacturers,  producers  and  suppliers  of 
goods  and  services 
interest  of 
consumers and their effective  implementation; 

in  relation 

to 

6 

Crl. Appeal  No.23 of 2019 

{3}  For promotion  and protection  of the  interests  of 
consumers,  the Council shall coordinate between  the 
Government,  manufacturers,  producers,  suppliers 
and consumers. 

6.  Authority.--(1)  The  Authority  shall  receive 
complaints  of  the  consumers  and  those  made  on 
investigation  and 
behalf  of 
determination  thereof. 

the  council  for 

(2)  The  Police,  Capital Development  Authority  and 
other  agencies  of  the  Federal  Government  and 
Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Administration  shall 
act  -  in  aid  of the  Authority for performance  of its 
functions  under this Act. 

9.  Penalties.--(1)  Where  any  right  of  consumer 
required to be protected  under section 5 of the Act is 
in  any way infringed, the person responsible for such 
infringement  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment 
which may  extend  to  two  years,  or with fine  which 
may extend  to forty  thousand  rupees, or with both. 

(2)  Whoever  makes  advertisement  through  print  of 
electronic  media  or by  chalking  on  walls or  in  any 
other  manner  in  contravention  of section  7,  he shall 
be punished  with imprisonment  which may extend  to 
two  years,  or  with fine  which may  extend  to  thirty 
thousand  rupees, or with both. 

{3}  The Authority  may,  where  it  deems  appropriate, 
order for payment  of compensation  to the  consumer 
to the extent  the consumer has suffered  any damage 
or loss through any unfair trade practice. 

(4) The Authority may,  where it deems  necessary for 
protection  of the rights of other consumers, order for 
confiscation  of any  goods  or  material  or  direct for 
their destruction. 

9. 

In  view of the above facts and circumstances,  it  is a  case 

of  professional  misconduct, which falls within  the jurisdiction  of 

the  Consumer  Court,  therefore,  the  instant  appeal  is  allowed 

and  the  impugned  order  dated  22.09.2018  passed  by  the 

learned  Authority  under  the  Islamabad  Consumers  Protection 

Act,  1995  is  hereby  set-aside.  The  case  is  remanded  to  the 

learned  Authority  under  the  Islamabad  Consumers  Protection 

Act,  1995 for decision of the case after recording of evidence of 

7 

Crl.  Appeal  No.23 of 2019 

both  the  parties  within  a  period  of  two  months  after  receipt  of 

certified copy of this judgment. 

-etultlm  Aiam Qa~nl 

Judge 

Announced in  Open Court, on  this~/020. 

