Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W. P. No.2974/2016 

Mahera Sajid 

VS

Station House Officer, Police Station Shalimar & 6 others 

Petitioner by 

:  Mr  Umer Ijaz Gillani, Advocate. 

Mr Muhammad Haider Imtiaz, Advocate. 
Mr Waleed Bin Usman, Advocate.  

Respondents by 

:  Raja Khalid Mehmood, Deputy Attorney General. 
Kh. Muhammad Imtiaz, Asstt. Attorney General. 
Mr Umar Hanif Khichi, Advocate. 

Mr Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC (Amicus). 
Mr Babar Sattar, ASC (Amicus). 
Mr Tariq Mehmood Jehangiri, ASC (Amicus). 

Sheikh Zubair, S.P. Investigations, Mr Azhar Shah, 
DSP/Legal, Mr Abid Ikram, SHO, PS Shalimar for 
Islamabad Capital Territory Police.   

Date of Hearing 

:  11-05-2018. 

ATHAR MINALLAH, J.-  The  petitioner,  namely  Mahera 

Sajid,  wife  of  Sajid  Mehmood,  has  invoked  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Constitution’)  asserting  that  the  failure  on  the  part  of  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-2- 

respondents  and  other  State  functionaries  to fulfill  their  obligations 

has led to the grave violation of her fundamental rights, which have 

been  guaranteed  to  every  person  or  citizen  by  the  framers  of  the 

Constitution.  She  has  also  asserted  that  the  fundamental  rights  of 

her  husband,  namely  Sajid  Mehmood,  son  of  Capt.  Dilawar  Khan 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Detenu’),  their  three  young 

daughters and other family members have  also been breached and 

violated.  She  has,  therefore,  invoked  the  constitutional  jurisdiction 

of this Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights  guaranteed 

under the Constitution.  

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  the  petitioner  and  her 

husband  i.e.  the  Detenu,  are  engineers  by  profession  and  duly 

registered  as  such  by  the  Pakistan  Engineering  Council.  After  tying 

the  knot  they  were  blessed  with  three  daughters,  namely,  Hanaa 

Sajid, Aymun Sajid and Haadiya Sajid who, at the time of filing this  

constitutional  petition,  were  08,  13  and  14  years  old  respectively. 

The  Detenu  was  the  sole  bread  earner  of  the  family  and  his  aging 

parents were also dependent on him. The Detenu was self employed 

and  was, 

inter  alia,  engaged  in  the  business  of  software 

development.  The  family  appears  to  have  been  living  happily  in 

House  No.13-B,  Street  No.29,  Sector  F-10/1,  Islamabad.  There  is 

nothing on record to show that the Detenu was ever involved in any 

illegal activity, let alone a crime. There is also nothing on  record to 

even  remotely  indicate  that  he  had  any  enmity  or  that  he  was 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-3- 

involved  in  politics  or  had  any  connection  with  any  crime.  The 

petitioner  and  the  Detenu  had  established  a  firm  in  order  to  carry 

on  their  lawful  business  of  software  development  which  was  duly 

registered  with  the  Pakistan  Software  Export  Board.  The  petitioner 

asserts that on 14-03-2016, around a dozen men, who had come in 

two  vehicles  described  as  "double  cabins",  forcefully  entered  their 

house.  Some  were  wearing  masks  while  others  were  in  uniform, 

which  according  to  the  petitioner  resembled  that  of  the  special 

police  force.  After  forcefully  entering  the  house  they  searched  the 

premises  and  forcibly  abducted  the  Detenu.  They  also  took  with 

them  computers/laptops,  cell  phones  and  some  documents.  The 

crime scene was the home of the petitioner and the Detenu, which 

is  situated  in  an  upscale  developed  and  populated  sector  of  the 

Capital  of  Pakistan  i.e.  Islamabad.  The  incident  had  taken  place  at 

06:00 p.m. on 14-03-2016. It is the case of the petitioner that since 

the persons who had forcibly taken her husband appeared to belong 

to  some  security  or  law  enforcing  agency  of  the  State,  therefore, 

she  expected 

that  she  would  be 

informed  regarding  his 

whereabouts.  However,  when  no  information  was  received  till  the 

next morning she filed a formal written complaint on 15-03-2016 at 

the  Police  Station  Shalimar,  F-10,  Islamabad.  Admittedly,  the 

detailed  narration  in  the  written  report  was  entered  in  the  Daily 

Diary  as  rapat  no.45,  dated  15-03-2016.  However,  a  criminal  case 

was  not  registered  as  mandated  under  section  154  of  the  Code  of 

Criminal Procedure, 1898 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Cr. P. C.’) 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-4- 

and  thus  investigations  were  not  carried  out.  The  father  of  the 

Detenu,  namely,  Capt.  Dilawar  Khan  filed  a  complaint  on  18-06-

2016  with  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  on  Enforced  Disappearance 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Commission’).  Pursuant  to  the 

direction given by the Commission a criminal case was registered on 

05-07-2016  i.e.  FIR  No.216,  dated  05-07-2016,  at  the  Police 

Station  Shalimar,  Islamabad.  The  record  shows  that  a  Joint 

Investigation  Team  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘JIT’)  was  also 

constituted.  When  no  positive  response  was  forthcoming  despite 

registration  of  a  criminal  case  and  constitution  of  the  JIT,  the 

petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of 

the Constitution by filing the instant petition on 03-08-2016. 

3. 

Pursuant  to  directions  given  by  this  Court,  written 

reports were filed by  the respondents. Respondents no.6 and 7 i.e. 

the  Inter  Services  Intelligence  and  the  Military  Intelligence 

submitted their respective reports through the Secretary, Ministry of 

Defence.  The  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior  was  also  directed  vide 

order,  dated  21-09-2016,  to  submit  a  written  report,  inter  alia, 

identifying  the  officials  who  had  failed  to  protect  a  citizen  of 

Pakistan  from  being  abducted  and  thereafter  refusing  to  register  a 

criminal case or to investigate the alleged crime in accordance with 

the law.  

 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-5- 

4. 

Mr Tariq Mehmood Jehangiri, ASC, who at the time was 

President,  Islamabad  High  Court  Bar  Association,  Mr  Babar  Sattar, 

ASC  and  Mr  Ahmer  Bilal  Sufi,  ASC  were  appointed  as  amici  curiae 

vide  order,  dated  06-10-2016.  This  Court  had  enquired,  vide  order 

dated  18-11-2016,  whether  the  Incharge  of  the  Police  Station  who 

had  refused/failed  in  his  duty  to  register  a  criminal  case,  was 

proceeded  against.  An  explanation  in  this  regard  was  sought  from 

the  Inspector  General  of  Police,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  The 

respondents  were  reminded  regarding  their  obligations  in  the  light 

of the law laid down by the august Supreme Court in the case titled 

‘Muhammad  Bashir  v.  Station  House  Officer,  Okara  Cantt.  and 

others’ [PLD 2007 SC 539]. It was after the passing of the aforesaid 

order  that  show  cause  notices  ,  dated  28-11-2016,  were  issued 

against  Mr  Qaiser  Niaz  Gillani,  Inspector  and  Manzoor  Ahmed,  ASI 

respectively who, at the time of filing the complaint were posted at 

the  Police  Station  Shalimar.  Both  were  found  guilty  of  having 

committed  misconduct  and  were  handed  down 

the  minor 

punishment  of  'forfeiture  of  one  year  approved  service'  vide  order 

dated  02-06-2017  respectively.  A  written  report  was  submitted  by 

the  Assistant  Inspector  General  of  Police  (Operations)  on  behalf  of 

the  Inspector  General  of  Police,  wherein  details  regarding  progress 

made in the course of investigations were mentioned. Copies of the 

letters written to various other officials were also attached with the 

written  report  which  clearly  establishes  that  they  were  sent  after 

the  filing  of  the  instant  petition  and  the  issuance  of  notices  to  the 

 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-6- 

respondents. Moreover, regarding the proceedings conducted by the 

JIT,  it  was  stated  that  some  meetings  were  held  and  minutes 

relating to only two meetings i.e. 21-01-2017 and 16-05-2017 were 

attached  with  the  report.  The  minutes  of  the  meeting  held  on  16-

05-2017 explicitly acknowledges that it was the first meeting of the 

'senior  JIT'.  In  the  written  report  it  was  also  mentioned  that  the 

Inspector General of Police, Islamabad Capital Territory had chaired 

a meeting with the members of the JIT and it was concluded that it 

was a case of “enforced disappearance”. It is noted that the JIT was 

headed by a senior officer of the Islamabad Capital Territory Police 

and,  inter  alia,  included  representatives  of  the  three  intelligence 

agencies, namely,  Intelligence Bureau, Military Intelligence and the 

Inter  Services  Intelligence.  All  the  members  of  the  JIT,  except  the 

representative  of  the  Military  Intelligence,  had  unanimously 

concluded that it was a case of “enforced disappearance”. However, 

the representative of the Military Intelligence  had not recorded any 

reason  to  disagree  with  the  other  members.  On  11-04-2017  the 

Secretary,  Ministry  of  Interior  and  a  Senior  Joint  Secretary  of  the 

Ministry  of  Defence  appeared  along  with  the  learned  Additional 

Attorney General and sought time in order to make efforts to trace 

the  whereabouts  of  the Detenu.  A  written  report  was  submitted  by 

the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Defence  stating  therein  that  the 

intelligence  agencies,  under  the  administrative  control  of  his 

Ministry, had confirmed that the Detenu was not in their custody.  

 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-7- 

5. 

The petitioner, through an application, prayed that since 

the  State  had  failed  in  its  duty  to  protect  fundamental  rights 

guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  or  to  trace  her  husband, 

therefore,  the  respondents  be  held  responsible  and  that  she  and  

her three young  daughters be directed to be compensated because 

it was an acknowledged fact that the sole bread earner of the family 

was  a  victim  of  involuntary  disappearance.  She  demanded  that 

since  she  and  her  children  were  suffering  solely  because  of  failure 

on  the  part  of  the  State  and  its  functionaries  to  protect  their 

fundamental  rights,  therefore,  the latter  be  directed  to  pay  for  the 

day  to  day  expenses  and  put  her  and  the  three  young  children  in 

the  same  position  in  which  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  'enforced 

disappearance'  of  the  Detenu.  She  also  gave  a  break  up  of  her 

expenses which amounted to Rs.117,500/- per month. None of the 

respondents  have  contested  the  said  breakup  of  the  amount  of 

expenses demanded by the petitioner. It is her case that she has no 

independent  source  of  income  and  that  the  Detenu  was  the  sole 

income earner of the household.  

6. 

This  Court,  after  going  through  the  record  and  reports 

filed  by  the  respondents,  directed  the latter  to  identify  the  officials 

who  were  posted  as  Chief  Commissioner,  District  Magistrate, 

Inspector General of Police, Superintendent of Police, Sub Divisional 

Police  Officer  and  the  Incharge  of  Police  Station  on  the  day  the 

Detenu  was  alleged  to  have  been  taken  and  the  Police  Station, 

 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-8- 

despite  having  received  a  written  complaint,  preferred  not  to 

respond.  They  were  directed  to  submit  their  respective  affidavits 

explaining  as  to  why  they  may  not  be  held  responsible  for  the 

obvious failure on their part in protecting the fundamental rights of  

citizens  and  for  failure  to  fulfill  their  obligations  towards  the 

petitioner, her daughters and the Detenu. Pursuant to the direction 

of this Court, Mr Zulfiqar Haider, Mr Khalid Khan Khattak, Capt. (R) 

Mushtaq  Ahmed,  Mr  Bilal  Zafar  Sheikh  and  Mr  Qaiser  Niaz  who,  at 

the  relevant  time  i.e.  on  14-03-2016,  were  posted  as  Chief 

Commissioner,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  Inspector  General  of 

Police,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  District  Magistrate,  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory,  Sub  Divisional  Police  Officer  and  Incharge  Police 

Station  Shalimar,  respectively  submitted  separate  affidavits  under 

oath.  The  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Defence  also  filed  his  affidavit. 

None took responsibility for the failure of the criminal justice system 

in  responding  to  the  plight  of  the  petitioner.  Not  a  single  official 

referred  to  obligations 

imposed  upon  him  under  the 

law. 

Interestingly,  every  official  has  tried  to  be  evasive  and  shift  the 

blame  on  others.  Most  of  them  have  taken  the  plea  that  they  had 

not  been  informed  regarding  the  incident  nor  was  a  written 

complaint  filed  till  15-03-2016  by  the  petitioner.  It  is  ironic  that 

most  of  these  public  functionaries,  who  were  holding  some  of  the 

highest  offices  of  the  State,  have  not  hesitated  in  blaming  the 

petitioner  for  failing  to  properly  pursue  her  written  complaint.  Mr 

Khalid  Khan  Khattak,  who  at  that  time  was  holding  the  post  of 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-9- 

Acting Inspector General of Police in addition to the post of Deputy 

Inspector General, went to the extent of stating in his affidavit that 

he was only responsible for the general administration of  the police 

force  and  that  he  had  "kept  his  attention  mainly  towards  fulfilling 

his  job  related  issues  and  that  he  exercised  powers  of  Inspector 

General  of  Police  only  in  matters  of  "great  importance"'.  Likewise 

the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, in his affidavit, has accused the 

petitioner of making false assertions regarding the events of 14-03-

2016. The relevant portion of his affidavit is reproduced as follows.- 

“The  Hon’ble  Court  may  appreciate  that  the  alleged 

incident  took  place  during  day  time  on  14  March,  2016 

but  ironically  Police  Station  Shalimar,  Islamabad  which 

is  at  a  distance  of  5  minutes  from  the  place  of 

occurrence  was  not  informed.  The  Commission  and 

Islamabad  High  Court  were  also  approached  after  an 

inordinate  delay  of  about  5  months.  These  are  all 

factors,  which  create  suspicion  about  the  actual 

happening. Hence, the issue needs to be investigated at 

larger forum i.e. Senior JIT/PTF etc which fall under the 

domain  of  Commission  of 

Inquiry  on  Enforced 

Disappearances to determine the facts.” 

7. 

The three learned amici curiae have also submitted their 

respective reports. 

8. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  contended 

that; the respondents failed to fulfill their obligations imposed under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-10- 

the  law  and  have  breached  their  fiduciary  duties  towards  the 

petitioner, other immediate members of the family and the Detenu; 

it 

is  an  admitted  position  that 

it 

is  a  case  of  enforced 

disappearance; it is ironic that a criminal case was registered after a 

direction  was  issued  by  the  Commission  i.e.  after  a  lapse  of  more 

than  four  months;  even  after  registration  of  the  criminal  case,  the 

investigations  carried  out  were  only  an  eye  wash;  only  two 

meetings of the JIT were conducted; the disparity in the response of 

the  officials  in  the  case  of  a  similar  crime  committed  against  a 

privileged person or a member of the latter's family and against an 

ordinary  citizen  such  as  the  petitioner  is  obvious  from  the  conduct 

of  the  respondents  and  the  record;  letters  were  written  by  the 

respondents to other agencies and officials after the instant petition 

was  filed  and  notices  were  issued;  the  affidavit  filed  by  those 

holding the respective posts at the time  of the incident are evasive 

and  makes  a  mockery  of  the  criminal  justice  system;  the 

fundamental rights  guaranteed under Articles 9, 10, 10A and 23 of 

the  Constitution  have  been  violated.  The  Chief  Commissioner, 

District  Magistrate,  Inspector  General  of  Police,  Superintendent  of 

Police and the concerned Incharge of Police Station failed to perform 

their duties and fulfill obligations, inter alia, under the Police Rules, 

1934 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Police Rules’); the breach of 

duty and failure to fulfill obligations entrusted by the State  has led 

to  serious  violations  of  the  fundamental  rights,  not  only  of  the 

petitioner and the Detenue but their three young daughters as well; 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-11- 

the  officials  through  their  conduct  have  established  that  they  were 

complicit;  the  petitioner  and  members of  the  family  are  entitled  as 

of right to be put in the same financial position as they were  when 

the  incident  had  occurred  resulting  in  the  abduction  of  the  only 

bread  winner  of  the  family;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  several 

judgments cited in the written arguments. 

9. 

The  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  has  argued  that; 

disciplinary  action  has  been  taken  against  the  officials  who  were 

found responsible for the delay in registration of  the criminal case; 

penalties have been awarded against such officials; the matter was 

not properly pursued by the petitioner or  any other family member 

of  the  Detenu; the  petitioner is  not entitled to  compensation  as no 

such  policy  exists;  the  officials  of  the  civil  administration  of 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory  had  fulfilled  their  obligations  and, 

therefore,  they  cannot  be held  responsible  for  the  abduction  of  the 

Detenu;  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Police  Rules  prescribe  the 

responsibilities of the respondents, details whereof are mentioned in 

the written arguments. 

10. 

Mr  Umar  Hanif Khichi,  Advocate,  appeared  on  behalf  of 

Capt.  (R)  Mushtaq  Ahmed,  District  Magistrate,  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory and has argued that; the latter had fulfilled his obligations 

and  had  given  strict  directions  to  police  officials  to  conduct  proper 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-12- 

and  transparent  investigations;  as  District  Magistrate  he  has  no 

duty to get involved in the investigations.  

11. 

Mr  Tariq  Mehmood  Jehangiri,  ASC  assisting  as  amicus 

curiae  was  of  the  opinion  that  enforced  disappearance  is  a  serious 

offence  and  that  the  State  is  under  an  obligation  to  protect  and 

safeguard  the  life  and  liberty  of  a  citizen;  in  the  instant  case  the 

respondents have not been able to show that they had fulfilled their 

obligations in letter in spirit.  

12. 

Mr Babar Satar, ASC (amicus curiae) placed reliance on 

several judgments from Pakistan and foreign jurisdictions in support 

of  the  contention  that  in  an  appropriate  case,  particularly  when 

violation  of  fundamental  rights  stands  established,  constitutional 

Courts are empowered to direct that affected persons be adequately 

compensated  by  the  State  and  its  functionaries.  The  case  law  has 

been  cited  in  the  written  brief  which  was  made  part  of  the 

proceedings.  

13. 

Mr  Ahmer  Bilal  Sufi,  ASC  (amicus  curiae)  submitted  his 

amicus  brief  and  has  described 

in  detail  the  reasons 

for 

disappearances; he has explained that on the one hand the State is 

under  an  obligation  to  implement  the  United  Nations  Resolution 

No.1373  which  urges 

for  taking  effective  measures  against 

terrorism and terrorist acts and on the other the State is also under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-13- 

an  obligation  to  uphold  human  rights  as  enshrined  in  the 

International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights;  the  State 

functionaries  are in  a  difficult  situation  because  of  the  wide  spread 

terrorist  activities in  Pakistan;  Pakistan  is  passing  through  a  phase 

where  its  security  is  being  threatened;  this  factual  aspect  was 

acknowledged  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled 

‘District  Bar  Association,  Rawalpindi  and  others  v.  Federation  of 

Pakistan  and  others’  [PLD  2015  SC  401];  no  legislation  has  been 

enacted  keeping  in  view  Article  10(8)  of  the  Constitution;  various 

laws have been enacted whereby persons can be detained lawfully. 

14. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  and  the  learned 

Deputy  Attorney  General  have  been  heard  and  the  record  perused 

with their able assistance. Moreover, this Court has also benefited in 

rendering this judgment due to the briefs of the amici curiae.  

15. 

The  admitted  facts  are  that  the  petitioner  had  filed  a 

written  complaint  on  the  morning  of  15-03-2016  narrating  therein 

the  facts  regarding  the  alleged  abduction  of  her  husband  i.e.  the 

Detenu, the previous evening by persons who appeared to be State 

functionaries,  some  of  whom  were  in  the  uniform  of  some  law 

enforcing agency.  They searched the premises and took with them 

the Detenu, laptops,  cellular  phones  and  some  documents.  Despite 

the  graveness  of  the  alleged  incident,  the  details  whereof  were 

explicitly  mentioned  in  the  written  complaint,  the  then  Incharge  of 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-14- 

the  Police  Station,  namely,  Qaiser  Niaz  Gillani,  Inspector,  casually 

forwarded  the  same  to  Manzoor  Ahmed,  ASI.  The  latter  was 

satisfied with entering the narrated facts in the Daily Diary as rapat 

no.45,  dated  15-03-2016,  and  obviously  investigations  did  not 

ensue because a criminal case under section 154 of the Cr.P.C was 

not  registered.  The incident  which  allegedly  had  the  characteristics 

of an 'enforced disappearance' was not amongst the priorities of the 

administration  because  neither  the  Chief  Commissioner  nor  the 

Inspector  General  were  informed.  The  said  officials  also  appeared 

the  least  interested  in  knowing  about  the  crimes  taking  place  in 

their  jurisdiction  because  they  did  not  make  any  enquiry  nor  had 

they given instructions that they be kept informed. On 18-06-2016, 

the father of the Detenu approached the Commission and pursuant 

to the latter's direction a criminal case was registered, almost after 

four months from the date of occurrence.   

16. 

Perusal  of  written  reports,  affidavits  and  copies  of 

minutes of meetings placed on record, makes it obvious that the JIT 

had  held  only  two  meetings  i.e.  on  21-01-2017  and  16-05-2017. 

The Inspector General of Police had also held a meeting with the JIT 

and  except  for  the  representative  of  the  Military  Intelligence  all 

other members had concluded that abduction of the Detenue was  a 

case  of  ‘enforced  disappearance’.  The  officials  holding  respective 

public  offices  at  the  relevant  time  have  submitted  affidavits  and 

none  have  accepted  responsibility  for  the  delay  in  taking  timely 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-15- 

action  and  to  effectively  investigate  the  crime.  It  is  also  evident 

from the record that pursuant to registration of a criminal case that 

too after a considerable delay of almost four months from the date 

of  occurrence,  effective  investigations  were  not  conducted.  The 

criminal  justice  system  appears  to  have  become  active  when  the 

instant  petition  was  filed  but  remained  confined  to  writing  letters 

and holding of a few meetings. Some officials in their affidavits have 

tried  to  hold  the  petitioner  responsible  for  the  delay  because 

according  to  them  she  did  not  pursue  the  case.  The  Inspector 

General was of the view that abduction of a citizen from one of the 

most upscale area of the Capital of Pakistan, refusal of the Incharge 

Police  Station  to  register  a  criminal  case  despite  having  been 

informed  in  writing  and  failing  to  promptly  and  effectively 

investigate  the  disappearance  of  a  citizen  were  not  important 

enough  so  as  to  require  his  attention. The  Secretary,  Defence  who 

happens  to  be  the  administrative  head  of  a  Ministry  under  whose 

control  one  of  the  reputable  and  competent  intelligence  agencies 

are  working  went  to  the  extent  of  suspecting the  bona  fides  of the 

petitioner  not  realizing  that  the  JIT  had  unequivocally  concluded 

that  it  was  a  case  of  'enforced  disappearance".  The  Secretary, 

Ministry of Interior and a Sr. Joint Secretary of Ministry of Defence 

appeared  on  14-04-2017  and  had  sought  time  to  make  efforts  in 

tracing  the  whereabouts  of  the  Detenue.  They  also  appear  to  have 

got  involved  with  matters  which  they  felt  were  more  important 

because  they  did  not  submit  any  report  nor  informed  the  Attorney 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-16- 

General office so as to explain to this Court as to what efforts were 

made  by  their  respective  Ministries.  From  perusal  of  the  affidavits 

filed  by  the  Chief  Commissioner  and  the  District  Magistrate,  it  is 

obvious  that  they  felt  that  they  had  no  responsibility  other  than 

giving  directions  to  the  police  officials.  The  Chief  Commissioner 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory  is  the  Executive  head  who  exercises 

powers  vested  in  a  Provincial  Government.  Likewise,  the  District 

Magistrate  has  powers  and  responsibilities  regarding  efficient 

working  of  the  criminal  justice  system  under  the  law  which  he  did 

not  refer  to  in  his  affidavit.    Departmental  proceedings  were 

initiated against the Incharge Police Station who had not fulfilled his 

duty  and  obligations  by  promptly  registering  a  First  Information 

Report  after  this  Court  had  enquired  in  this  regard.  The  concerned 

Incharge  Police  Station  was  found  guilty  of  misconduct  but  the 

authorized  officer  and  the  authority  considered  the  lapse  so  trivial 

that  a  minor  penalty  was  considered  sufficient  to  hold  him 

accountable.  The  criminal  justice  system  was  only  responding  and 

reacting  to  directions  given  and  enquiries  made  by  this  Court  and 

otherwise  appears  to  have  been  unresponsive.  Was  this  response 

justified when everyone at the helm of affairs had concluded that it 

was  a  case  of 

'enforced  disappearance'. 

Is  an 

'enforced 

disappearance'  such  a  trivial  matter  not  important  enough  to  be 

dealt  with  as  a  heinous  crime.  Should  the  petitioner  and  her  three 

young  daughters  have  been  made  to  suffer  or  was  it  the 

responsibility of the former to have vigorously pursued her case so 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-17- 

that  the  criminal  justice  could  respond,  as  has  been  suggested  in 

some  of  the  reports  and  affidavits  filed  by  the  respondents.  Would 

the  Chief  Commissioner,  Inspector  General,  District  Magistrate, 

Secretary,  Defence,  heads  of  the  three  intelligence  agencies, 

Secretary,  Interior  and  other  concerned 

functionaries  have 

responded  in  the  same  manner  had  one  of  their  loved  ones 

disappeared under similar circumstances instead of the Detenu? The 

answer  is  definitely  an  emphatic  'no'.  The  frequency  of  such 

constitutional petitions indicates that either public functionaries are, 

directly  or  indirectly,  complicit  or  they  do  not  consider  such 

complaints  important  enough  to  satisfy  the  aggrieved  persons 

through  prompt  and  effective  response  and  action  so  that  there  is 

no  need  for  them  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court.  Are  the 

public  functionaries  who  are  entrusted  with  the  obligations  and 

duties  by  and  on  behalf  of  the  State  accountable  to  the  citizens 

when  there  is  an  obvious  breach  thereof?  Should  the  public 

functionaries respond to a crime against an ordinary citizen and one 

belonging  to  the  privileged  classes  differently?  Is  a  citizen  entitled 

to  be  compensated  when  the  violation  of  fundamental  rights  and 

breach  of  obligations  and  duties  of  the  State  and  its  public 

functionaries  stands  established?  If  so  then  can  a  Constitutional 

Court issue a writ in this regard while exercising power under Article 

199  of  the  Constitution?  These  are  some  of  the  questions  which 

have  arisen  for  consideration  of  this  Court  in  the  facts  and 

circumstances of the instant petition.   

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-18- 

17. 

There  is  no  cavil  to  the  proposition  that  the  scheme  of 

the  Constitution  has  made  the  State  through  its  instrumentalities 

and 

functionaries  absolutely  and  exclusively  responsible 

for 

protecting  and  safeguarding  the  fundamental  rights  which  have 

been guaranteed under the Constitution to every citizen. The august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  ‘Habib  Ullah  Energy  Limited  and 

another v. WAPDA through Chairman and others’ [PLD 2014 SC 47] 

has emphasized that the basis of the power of State functionaries is 

the  delegation  of  authority  by  the  principal  who  are  the  people  of 

Pakistan.  It  has  been  held  and  declared  that  the  State's  legal 

authority is derived from a fiduciary relationship and if the State or 

its  instrumentalities  deviate  from  their  fiduciary  obligations  then  it 

inevitably  erodes  the  authority  of  the  State  to  administer  and 

enforce  the law.  It  has  been  unambiguously  held  that  the  violation 

of  duties  and  obligations  by  a  public  fiduciary  cannot  be  condoned 

because doing so would lead to the erosion of the very basis of the 

State's  legal  authority  and  thus  undermine  the  rule  of  law.  It  has 

been further stressed that the basis of a fiduciary relationship is the 

exclusive  principle  which  mandates  that  every  fiduciary  has  a  duty 

to act solely in the interest of the beneficiary and that such fiduciary 

obligations  depend  on  demonstrating  complete  commitment  to  act 

exclusively  in  the  best  interest  of  the  principal.  In  the  case  titled 

‘Muhammad  Yasin  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary 

Establishment  Division,  Islamabad  and  others’  [PLD  2012  SC  132] 

the  august  Supreme  Court  has  held  that;  'Civil  servants  and  other 

 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-19- 

holders of public offices have to remain conscious that in the terms 

of the Constitution it is the will of the people of Pakistan which has 

established  the  Constitutional  order  under  which  they  hold  their 

respective  offices.  As  such  they  are,  first  and  foremost  fiduciaries 

and  trustees  for  the  people  of  Pakistan.  And  when  performing  the 

functions  of  their  office,  they  can  have  no  interest  other  than  the 

interests of the honourable people of Pakistan in whose name they 

hold the office and from whose pockets they draw their salaries and 

perquisites".  The  duty  to  protect  the  citizens  from  harm  and 

jealously  safeguard  their  fundamental  rights  is  exclusively  that  of 

the  State  and  its  functionaries.  In  this  regard  the  latter,  as 

fiduciaries  and  trustees  appointed  by  the  people  of  Pakistan  to 

exercise powers exclusively in their interest, are accountable for any 

breach  and  the  same  is  not  condonable.  The  most  cherished  and 

valuable  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  are 

security, life  and liberty  (Article  9);  the  right  not to  be  arrested  or 

detained in custody without being informed of the grounds for such 

arrest  and  the  right  to  consult  and  be  defended  by  a  legal 

practitioner of choice; to be produced before a Magistrate within the 

specified  period  of  his  or  her  arrest  or  detention  (Article  10);  a 

person  is  entitled  to  a  fair  trial  and  due  process  (Article  10A);  no 

law  authorizes  the  punishment  of  a  person  for  an  act  or  omission 

that  was  not  punishable  by  law  (Article  12);  no  person  can  be 

compelled  to  be  a  witness  against  himself  even  if  he  is  accused  of 

an offence (Article 13); the dignity of a person and, subject to law, 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-20- 

the  privacy  of  his  or  her  house  has  been  declared  to  be  inviolable 

and that no person shall be subjected to torture for the purposes of 

extracting  evidence  (Article  14);  every  citizen  has  the  right  to 

remain  in  and,  subject  to  reasonable  restriction  imposed  by  law  in 

public  interest,  enter  and  move  freely  throughout  Pakistan  and  to 

reside and settle in any part thereof (Article 15); Articles 16 and 17 

guarantees  freedom  of  assembly  and  freedom  of  association 

respectively,  while  Article  18  relates  to  freedom  of  trade,  business 

or  profession;  Articles  19  and  19A  guarantees  to  every  citizen 

freedom  of  speech  and  the  right  to  information  respectively.  All 

citizens are equal before law and entitled to equal protection of law 

(Article 25). All these fundamental rights have been guaranteed by 

the  framers  of  the  Constitution  to  every  citizen  or  person,  as  the 

case  may  be.  The  protection  of  these  rights  and  the  duty  and 

obligation to ensure that they are enjoyed by every citizen solely is 

that of the State through those who hold public office as fiduciaries 

and  trustees  of  the  people.  Article  3  of  the  Constitution  declares 

that  the  State  shall  ensure  elimination  of  all  forms  of  exploitation 

while Article 4 enjoins that the protection of law and to be treated in 

accordance with law is an inalienable right  of every citizen.  What if 

the  State  through  its  instrumentalities,  directly  or  indirectly, 

expressly  or 

tacitly,  assumes 

the 

role  of  usurping 

the 

aforementioned  fundamental  rights?  Is  "enforced  disappearance" 

such  a  tool  where  the  State  as  a  protector  and  custodian  of  

fundamental  rights  arrogates  to  itself  a  role  which  is  in  flagrant 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-21- 

violation of its fiduciary obligations towards its citizens. If that is so 

then  what  ought  to  be  the  consequences  for  complicity  or 

recklessness  of  public  functionaries  who  fail  in  fulfilling  the 

obligations and duties entrusted to them by the people of Pakistan.   

18. 

In  the  instant  case  admittedly  the  respondents  have 

unequivocally  stated  that  it  is  a  case  of  "enforced  disappearance". 

Enforced disappearance has not been defined in any statute nor has 

the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) enacted a law to prevent or punish 

acts  or  omissions  relating  to  enforced  disappearance.  The  surge  in  

complaints  regarding  the  alleged  involvement  of  the  State  and  its 

instrumentalities in the abduction of citizens had led the apex Court 

to  direct  the  Federal  Government  to  constitute  the  Commission 

pursuant  to  powers  conferred  under  section  8  of  the  Pakistan 

Commission of Inquiry Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act 

of 1956’).  Clause (d) of Regulation 2 of the Commission of Inquiry 

on Enforced Disappearances Regulations (hereinafter referred to as 

the 

‘Regulations’)  has  defined 

the  expression 

“Enforced 

Disappearance/Missing  person”  as  meaning  such  a  person  picked 

up/taken  into  custody  by  one  of  the  law  enforcement/intelligence 

agencies, working under the civilian or military control, in a manner 

which  is  contrary  to  the  provision  of  law".  Likewise  the  expression 

“Joint  Investigation  Team”  has  been  defined in  Regulation  2(i)  and 

its constitution has been described under Regulation 13.  

 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-22- 

19. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  ‘Human 

Rights Case No.29388-K of 2013’ [PLD 2014 SC 305] has dealt with 

in great detail cases of involuntary disappearances and in paragraph 

17  of  the  judgment  has  referred  with  approval  to  a  judgment 

rendered by the Supreme Court of Nepal wherein implementation of 

the  principles  enshrined  in  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly 

Declaration on Enforced Disappearances (1992) and the Convention 

against  Enforced  Disappearance  (2006)  have  been  acknowledged. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  has,  therefore,  observed  and  held  as 

follows.- 

“It is pertinent to note that Pakistan has also not ratified 

this  Convention.  The  Supreme  Court  of  Nepal  applied 

the  principles  of  the  2006  Convention  in  light  of  the 

right  to  life  guaranteed  in  the  Interim  Constitution  of 

Nepal, 2007. Our Constitution at Article 9 lays down the 

right 

to 

life  which  has 

received  an  expansive 

interpretation  from  this  Court.  Moreover,  Article  10 

provides 

direct 

protection 

from 

enforced 

disappearances.  Thus  the  crime  against  humanity  of 

enforced  disappearances  is  clearly  violative  of  the 

Constitution  of  Pakistan.  Therefore,  this  Court  can  also 

apply  the  principles  enshrined  in  2006  Convention  in 

order to achieve the ends of justice. Likewise there are 

cases  from  international  tribunals  such  as  the  UN 

Human  Rights  Committee,  the  Inter-American  Court  of 

Human Rights and the European Court of Human Rights 

as  well  as  other  national  courts,  most  notably  the 

Constitutional  Courts  of  Peru  and  Colombia,  where  the 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-23- 

Courts were forced to issue directions to the concerned 

authorities for effecting recovery of the missing persons 

and also dealing with those persons who are responsible 

for their enforced disappearance.” 

It  is  obvious  from  the  above  that  the  principles  of  the 

aforesaid Conventions have been made applicable in order to meet 

the ends of justice.  

20. 

The  United  Nations  International  Convention  for  the 

Protection  of  All  Persons  from Enforced  Disappearances  (2006) has 

explicitly  provided  in  sub  Article  2  of  Article  1  that  no  exceptional 

circumstances  whatsoever,  whether  a  state  of  war  or  a  threat  of 

war, internal political instability or any other public emergency, may 

be invoked as a justification for  enforced disappearance. Moreover, 

Article  2  defines  the  expression  “enforced  disappearance”  for  the 

purposes  of  the  Convention  as  the  arrest,  detention,  abduction  or 

any other form of deprivation of liberty by agents of the State or by 

persons or groups of persons acting with the authorization, support 

or acquiescence of the State, followed by a refusal to acknowledge 

the  deprivation  of  liberty  or  by  concealment  of  the  fate  or 

whereabouts of the disappeared person, which places such a person 

outside  the  protection  of  the  law.  Article  5  of  the  Convention  has 

unequivocally  declared  the  phenomena  of  enforced  disappearance 

as  constituting  a  crime  against  humanity.  This  has  been 

unambiguously  endorsed  with  approval  by  the  august  Supreme 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-24- 

Court  in  the  above  cited  judgment.  Article  6,  sub  Article  1(b)(iii) 

provides  that  a  superior  who  fails  to  take  all  necessary  and 

reasonable measures within his or her power to prevent or repress 

the  commission  of  an  enforced  disappearance  or  to  submit  the 

matter  to  the  competent  authorities  for  investigation  is  also 

responsible  for  the  offence.  The  other  international  instruments 

relating to causing disappearance of persons by the State or with its 

acquiescence  are  the  Inter-American  Convention  on  Enforced 

Disappearances (1994), the Rome Statute of International Criminal 

Court,  1998  and  the  International  Convention  for  Protection  of  All 

Persons  from  Enforced  Disappearances,  2006.  The  expression 

“enforced disappearance” has been treated in all the instruments in 

almost the same way. It is, therefore, axiomatic that the expression 

“enforced disappearance” involves the direct or indirect involvement 

of  the  State  through  its  organs  and  agencies.  The  positive 

Constitutional  obligation  of  a  State  to  protect  fundamental  rights 

and  to  prevent,  investigate  and  punish  any  perpetrator 

in 

accordance  with 

law 

is  not  only  severally  breached  but 

simultaneously  gives  rise  to  an  unimaginable    paradox  when  the 

State and its functionaries assume the role of abductors.   

21. 

The  phenomena  of  enforced  disappearance  is  not  new 

and  has  been  widespread  in  many  countries  across  the  world. 

During  World  War  II  on  07-12-1941  Adolf  Hitler,  the  German 

Chancellor issued  ‘Nacht  und  Nebel’  (The  Night  of the  Fog  decree). 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-25- 

The rationale for this official decree was to create a deterrent effect 

by making prisoners vanish without leaving a trace and refusing to 

give information regarding their whereabouts or fate to their family 

members.  Enforced  disappearance  affects  in  a  complex  and 

profound manner because the person subjected to disappearance is 

not the only victim. His or her close relatives, particularly those who 

are dependents, suffer the most. Their anguish and suffering cannot 

be  comprehended  because  their  loved  ones  are  removed  from  the 

protection of the law. By removing a person from protection of the 

law gives the captors the freedom  and license to do what they feel 

like. This creates an environment of uncertainty for the dependents 

and other family members. The perpetrators get a license to subject 

the victim to torture, which is otherwise strictly forbidden under the 

law, and in the case of death it enables them to  cause the body to 

vanish  without  a  trace.  The  fundamental  rights  of  the  victims 

guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  become  irrelevant  and  virtually 

suspended.  It  creates  anguish,  insecurity  and  fear  for  the  close 

relatives,  exposing 

them 

to  grave  economic  and  social 

consequences,  particularly  if  the  abductee  is  the  sole  breadwinner. 

It has the effect of creating a sense of fear and insecurity in society 

and,  therefore,  depending  on  the  facts  and  circumstances,  it  may 

also  attract  the  provisions  and  offences  defined  under  the  Anti 

Terrorism  Act,  1997.  Lack  of  response,  non  cooperative  and 

negative  attitudes  of  the  public  functionaries  entrusted  with  the 

duty to deal with complaints exaggerates the anguish and suffering 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-26- 

of  close  relatives  and  amounts  to  the  degrading  treatment  of 

citizens at the hands of the State functionaries. This inevitably leads 

to  grave  violations  of  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  close  relatives 

as  well.  The  State  and  its  functionaries,  instead  of  fulfilling  the 

obligations imposed upon them as fiduciaries and trustees, resort to 

inhuman  and  cruel  usurpation  of  fundamental  rights.  It  is  for  this 

reason  that  enforced  disappearance  has  been  declared  as  a  crime 

against humanity and indeed that is exactly what it is. It results in 

multiple  violations  of  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the 

Constitution.    It  is,  therefore,  one  of  the  most  heinous  crimes  and 

cannot  be  justified  on  any  ground  whatsoever,  particularly  under 

the  Constitution  of  Pakistan.  It is  definitely  a  crime  which  ought  to 

be  given  the  highest  priority  by  the  State  instrumentalities  and 

functionaries  and  their  conduct  and  attitude  towards  the  victims 

must manifest their intent and will as guardians of the fundamental 

rights of citizens.       

22. 

It  would  be  pertinent  to  refer  to  a  relevant  judgment 

rendered by the European Court of Human Rights in the case titled 

Bazorkini  VS Russia  No.  69481/01,  ECHR-2006;139.  The  facts 

of the case related to the disappearance of the applicant's son. The 

European  Court  of  Human  Rights,  while  examining  the  violation  of 

Article  3  of  the  Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and 

Fundamental Freedoms, has observed and held as follows.- 

 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-27- 

“The  Court  would  further  emphasis  that  the  essence  of 

such  violation  does  not  mainly  lie  in  the  fact  of 

disappearance  of  the  family  members  but  rather 

concerns  the  authorities’  reactions  and  attitudes  to  the 

situation  when  it  is  brought  to  their  attention.  It  is 

specially  in  respect  of  the  latter  that  a  relative  may 

claim directly to be a victim of the authorities conduct” 

23. 

The  Court, in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  above 

case,  concluded  that  the  manner  in  which  the  complaint  of  the 

applicant  i.e  the  mother  of  the  disappeared  person  had  been  dealt 

with  constituted  inhuman  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  of  the 

Convention which provides that no one shall be subjected to torture 

or  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment.  Likewise  in 

the case of Aslakhanova and others VSRussia, Applications no. 

2944/06  and  8300/07,  5018/07,  332/08,  42509/10  vide  its  final 

judgment  dated  29-04-2013  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights 

held  and  declared  the  applicants,  who  were  close  relatives  of  the 

disappeared men, as victims of the violation of Article 3 on account 

of  the  distress  and  anguish  which  they  had  suffered  and  continued 

to  suffer  as  a  result  of  the  inability  of  State  functionaries  to 

ascertain the fate of their family members and the manner in which 

their  complaints  had  been  dealt  with.  In  these  cases  financial 

compensation  to  the  families  was  acknowledged  as  one  of  the 

remedies  for  the  inability  of  the  State  to  promptly  and  effectively 

investigate the complaints  which had given rise to the anguish and 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-28- 

suffering of the families. This has also been recognized by the Inter 

American  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  several  judgments.  Reference 

may  be  made  to  the  judgment  dated  19-06-1998  in  Benavides-

Cevallos  VS Ecuador,  judgment  dated  29-08-2002  in  Caracazo 

VSVenezuela, and judgment dated 27-02-2002 in Trujillo-Oroza 

VSBolivia.              

24. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  ‘President 

Balochistan High Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan and 

others’  [2012  SCMR  1958]  has  held  that  it  is  the  constitutional 

obligation  of  the  State  to  exercise  all  options  to  ensure  that  the 

fundamental rights of the people of Pakistan are fully protected and 

secured particularly relating to the security of their lives. The august 

Supreme  Court  has  emphasized  that  the  Executive  authorities 

cannot be allowed to continue to be silent spectators to the violation 

of  fundamental  rights.  The  Federal  Government  was,  therefore, 

called  upon  to  ensure  taking 

immediate  action  under  the 

Constitution to provide security to the citizens.  

25. 

A learned Division Bench of the Sindh High Court in the 

case  titled  ‘Ali  Ahmed  v.  Muhammad  Yakoob  Almani,  Deputy 

Superintendent  of  Police,  Qasimabad,  Hyderabad  and  others’   [PLD 

1999  Karachi  134]  has  held  that  once  the  High  Court  has  come  to 

the  conclusion  that  the  detention  of  a  person  was  without 

justification, then compensation could be awarded. Another learned 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-29- 

Division  Bench  of  the  learned  Sindh  High  Court  in  the  case  titled 

‘Syed Hassan Ali Shah v. Station House Officer, Police Station Dadu 

and  others’  [PLD 2006  Karachi 425]  after  examining  the  precedent 

law has summarized the principles as follows.- 

“(i)  When  a  Court  finds  that  a  person  in  custody  was 

detained without lawful authority or in an unlawful 

manner,  it  could  apart  from  directing  his  release, 

pass  any  appropriate  incidental  or  consequential 

order  as  it  may  consider  proper  in  the  interest  of 

justice under Article 199 of the Constitution. 

(ii)  That  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  to  grant  relief 

under  Article  199(I)(b)(1)  or  Article  199(1)(c)  is 

not hedged by the limitation of English precedents 

or provision of Sub-constitutional legislation. 

(iii) 

In  case  such  detention  prima  facie  amounts  to  a 

penal offence the Court could direct that the case 

against  a  person  responsible  for  such  unlawful 

detention  may  be 

registered  and 

tried 

in 

accordance with the law. 

(iv)  An  order  merely  directing  the  release  of  a  person 

from custody upon finding his detention illegal and 

condoning  the  violation  of  his  most  cherished 

fundamental  rights  of  liberty  and  dignity  in 

defiance  of  the  requirements  of  law  and  the 

Constitution  may  not  be  the  appropriate  relief  to 

which  such  person  may  be  entitled.  Under  the 

wide  powers  available  to  this  Court  under  Article 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-30- 

199  of  the  Constitution  it  would  be  proper  to 

award  monetary  recommendation  to  a  victim  of 

violation of fundamental rights. 

(v)  The  liability  to  pay  such  compensation  is  in  the 

nature  of  a  public  law  duty  as  distinguished  from 

the private law right of a citizen to claim damages 

in  tort  and  can  be  enforced  in  proceedings  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  The  amount  of 

compensation  paid  or  payable  under 

these 

proceedings,  however,  will  be  taken  into  account 

by  a  Court  subsequently  trying  a  suit 

for 

damages. 

(vi)  That  the  amount  of  such  compensation  would  be 

determined  by  the  Court  in  its  discretion  keeping 

in  view  the  principle  applied  in  awarding  general 

damages  in  case  of  false  imprisonment  and 

exemplary  damages  in  case  of  mala  fide  conduct 

of a public officer under the law. Special damages 

sustained  by  a  victim  of  unlawful  imprisonment, 

however,  can  only  be  proved  through  ordinary 

civil  suit.  In  accordance  with  the  decision  of  this 

Court  such  compensation  ought  to  be  substantial 

and not nominal.  

(vii)  The  liability  to  pay  such  compensation  would 

devolve  jointly  and  severally  upon  the  State  as 

well  as  the  public  officials  responsible  for  illegally 

depriving  a  citizen  of  his  liberty.  The  State 

Government  however,  would  be  entitled 

to 

recover  the  amount  paid/payable  to  the  detenu 

from such officials for having caused wrongful loss 

 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-31- 

to  the  Government  through  misuse  of  powers 

under  the  relevant  Service  Rules  applicable  to 

such official instead of burdening the taxpayer. 

(viii)  In addition to the above the petitioner/victim may 

also  be  entitled 

to  payment  of  actual, 

compensatory  or  deterrent  cost  apart  from  actual 

costs  of  litigation  calculated  according  to  the 

applicable  Rules.  Compensatory  costs  may  be 

awarded  and  the  official  responsible  for  illegal 

action  may  be  personally  burdened  with  the 

liability  to  pay  exemplary  or  punitive  costs  in 

terms  of  the  law  declared  by  the  Honourable 

Supreme Court.” 

26. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Asif  Saeed  Khan  Khosa,  when  he 

was Judge of the Lahore High Court, has observed in the case titled 

‘Abid  Hussain  and  another  v.  Chairman,  Pakistan  Bait-ul-Mal  and 

others’ [PLD 2002 Lahore 482] as follows.- 

“Secondly,  the  State  had  failed  to  protect  the  victim’s 

life or physical safety and it, thus, cannot avoid sharing 

the  blame  for  the  harm  coming  to  him  and  therefore, 

chipping 

in  by 

the  State 

towards  payment  of 

compensation to the victim or his heirs is the least that 

the State can do in such a situation. And, thirdly being a 

welfare  State,  an  Islamic  State  is  even  otherwise 

expected  to  reach  out  and  come  to  the  rescue  and 

assistance of a helpless citizen in need, be he a convict 

or  has  substantially  cleaned  himself  of  the  crime  by 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-32- 

undergoing 

the  entire 

substantive 

sentence  of 

imprisonment passed against him.” 

27. 

The  Supreme  Court  of  India  has  consistently  held  that 

relief  of  monetary  compensation,  as  exemplary  damages,  can  be 

awarded by the Supreme Court or a High Court by way of public law 

remedy if  there is  an  established infringement  of  the  constitutional 

right  of  protection  of  life  and  that  it  is  based  on  strict  liability  for 

contravention.  Reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the  cases 

of  ‘Dr  Mehmood  Nayyar  Azam  v.  State  of  Chaattisgarh  and  others’ 

[2013  SCMR  66],  ‘Rudul  Sah  v.  State  of  Bihar  and  another’  [AIR 

1983 SC 1086], ‘Sebastian M. Hongray v. Union of Inida’ [AIR 1984 

SC  1026],  ‘Bhim  Singh,  MLA  v.  State  of  J.  &  K.  and  others’  [AIR 

1986 SC 494].  

28. 

It is,  therefore,  obvious from  the  above  discussion  that 

in  an  appropriate  case  a  High  Court,  while  exercising  jurisdiction 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  can  order  the  State  to 

compensate  a  citizen  for  an  established  violation  of  fundamental 

rights  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution.  After  receiving  a 

complaint  alleging  facts  which  have  the  characteristics  of  'enforced 

disappearance', it  becomes the  State's duty  and  obligation  through 

its  functionaries  to  promptly  and  effectively  take  all  reasonable 

steps,  inter  alia,  to  register  a  criminal  case  and  to  investigate  and 

secure  evidence.  Keeping  the  complainant  informed  regarding  the 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-33- 

progress made in the investigations and steps taken is also  part of 

this  duty  of  the  concerned  public  functionaries.  The  onus is  on  the 

State  and  its  functionaries  to  unambiguously  demonstrate  their 

bona fides through responses, conduct and attitudes, particularly if 

it is alleged to be a case of enforced disappearance. Delay in taking 

action  and  reasonable  steps  would  not  only  raise  an  inference  of 

complicity  but  would  violate  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  person 

alleged to have been subjected to 'enforced disappearance' and also 

of  those  close  relatives  who  have  to  go  through  anguish,  pain  and 

extreme  stress  which  cannot  be  comprehended  by  a  human  mind 

and that too for no fault of their own. The fundamental rights of the 

immediate family members i.e spouse, young children and parents, 

inter  alia,  guaranteed  under  Articles  9,  14  and  25  of  the 

Constitution are equally violated if the response of the State and its 

functionaries  is  deficient  and  not  in  consonance  with  the  required 

standard  of  promptness  and  effectiveness.  The  nature  of  the 

complaint  i.e  alleged  enforced  disappearance  definitely  puts  a  far 

higher onus to be discharged by the public functionaries in order to 

establish  their  bona  fides  by  clearly  demonstrating  on  the  basis  of 

strict  liability  in  the  context  of  prompt  and  effective  response  and 

confidence  inspiring  attitudes.  This  obligation  and  onerous  duty  is 

undoubtedly fiduciary in nature. In case of breach of this duty, the 

State  and  the  concerned  functionaries  definitely  would  expose 

themselves  to  be  accountable  besides  being  liable  to  compensate 

the affected citizens.                           

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-34- 

29. 

It would be relevant to note that the Police Order, 2002 

was promulgated and notified on 14-08-2002 and under sub section 

3  of  section  1  it  was  to  come  into  force  in  the  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  on  the  date  when  the  Local  Government  was  to  assume 

office  in  the  said  territory.  Pursuant  to  promulgation  of  the  Local 

Government Act 2015, Local Governments have been established in 

the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  However,  a  formal  notification 

regarding  the  Police  Order,  2002  having  become  operative has  not 

yet been issued. This Court has been informed that The Police Act, 

1861  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Act  of  1861’)  and  the  Police 

Rules,  1934  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Police  Rules’) 

presently  govern  the  administration  of  Police  within  the  Islamabad 

Capital Territory. A plain reading of sub section 3 of section 1 of the 

Police Order, 2002 shows that issuance of a notification would be a 

mere  formality  if  the  condition  of  assumption  of  offices  of  Local 

Governments has been met. Nonetheless, whether or not the Chief 

Commissioner,  Inspector General of Police, District Magistrate, the 

Superintendent  of  Police  and  Incharge  of  the  concerned  Police 

Station  have  breached 

their  respective  responsibilities  and 

obligations  shall  be  determined  by  the  competent  authority  under 

the  relevant  law.  The  Chief  Commissioner  is  appointed  under  the 

Presidents Order No. 18 of 1980 read with Presidents Order No. 2 of 

1980.  The  Chief  Commissioner  exercises  the  authority  of  the 

Provincial Government in respect of the Islamabad Capital Territory 

 
   
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-35- 

relating to powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Provincial 

Government under any law enforced within said territory.  

30. 

The  facts  and  circumstances  relating  to  the  instant 

petition have been discussed in detail above. The failure on the part 

of the criminal justice system to promptly and effectively respond to 

the  complaint  filed  by  the  petitioner  stands  established  beyond 

doubt.  The  conduct  of  all  the  public  functionaries  who  have  been 

referred to above and their attitude towards the helpless petitioner 

and her three young daughters is distressing. The events of 14-03-

2016 narrated by the petitioner in her written complaint filed at the 

Police  station  the  next morning  reflected  that  the  manner in  which 

the  perpetrators  had  conducted  the  operation  was  similar  in  its 

characteristics  to  that  of  'enforced  disappearance'.  The  events  had 

taken  place  in  the  heart  of  the  Capital  of  Pakistan.  The  concerned 

Police  Station  was  informed  by  the  petitioner  in  writing  the  next 

morning and despite the gravity of the alleged crime and the settled 

principles and law a criminal case was not registered so that prompt 

and effective investigations could be initiated and evidence secured. 

The  Chief  Commissioner,  as  the  executive  head  of  the  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory,  vested  with  the  powers  of  the  Provincial 

Government  and  the  Inspector  General  of  Police  who  was 

responsible  for  the  command  of  the  Police  force  did  not  seem  to 

have  been  interested  in  knowing  about  incidents  of  crime, 

particularly grave violations of fundamental rights of citizens within 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-36- 

their  jurisdiction.  The  District  Magistrate  who  was  responsible  for 

the functioning of the criminal justice system and had a duty under 

the  Police  Rules  of  regularly  inspecting  the  Police  Stations  was 

either not interested in knowing about crimes taking place within his 

jurisdiction or in case he knew that then for reasons best known to 

him he did not fulfill his duty towards the Detenu, the petitioner and 

their  three  young  daughters.  The  same  attitude  and  conduct  was 

also  displayed  by  all  other  relevant  functionaries.  The  crucial  time 

for  carrying  out  investigations  was  indeed  lost  because  of  the 

inaction, which cannot be attributed to any reason other than being 

willfully  complicit.  A  more  disturbing  dimension  which  stems  from 

the facts and circumstances of the instant petition is the response of 

the  Inspector  General  of  Police  who  at  the  relevant  time  was  also 

holding the post of Deputy Inspector General. In his affidavit dated 

02-06-2017  he  has  deposed  that  he  was  not  informed  by  his 

subordinates  regarding  the 

incident  nor  had  the  petitioner  

approached  him  in  writing  in  this  regard.  He  has  also  blamed  the 

petitioner  for  delay  in  informing  the  Police  Station  regarding  the 

incident. In his affidavit he has quoted the relevant provisions of the 

Police Rules and has thus admitted that he was responsible for the 

command,  discipline  and  administration  of  the  Police  force.  He  has 

explicitly stated in his affidavit that while holding the acting charge 

of the post of Inspector General Police he exercised powers 'only in 

matters  of  great importance'.  However,  he  has  not  explained  as  to 

what  could  have  been  a  matter  of  more  importance  than  a  citizen 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-37- 

alleged to have been a victim of 'enforced disappearance'. According 

to  his  deposition  the  petitioner  should  have  filed  a  petition  under 

section  22-A  of  the  Cr.  P.C  for  registration  of  the  First  Information 

Report.  Despite  having  acknowledged  that  he  was  responsible  for 

the  command  of  the  Police  force,  he  has  conveniently  shifted  the 

blame on his subordinates. A plain reading of the affidavits filed by 

the Chief Commissioner and the District Magistrate also shows that 

they  were  either  not  interested  in  keeping  themselves  informed 

about  the  crimes  committed  within  their  jurisdiction  or  serious 

incidents  of  abduction  of  citizens  and  violations  of  fundamental 

rights  of  helpless  family  members  seemed  unimportant  to  them. 

Admittedly,  the  Special  Branch  and  the  other  two  premier 

intelligence agencies of the State i.e the Intelligence Bureau and the 

Inter  Services  Intelligence  not  only  operate  within  the  Islamabad 

Capital  Territory  but  also  keep  the  higher  authorities  informed 

regarding important incidents. The Secretary, Defence in his written 

affidavit has gone to the extent of suspecting the  bona fides of the 

petitioners  version  without  realizing  that  the  JIT,  including  the 

representative of the Inter Services Intelligence, has concluded and 

affirmed  that  it  was  a  case  of  'enforced  disappearance'.  These  are 

the  officials  who  are  at  the  helm  of  affairs,  holding  the  highest 

public  offices  and  entrusted  with  the  onerous  duty  to  serve  the 

people of Pakistan and safeguard their fundamental rights. By virtue 

of the public offices which they were holding at the time of filing the 

affidavits,  they  were  custodians  of  the  fundamental  rights  of  the 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-38- 

citizens.  They  were  responsible  to  protect  the  citizens  from  harm 

without  the  latter  being  required  to  approach  them.  This  onerous 

duty  was  imposed  upon  them  while  acting  on  behalf  and  as 

representatives  of  the  State.  They  owed  the  citizens,  which 

inevitably  includes  the  petitioner,  her  husband,  the  latter's  aging 

parents  and  three  young  daughters,  a  duty  of  care.  They  were 

entrusted  with  obligations  by  the  State  as  fiduciaries  and  trustees. 

It  appears  from  their  affidavits  that  either  the  criminal  justice 

system  has  completely  failed  in  responding  to  crimes  committed 

against  an  ordinary  citizen  or  that  the  persons  holding  the  highest 

public  offices  are,  directly  or  indirectly,  complicit  in  serious 

infringements  of  fundamental  rights  of  citizens  who  are  victims  of 

enforced  disappearances.  After  four  months  a  criminal  case  was 

registered  and  that  too  when  the  father  of  the  Detenu  had 

approached the Commission. It is evident from the record that even 

after  registration  of  the  criminal  case  and  the  constitution  of  a  JIT 

no  effective  investigations  were  carried  out.  However,  the  JIT 

appears to have met twice and had unequivocally concluded that it 

was  a  case  of  'enforced  disappearance'.  Beyond  this  affirmation 

nothing was brought on record to show that the JIT had carried out 

effective  investigations  to  trace  the  Detenu  and  make  the 

perpetrators accountable for committing a crime of a grave nature. 

The proceedings do not appear to be  more than an eye wash. It is 

obvious  from  the  record  that  the  respondents  were  merely 

responding  to  notices,  directions  and  queries  made  from  time  to 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-39- 

time  during  the  proceedings  in  the  instant  petition,  otherwise  the 

criminal justice system was not responding on its own. After a query 

was  made  by  this  Court,  only  then  disciplinary  proceedings  were 

initiated against the Incharge Police Station who had not registered 

a criminal case despite receiving a written complaint. He was found 

guilty  but  despite  the  gravity  of  the  misconduct  and  the  ensuing 

consequences,  awarding  of  a  minor  penalty  was  considered  an 

appropriate  retribution.  The  most  disturbing  dimension  in  the 

instant  case  is  the  agony,  suffering  and  unimaginable  pain  of  the 

petitioner because of the attitude of public functionaries towards her 

and her family. Instead of serving her as a citizen, it is obvious from 

the  record  that  they  were  treating  the  proceedings  as  adversarial.      

The  conduct  of  the  officials  who  were  holding  some  of  the  highest 

public  offices  when  according to  their  own  findings the  Detenu  and 

his  close  relatives  were  victims  of  'enforced  disappearance'  and 

their attitude towards the petitioner is obvious and established from 

the  written  reports  and  the  affidavits  which  speak  volumes  in  this 

regard.  The  failure  of  all  the  officials  named  above  and  their 

successors  in  fulfilling  their  fiduciary  duty  and  obligations  and 

resultantly gravely violating the fundamental rights of the petitioner 

and her three young daughters, inter alia, under Articles 9, 14 and 

25  stands  established  beyond  doubt.  Their  attitude  towards  the 

petitioner  and  other  family  members  has  been  degrading  thus 

violating 

their 

fundamental  right  under  Article  14  of 

the 

Constitution. Every official acting as an agent of the State, from the 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-40- 

Incharge  Police  Station  to  the  Inspector  General  of  Police  and 

District Magistrate to the Chief Commissioner failed to discharge the 

duties  and  obligations  on  behalf  of  the  State.  Each  one  of  them  is 

responsible  for  the  non  responsiveness  of  the  criminal  justice 

system despite having been informed in writing. The petitioner was 

not required to have pursued the matter as has been suggested by 

those  who  were  holding  one  of  the  highest  public  offices.  The 

premier  intelligence  agencies  also  failed  in  their  obligations  by  not 

being  able  to  demonstrate  having  taken  effective  measures  in 

tracing  the  whereabouts  of  the  Detenu  and  identifying  the 

perpetrators.  Either  everyone  was  complicit  or  simply  did  not  care 

because the petitioner and her three young daughters were ordinary 

citizens.  The  latter  have  not  been  treated  with  respect  and  the 

officials  named 

in  this 

judgment  and  their  successors  are 

responsible  for  the  unimaginable  anguish,  pain  and  degrading 

treatment  which  they  definitely  deserved  from  the  State  and  its 

agents.  In  a  nut  shell  the  State  has  undoubtedly  failed  in  its  duty 

and  obligations  towards  the  petitioner  and  her  three  young 

daughters.  The  officials  responsible  to  protect  the  citizens  as 

appointed agents of the State are jointly and severally accountable 

to  the  petitioner  and  her  three  young  daughters.  The  State  of 

Pakistan  as  an  Islamic  welfare  state  has,  therefore,  made  itself 

liable  to  compensate  the  petitioner  and  her  three  young  daughters 

for  the  established  acts  and  omissions,  conduct  and  degrading 

attitude  of  the  public  functionaries  which  has  caused  unimaginable 

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-41- 

anguish  and  suffering  to  the  petitioner  and  her  three  daughters, 

thus  gravely  violating  the  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  to  them 

under  the  Constitution.  The  Chief  Commissioner  and  the  Inspector 

General of Police, being the highest office holders in the hierarchy of 

administration  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  are  responsible 

for  the  failure  of  their  subordinates  and  for  the  criminal  justice 

system failing to respond to the complaint of the petitioner, because 

the  buck  stops  at  the  top.  The  non  cooperative,  insensitive  and 

humiliating  attitude  of  the  agents  of  the  State  has  exposed  each 

one of them to be proceeded against.                                      

31. 

For what has been discussed above, the instant petition 

is allowed and consequently it is declared and directed as follows:- 

i.) 

'Enforced disappearance' is one of the most cruel and 

inhuman  acts  and  categorized  as  a  crime  against 

humanity.  A  complaint  which  alleges  or  discloses 

characteristics 

in 

the 

nature 

of 

'enforced 

disappearance'  shall  be  treated  by  the  respondents 

as a heinous act and thus dealt with accordingly. 

ii.) 

It  is  the  duty  and  obligation  of  the  State  to  take 

effective  and  prompt  action  when 

'enforced 

disappearance'  has  been  alleged.  The  Chief 

Commissioner,  vested  with  powers  of  a  Provincial 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-42- 

Government  and  the  Inspector  General  of  Police, 

responsible for command of the Police force, are and 

shall  be  accountable  for  the  lack  of  response  of  the 

criminal  justice  system  according  to  the  required 

standards  in  general  and  in  cases  alleging  acts  of 

'enforced  disappearance'  in  particular,  within  their 

jurisdiction  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory.  The 

onus shall be on the public functionaries to dispel any 

impression  regarding involvement  of the  State  or  its 

instrumentalities  in  an  alleged  abduction.  This  onus 

shall  be  discharged  by  establishing  prompt, 

responsive and effective investigations.     

iii.) 

In  the  event  that  it  is  established  that  the  criminal 

justice  system 

failed 

in 

responding  promptly, 

followed by conducting effective investigations into a 

complaint 

of 

a 

citizen 

alleging 

enforced 

disappearance  of  a  loved  one,  then  the  State 

depending  on  the  facts  and  circumstances  in  each 

case shall become liable to compensate the person if 

it can be shown that the latter's fundamental right(s) 

stand  infringed.  Any  loss  suffered  by  the  exchequer 

on  account  of  payment  of  compensation  shall  be 

recovered from the public functionaries, inter alia, in 

the  case  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  from  the 

 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-43- 

Chief  Commissioner  and  the  Inspector  General  of 

Police.  

iv.) 

It  is  the  duty  of  the  Special  Branch,  Intelligence 

Bureau,  the  Inter  Services  Intelligence  and  the 

Military  Intelligence 

to  collect 

information  and 

promptly  report  to  the  concerned 

functionaries 

regarding  any  incident  of  abduction  of  a  citizen 

having 

the 

characteristics 

of 

an 

'enforced 

disappearance'  and  to  take  effective  measures  in 

tracing  the  whereabouts  of  the  victim.  It  is  noted 

that  these  instrumentalities  of  the  State  are  part  of 

the  JIT  constituted  under  the  Regulations.  In  the 

case  of  failure  in  fulfilling  this  duty  the  respective 

Sector  Commanders  shall  expose  themselves  to 

being accountable and proceeded against.                         

v.) 

The failure of the criminal justice system to promptly 

respond  to  the  complaint  of  the  petitioner  and  then 

to conduct effective investigations stands established 

in  the  instant  case.  Moreover,  the  attitude  and 

conduct of public functionaries towards the petitioner 

not  being  in  conformity  with  the  fundamental  right 

guaranteed  under  Article  14  of  the  Constitution  is 

also  established  and  evident  from  the  reports  and 

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-44- 

affidavits  brought  on  record.  The  State  and  its  

functionaries  have 

failed 

in  safeguarding 

the 

fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed under 

Article  9  of  the  Constitution.  It  is,  therefore,  an 

obligation of the State to financially put the petitioner 

in  the  same  position  by  way  of  compensation  as 

existed on the day of occurrence i.e 14-03-2016. The 

breakup of the expenses amounting to Rs 117,500/- 

per  month  placed  on  record  has  not  been  contested 

by 

the 

respondents.  However, 

the 

Chief 

Commissioner  and  the  Inspector  General  of  Police 

shall constitute a joint Committee consisting of senior 

officers to verify the actual expenses if they have any 

reservations  regarding  the  break  up  provided  by  the 

petitioner. If such a Committee is constituted then it 

shall  complete  verifications  within  30(thirty)  days 

from  the  date  of  receiving  a  certified  copy  of  this 

judgment. The  petitioner  shall  be  paid an  amount  of 

Rs 117,500/- per month, or such amount as may be 

determined pursuant to verification, as the case may 

be.  The  arrears  shall  be  calculated  and  paid  to  the 

petitioner  with  effect  from  14-03-2016.  The  said 

monthly  payment  shall  be  made  to  the  petitioner  till 

the  State  through  its  functionaries  has  traced  the 

whereabouts or fate of the Detenu.                

 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-45- 

vi.)  The  Federal  Government  is  directed  to  conduct  an 

inquiry  through  an  officer  not  lower  in  rank  than  a 

Federal Secretary or a Committee, into the failure of 

the  criminal  justice  system  in  the  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  as  is  evident  from  the  facts  highlighted 

above.  The  inquiry  shall  also  identify  the  officials 

responsible  for  the  established  failure  in  the  instant 

case  and  the  loss  suffered  to  the  exchequer  as 

payment  of  maintenance  to  the  petitioner  and  her 

three  young  daughters  shall  be  recovered  from  such 

delinquents.  The  inquiry  is  directed  to  be  completed 

within  thirty  days  from  the  date  of  receipt  of  this 

judgment  and  a  report  in  this  regard  shall  be 

submitted  by  the  Secretary  interior  to  the  Registrar 

of this Court.   

vii.)  The JIT is directed to take appropriate measures and 

effectively 

investigate 

the 

alleged 

enforced 

disappearance  in  the  instant  case.  The  members  of 

the  JIT  representing  the  intelligence  agencies  are 

directed to trace the whereabouts of the Detenu. The 

head of the JIT shall submit a progress report before 

the  Registrar  of  this  Court  on  the  15th  of  each 

month.            

 
 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-46- 

32. 

Lastly, this Court while exercising constitutional jurisdiction 

cannot  ignore  the  conduct  and  attitude  of  the  public  functionaries 

towards the petitioner, which is evident from their affidavits. They owed 

a duty of care towards the petitioner who has been running from pillar 

to  post  to  make  the  criminal  justice  system  respond  to  her 

unimaginable plight. Those who have been appointed as agents of the 

State to safeguard the rights of the citizens  have displayed  an attitude 

which  was  appalling  and  distressing.  Because  of  the  conduct  and 

attitude  of  the  custodians  of  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens  the 

petitioner  despite  her  grave  anguish  and  suffering  was  subjected  to 

unnecessary litigation  and harassment. It is evident from the affidavits 

that  the  attitude  of  each  functionary  has  been  degrading  towards  the 

helpless  citizen  who  was  not  required  to  engage  in  litigation  had  the 

criminal  justice  system  responded  to  her  complaint  promptly  and 

effectively.  Each  public  functionary  has  made  himself  liable  to  pay 

special  costs  to  the  petitioner.  Moreover,  it  is  settled  law  that  while 

exercising  constitutional 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of 

the 

Constitution  it  may  impose  costs  in  excess  of  the  amount  prescribed 

under section 35-A of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908. Reliance is placed 

on  the  cases  of  ‘Khurshid Ahmed Naz Faridi v. Bashir Ahmed and 3 

others’ [1993 SCMR 639] and ‘Muhammad Zia v. Ch. Nazir Muhammad, 

Advocate and 4 others’  [2002  CLC  59].  Keeping  in  view  the  facts  and 

circumstances  of  this  case,  this  Court  imposes  cost  of  Rs.100,000/- 

 
 
W.P No.2974/2016 

-47- 

(Rupees one hundred thousand only) each on Lt. General (Retd) Zamir-

ul-Hassan Shah, Secretary Ministry of Defence, Mr Zulfiqar Haider, Chief 

Commissioner,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  Mr  Khalid  Khan  Khattak, 

Inspector  General  of  Police,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  and  Capt. 

(Retd) Mushtaq Ahmed, District Magistrate, Islamabad Capital Territory. 

A  cost  of  Rs.300,000/-  (Rupees  three  hundred  thousand  only)  is 

imposed  on  Mr  Qaiser  Niaz,  Inspector  who  was  the  Incharge  of  Police 

Station, Shalimar on 14-03-2016. This Court expects that the said public 

functionaries  and  others  would  deal  with  ordinary  citizens  and  display 

conduct and attitude towards them  which  visibly demonstrates  respect 

and  care,  having  regard  to  the  fundamental  right  guaranteed  under 

Article  14  of  the  Constitution  which  provides  that  “the  dignity  of  man 

and,  subject  to  law,  the  privacy  of  home,  shall  be  inviolable”.  The 

officials  named  above  shall  pay  the  costs  through  crossed  cheques 

drawn  in  the  name  of  the  petitioner  within  ten  days  from  the  date  of 

announcement of this judgment.  

(ATHAR MINALLAH) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 11-07-2018. 

Luqman Khan/* 

Approved for reporting. 

JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
