ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HI

COURT,

AD.

TUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

Criminal Misc. N o. 7 20/8/2020.

S. No. of
orde{

l)atc of
order/
Proc
16.06.2020.

Barooz  Khan

VS

'fhe State,  etc.

Order with signature  of ]udge and  that
counsel  where necessary.

of parties or

Mr. Naveed Shahzad  Ch., Advocate for petitioner.
Mr. Hasnain  Haider Thaheem,  State Counsel.
Mr. Sajjad  Haider  Malik, Advocate for respondent  No.2.
Sagheer Abbasi,  ASI, CIA, Islamabad.

Through  this Crl. Misc. petitiory the petitioner

has applied for post-arrest  bail in case FIR No.272,  dated

01..07.2019,  TJ/S 395/412 PPC, P.S. Bhara  Kahu,

Islamabad.

2. 

Brief  facts referred  in the instant FIR registered

on the complaint  of Alamgir  Khan/respondent  No.2 are

that on 01,.07.201.9,  he was on duty  when he received  call

from his home that some armed  personnel entered  into

his house, detained famity members and committed

dacoity  in the house while snatched away  cash  amount

oI l1s.1,6,7O,OOOf -, gold jewelry,  purse, I.D card,  cheque

books, etc.

3. 

Learned  counsel for the petitioner contends  that

petitioner is innocent and  has falsely been implicated in

this case, even the recovered  amount  of Rs'50,000/-  and

pistol have been planted uPon the petitioner and no

identification  parade  has been  conducted  in this case as

lady of complainant's  family identified  the petitioner in

Crl. Misc.  No.72018/2020

2

hospital as such  petitioner  is no more  required for the

purpose of investigation  and all the other co-accused

have been granted post-arrest  bail by the lower forums,

hence, principle  of consistency is also  applicable.

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State Counsel  as well as

learned counsel for respondent No.2 opposed  the

instant bail application  on the ground that petitioner  has

checkered  history  in similar type of offences  and even

he is well connected with the crime and looted amount

as well as weaPon  of offence have  been recovered  from

him, therefore,  he is not entitled  for concession  of bail'

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, reqgrd  perused.

Tentative  assessment of record  reveals  that

petitioner is involved in the armed  dacoity  while

detaining the family  members  and children  of

complainant  and looted cash amount Rs.L6,70,000f  -,

gold jewelry  and other items  on gun point.

7. 

The record  further reflects that an amount of

Rs.50,000/- was recovered  from the petitioner on his

pointation  and a pistol used in the said crime  was also

recovered,  which prima-facie  connects  the petitioner

with the hideous crime  of dacoity. The petitioner has

taken a specific  stance that he was identified  by the

woman fotk of the complainant's family  when  he was

under  treatment  in PIMS hospital as he was injured  in

another armed  robbery,  this aspect if considered at this

stage would amount to deeper  appreciation, which  is

not permissible at bail stage. Even challan  has been

1

Crl. Misc.  No.72018/2020

3

submitted  in the Court and petitioner has been  charged

with the offence which falls within the ambit  of

prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C. The petitioner

has argued  that other co-accused  have been granted

post-arrest bails by the lower  forums, which ate prima-

facie contrary to the settled principles of law. However,

at this stage,  this Court will not interfere into those

orders as any observation at this stage might effect  the

case especially  when the challan  has already  been

submitted  in the Court, therefore,  instant post-arrest  bail

application  is hereby  ilismissed. Ilowever, while relying

upon 201L SCMR  1-332  (Rehmat  Ullah VS The State\'

learned trial Court seized with the matter is directed  to

conclude  the trial on or before 31'.12.2020 under

intimation to this Court.

7.nhid

(MOHSTN AKHTAR)
JUDGE

