ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

C.R.No.338 /2017 
Federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, 
Islamabad 

VS          

Ms. Sitara Amjad Masih  

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondent by:   
_____________________________________________________________________ 

24.09.2020  
Mir Afzal Malik, Advocate 
Ex-parte 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

civil 

revision  petition, 

the  petitioner,  Federal  Board  of 

Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education,  Islamabad  impugns  the 

judgment and decree dated 17.07.2017 passed by the Court of the 

learned  District  Judge 

(West), 

Islamabad,  whereby 

the 

petitioner‟s  appeal  against  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

13.04.2017  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Judge,  was 

dismissed.  Vide  the said  judgment  and  decree  dated  13.04.2017, 

the  learned  Civil  Court  had  decreed  the  respondent‟s  suit  for 

declaration  and  mandatory  injunction  for  correction  of  date  of 

birth.  

2. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner drew the attention of the 

Court  to  the  respondent‟s  admission  form  (Exh.D/3)  for  the 

Secondary  School  Certificate  Examination  and  submitted  that  in 

the  said  admission  form,  the  respondent  had  entered  14.03.1992 

as  her  date  of  birth;  that  the  admission  form  contained  the 

respondent‟s  affidavit  deposing  that  the  entries  made  in  the  said 

admission  form  were  correct;  that  the  admission  form  had  also 

been  signed  by  the  respondent‟s  father/guardian;  that  the  said 

admission  form  had  also  been  signed  and  stamped  by  the 

Principal of the respondent‟s School (Islamabad Model School for 

Girls  (Vi-X)  E-8,  Islamabad);  that  the  said  admission  form  was 

exhibited before the learned Trial Court;  and that the respondent 

could  not  take  a  position  contrary  to  the  one  taken  by  her  in  the 

said admission form.  

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the 

respondent  had  placed  reliance  on  Family  Certificate  issued  by 

                
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
2 

C.R.No.338/2017                                       

NADRA 

(Exh.P/1)  and  birth  certificate 

(Mark-C); 

that 

the 

respondent did not produce the register of births in order to prove 

that her correct date of birth was 14.03.1996; that no witness was 

produced from the respondent‟s college/school in order to testify 

that  the  respondent‟s  correct  date  of  birth  was  not  14.03.1992; 

and  that  the  concurrent  judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the 

learned  Courts  below  are  contrary  to  the  law  laid  down  by  this 

Court in the case of Federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary 

Education VS Azam Ali Khan (2017 YLR 906). Learned counsel for 

the petitioner prayed for the revision petition to be allowed. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  despite  notice  was  served  on  the 

respondent  and  published  in  the  newspaper  daily  „jang‟ no  one 

tendered  appearance  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  hence  vide 

order  dated  28.05.2019,  the  respondent  was  proceeded  against 

ex-parte. Today also no one entered appearance on behalf of the 

respondent. 

5. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner and perused the record with his able assistance.  

6. 

The record shows that on 07.10.2016, the respondent filed a 

suit  for  “declaration and mandatory injunction for correction of 

date of birth”  praying  for  a  declaration  that  her  correct  date  of 

birth  is  14.03.1996.  Furthermore,  the  respondent  prayed  for  a 

direction  to  the  petitioner  to  issue  a  corrected/rectified  mark 

sheet of her matriculation examination  wrongly showing her date 

of  birth  as  14.03.1992.  The  petitioner  contested  the  said  suit  by 

filing  a  written  statement.  After  the  framing  of  issues,  the 

respondent  tendered  in  evidence  documents  including  copy  of 

Family  Certificate 

issued  by  NADRA  (Exh.P/1);  her  father‟s 

domicile certificate (Exh.P/2) in children‟s column of said domicile 

certificate the respondent‟s date of birth is shown as 14.03.2019; 

a  copy  of  the  respondent‟s  application  to  the  petitioner  for 

correction of date of birth in Secondary School Certificate (Mark- 

A);  a  copy  of 

the  newspaper  announcement  about 

the 

respondent‟s  date  of  birth  (Mark-B);  and  a  copy  of  the  birth 

certificate  issued  on  10.01.2015  (Mark-C)  by  the  District  Health 

Officer,  Faisalabad.  The 

respondent‟s  result  card  dated 

 
 
3 

C.R.No.338/2017                                       

04.07.2015  for  the  Matriculation  Examination  2015  issued  by  the 

petitioner  was  also  produced  as  Exh.P/2.  According  to  Exh.P/2, 

the respondent‟s date of birth was 14.03.1992 whereas according 

to  Family  Certificate  (Exh.P/1)  and  the  birth  certificate  (Mark-C) 

her date of birth was 14.03.1996.  

7. 

The  petitioner,  in  its  evidence  produced  Exh.D/1,  D/2  and 

D/3,  which  are  the  respondent‟s  registration  card,  students‟ 

registration return for the Session 2013-2015 and admission form 

for  the  Secondary  School  Certificate  (Part-II)  Examination.  The 

respondent  and  her  father/guardian  had  signed  the  admission 

form  (Exh.  D/3).  In  this  form,  the  respondent‟s  date  of  birth  was 

stated to be 14.03.1992. This form also contains an affidavit sworn 

by  the  respondent  deposing  that  the  particulars  in  the  said  form 

were true and correct. This form was also signed and stamped by 

the Principal Islamabad Model School for Girls, E-8, Islamabad. 

8. 

Now,  during  her  statement  as  PW-1  before  learned  trial 

Court  the  respondent  did  not  dispute  the  authenticity  of  Exh.D/3. 

the respondent‟s stance before the learned Courts below was that 

the wrong entry of the respondent‟s date of birth in her admission 

form  for  the  Secondary  School  Certificate  Examination  was 

caused  due to clerical  error by  her school.  In  the said  admission 

form (Exh.D/3), the respondent‟s date of birth was not only filled in 

figures  but  in  words  as  well.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  that 

there  was  a  possibility  of  an  error  being  committed  by  the 

petitioner  in  recording  the  respondent‟s  date  of  birth  in  her 

Secondary School Certificate. Since the admission form (Exh.D/3) 

was an admitted document, it deserved due weight and credence 

which  has  not  been  given  to  it  by  the  learned  Courts  below.  The 

learned  Courts  below  misread  the  evidence  by  not  appreciating 

that the admission form (Exh.D/3) had not just been signed by the 

respondent,  but  also  by  her  father/guardian  and  the  Principal 

Islamabad  Model  School 

for  Girls,  E-8, 

Islamabad.  The 

requirement of an endorsement by the head of the institution is to 

ensure  that  the  entries  made  in  the  admission  form  are  correct 

and  as  per  the  school  record  of  the  respondent.  The  respondent 

is, therefore, estopped from taking a position contrary to the one 

 
 
4 

C.R.No.338/2017                                       

taken  by  her  at  the  time  of  submission  of  the  admission  form  for 

the Secondary School Certificate Examination.  

9. 

Reliance  by 

learned  appellate  Court  on 

the  Family 

Certificate/Form-B issued by NADRA (Exh. P/1) on 03.10.2009 and 

her father‟s domicile certificate (Exh.P/2) merely because the said 

documents were issued prior to matriculation certificate (Exh.P/3) 

is  not  consistent  with  law  laid  down  by  the  Superior  Courts.  It  is 

well  settled  that  where  there  is  a  disparity  in  the  date  of  birth 

entered  in  the  educational  testimonials  of  a  person,  and  the 

National Identity Card or birth certificate, credence is to be given 

to  the  entry  of  the  date  of  birth  in  the  educational  testimonials 

unless there is cogent and convincing evidence to hold otherwise. 

In  the  case  of  Mohammad  Arshad  VS  Noor  Ahmad  (2008  SCMR 

713),  credence  was  given  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  to  the 

petitioner‟s  date  of  birth  on  his  matriculation  certificate  as 

compared to his date of birth on his Birth Certificate and National 

Identity Card.  

10.  Strong  evidence  of  unimpeachable character  is  required  to 

change  the  date  of  birth  entered  in  a  person‟s  educational 

testimonials.  Courts  have  to  be  vigilant  and  cautious  in  granting 

discretionary  relief  of  declaration  or  permanent  injunction  in 

cases  where  plaintiffs  seek  a  change  in  their  names  or  dates  of 

birth. 

11.  A student and  his/her parents have to be very  careful, alert 

and  vigilant  while  disclosing  the  date  of  birth  at  the  time  of 

submission  of  forms  for  the  examination  of  Secondary  School 

Certificate  /  Matriculation.  The  Secondary  School  Certificate 

issued  by  the  Board  of  Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education 

goes  with  the 

life  of  a  student  as  this  certificate 

is  the 

authenticated  proof  of  the  student‟s  date  of  birth.  Such  a 

certificate is  invariably  accepted  as  a valuable  piece  of  evidence 

in  proof  of  the  date  of  birth  of  the  person  in  question  throughout 

his/her career, and Courts attach a high degree of probative value 

to the certificate, and the date of birth as entered in the certificate 

is accepted as almost binding. 

 
 
 
5 

C.R.No.338/2017                                       

12.  A  change  in  the  date  of  birth  recorded  in  matriculation 

certificate  issued  by  the  Board  is  a  serious  matter  because  it 

involves  many  consequences  and  particularly  affects  the  date  of 

retirement  etc.  In  such  cases,  a  Court  needs  to  scrutinize  the 

evidence carefully and interference should be made sparingly and 

with circumspection. The approach of  a Court has to be cautious 

and not casual. 

13. 

In the case of Saima Iltaf VS Principal, Junior Burn Hall Girls 

College,  Abbotabad  (2001  CLC  972),  it  was  held  that  in  order  to 

substantiate  the  contents  of  a  birth  certificate,  the  relevant 

register where the date of birth is entered has to be produced. In 

the  case  at  hand,  the  respondent‟s  birth  certificate  was  not 

produced either by the relevant Union Council or by N.A.D.R.A. or 

its  predecessor 

institution.  This 

is  a  material 

lapse 

in  the 

respondent‟s  case  which  has  not  been  noticed  by  the  learned 

Courts below.  

14.  The learned Courts below could not have relied on the birth 

certificate (Mark-C) issued on 10.01.2015 inasmuch as in the case 

of  Federal  Board  of  Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education  VS 

Azam Ali Khan (2017 YLR 906), it has been held that when a birth 

certificate was not issued within a reasonable time after birth, the 

entry  of  the  date  of  birth  in  such  a  birth  certificate  had  to  be 

corroborated  by  producing  in  evidence  the  register  of  births 

showing the correct date of birth of the person in question.  

15.  By  not  requiring  the  respondent  to  produce  the  register  of 

births maintained by the relevant Union Council or authority so as 

to  prove  that  the  date  of  birth  entered  in  the  respondent‟s  birth 

certificate was correct, the learned Courts below went against the 

law  laid  down  by  this  Court.  In  the  unreported  judgment  dated 

29.06.2015,  passed  by  this  Court  in  Civil  Revision  No.170/2015, 

titled “Syeda Razia Bukhari VS Federal Board of Intermediate and 

Secondary  Education,  Islamabad”, 

this  Court  upheld 

the 

concurrent  judgments  passed  by  the  learned  Courts  below, 

whereby, the petitioner‟s suit seeking a change in her date of birth 

entered in her matriculation certificate, was dismissed. This Court 

did  not  give  credence  to  the  date  of  birth  entered  in  a  birth 

 
 
6 

C.R.No.338/2017                                       

certificate,  which  was  issued  years  after  the  petitioner‟s  alleged 

date  of  birth.  In  paragraph  04  of  the  said  judgment  it  has  been, 

inter-alia, held as follows:- 

“4. … The birth certificate has been tendered in evidence in 
original which shows the date of reporting the birth of the child is 
19.03.2009, however, the register of Union Council or any other 
documents was not exhibited in evidence to show that the 
correct date of birth is 05.02.1988. …” 

Furthermore, 

in  another  unreported 

judgment  dated 

27.01.2015 passed in Civil Revision No.538-D/2002 titled “Federal 

Board VS Mustafa Nawaz,”  this Court held as follows:- 

“14. … Moreover, in order to prove the contents of crucial 
document  i.e.  birth  certificate  Ex.P1,  it  was  mandatory  to 
produce and get examined birth register of the concerned union 
council  pertaining  to  the  year  1976-77  for  ascertaining 
correctness and genuineness of the documents, but no such 
effort was made. There is also no explanation as to why birth 
certificate was got issued with a delay of more than eighteen 
years on 2.2.1995.”  

16. 

I am of the view that the learned Courts below have misread 

the  evidence  on  the  record  and  have  not  given  credence  to  the 

law  laid  down  by  the  Superior  Courts  especially  the  judgments 

referred to herein above. Therefore, the instant revision petition is 

allowed; the concurrent judgments and decrees dated 13.04.2017 

and  17.07.2017  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge  and  learned 

District  Judge,  respectively,  are  set-aside.  Consequently,  the 

respondent‟s  suit  for  declaration  and  mandatory  injunction  for 

rectification  of  the  date  of  birth  in  her  matriculation  certificate  is 

dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.  

Sultan* 

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
