ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 

         JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

 W.P. NO: 2647/2014  

MUHAMMAD ZAHID KHAN KHATTAK   
VERSUS  
LEARNED JUDGE FAMILY COURT    ETC 

Serial No. of 
order of 
proceeding. 
1 

Date or order 
of 
proceedings 
2 

Order with signatures of judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 

3 

29.5.2014 

            Mr. Khurram M. Qureshi, Advocate. 

This  petition  assails  Order  dated  27.03.2014 

passed by Mr. Mubashar Hassan, learned Judge Family 

Court-West,  Islamabad,  whereby  petitioner’s  objection 

upon the maintainability of family suit was set aside. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  while  claiming 

herself  to  be  the  wife  of  petitioner,  respondent  No.2 

instituted  suit  for  dissolution  of  marriage  wherein,  he 

filed  written-statement  denying  existence  of  marriage 

contract between the parties and raised objection that 

the  suit  does  not  fall  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Family 

Court.  However,  learned  trial  Court  by  rejecting  the 

objection  vide  Order  dated  27.03.2014  proceeded  to 

frame the issues and called evidence of parties.  

3. 

Learned 

Counsel 

submits 

that 

neither 

relationship  of  husband  and  wife  exists  between  the 

parties nor any NIKAHNAMA has been produced by the 

respondent  No1,  due  to  which  Family  Court  had  no 

Jurisdiction to decide the case. 

4. 

It  is  next  submitted  that  respondent  No.2  is 

already  married  to  one  Rehan  Ahmad  Shamsi  who  is 

residing in United Kingdom, that marriage is still intact 

and  it  is  impossible  for  a  muslim  woman  to  marry 

another person during subsistence of a valid marriage. 

5. 

Learned  Counsel  further  averred  that  in  a  case 

where  matrimonial  status  is  under  dispute,  proper 

course for the Family Court is to pass a direction to file 

suit  for  declaration  before  the  Civil  Court.  He  placed 

reliance on case titled as ‘MST JAMEELA AKHTAR VSPUBLIC 

AT LARGE’ [2002 SCMR 1544] wherein it was held;  

“..the  trial  Court  while  granting  succession 

certificate  to  the  respondent  No.2,  should 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
2                             WP. No. 2647 of 2014 

have  directed  that  no  share  of  the  said 

amount  should  be  paid  to  Mst.  Umat  Ul 

Hameed  unless  she  gets  a  decree  from  the 

Civil  Court  about  her  status  as  widow  of 

Muhammad  Zafarullah  Khan,  deceased,  for 

such,  a  question  could  not  be  decided  in 

summary proceedings.” 

6. 

Learned Counsel further relied upon unreported 

judgment  dated  10.05.2013  passed  by  the  Hon’ble 

Supreme  Court  in  Case  of  Mst  Mehnaz  Bibi  &  Mst.  Saba 

Noor VS Mst. Farhat Nigar etc [Civil Petition 1057 of 2011] & 

unreported  judgment  dated  02.05.2011  passed  by  the 

Hon’ble Peshawar High Court in Case of Mst. Farhat Nigar 

VS Mst. Mehnaz Bibi [CR 524 of 2009] wherein the dispute 

qua  succession  was  held  to  be  triable  by  learned  Civil 

Court. 

7. 

8. 

Heard & record perused. 

The  question  of  law  emanating  from  the  facts 

and  circumstances  of  the  instant  case  is  ‘whether  a 

Family  Court  can  decide  a  dispute  where  existence  of 

matrimonial relationship is denied in written statement ?’ 

9. 

The  jurisdiction  of  a  Family  Court  is  provided 

under  Section  5  of  the  Family  Court Act,  1964  which  is 

as following; 

(1) 

“  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the 

Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, and the 

Conciliation  Courts  Ordinance,  1961,  the 

Family Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction 

to  entertain,  hear  and  adjudicate  upon  the 

matters specified in Part I of the Schedule.” 

10. 

In part I of the Schedule at item No 7 Jactitation 

of  Marriage  is  mentioned  which  makes  it  clear  that 

where  one  of  the  spouses  denies  existence  of 

marriage  it  amounts  to  jactitation  of  marriage  and  is 

within  the  exclusive  domain  of  the  Family  Court  to 

decide the dispute. 

11. 

The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  case  of  ‘Abdul 

Waheed VS Asma Jehangir’ [PLD 2004 Supreme Court 219] 

held as following; 

“Question  of  validity  of  a  marriage  falling 

within the exclusive domain of the Family Court 

established  udner  the  West  Pakistan  Family 

 
3                             WP. No. 2647 of 2014 

Court Act, 1964, High Court could and ought to 

have  avoided  the  needless  controversy  on  the 

subject.” 

12. 

Further  in  case  of  Abdul  Hamid  VS  Munaza 

Fakhar  [2006  YLR  2622  Lahore]  wherein  it  is  held  as 

following; 

“Ordinary  dictionary  meaning  of  the  word 

jactitation  clearly  indicate  that  it  arises  in  the 

situation when one person intends to keep the 

other  silent  in  respect  of  boasting  of  existence 

of  marital 

relations  between 

the 

two. 

According to my analysis, the laws promulgated 

for 

settlement  of  dispute  between 

the 

husband/wife  is  that  in  case  any  part  of  the 

married  couple  disputes,  such  suits  certainly 

would  come  before  the  Courts  of  exclusive 

jurisdiction established in this behalf and he/she 

cannot maintain civil suit but where such relief 

is claimed by a person other than husband/wife, 

suit 

in  this  behalf  shall  be  entertained, 

adjudicated tried and decided by the Civil Court 

of ultimate jurisdiction.” 

13. 

The case laws referred by the petitioner make it evident 

that dispute  involved  therein  pertained to  inheritance  and  the 

existence  of  marriage  of  the  predecessor  was  brought  under 

dispute by the third person and is not under dispute between 

the spouses, hence the referred case laws are distinguished. 

14. 

In  view  of  above,  there 

is  no 

justification  for 

interference  in  the  impugned  Order  hence  the  petition  is 

dismissed in limine. 

Approved for reporting. 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Umar 
29.5.2014 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
