ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.231 of 2022 

Ghazala Asjad 
VS 
Assistant Commissioner/Sub-Divisional Magistrate (City) and another 

S. No. of order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  order/ 
Proceedings 

                                   11.09.2023. 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary.  
Mr. Jameel Hussain Qureshi, Mr. Azhar Yousaf, 
Mr.  Qaiser  Mansoor,  Mr.  Nawazish  Ali,  Mr. 
Muhammad  Shahid  and  Ms.  Almas  Bano, 
Advocates  for  the  Petitioner  in  their  respective 
Petitions. 
Barrister  Munawar  Iqbal  Duggal,  Additional 
Attorney General, Rana Imran Farooq, AAG and 
Ms. Asia Batool, AAG. 
Ch.  Imtiaz  Ahmed  Gujjar,  Advocate  for  the 
Respondent No.2 in connected Petition.  

1. 

Two  questions  were  posed  for  the  learned 

Additional  Attorney  General  by  this  Court  vide  the 

last order.  Today he submits that the judgment in the 

case reported as Muhammad Kamran Mullahkhail VS 

Government of Balochistan through Chief Secretary, 

PLD 2012 Balochistan 57 has not been suspended by 

Apex  Court  though  it  is  under  challenge,  however, 

the  Federation  submitted  before  the  Supreme  Court 

that Federal Legislature may be permitted to re-create 

Executive  Magistracy  by  making  amendments  in 

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  subject to certain 

parameters  as  detailed  in  the  C.M  filed  before  the 

Supreme Court.  

2. 

However  with  regard  to  the  second  question 

as  posed  in  the  last  order  both  the  learned  counsels 

for  the  Petitioner  as  well  as  the  learned  Additional 

Attorney  General  are  in  agreement  that  the  High 

Court  is  empowered  to  invoke  Section  5(3)  of  the 

Family Courts Act, 1964 in order to add the matters 

pertaining  to  polygamy  as  per  Section  6(5)  of  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961  to  Part-II  of 

the  Schedule  to  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  and  if 

the same is done then the Schedule read with Section 

20  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  would  empower 

the Family Courts to act as Judicial Magistrates to try 

offence  of  polygamy.  Both 

the  counsels  have 

concluded their respective arguments.  The matter is 

reserved.  

R..anjam  

   (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 

            JUDGE 

 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
