ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

Raja Muhammad  Yaseen 
VS 
Muhammad  Zeeshan  and  others. 

Appellant 

In person. 

Respondents  by: 

Raja Faisal Younas, alongwith 
respondents  No. 1  & 2. 

State  by: 

Mr. Husnain  Haider Thaheem,  State 
Counsel. 
Muhammad  Ishaq  Khan, SJ. 

Date of Hearing: 

24.07 .2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI  J.  Through  this  Criminal  Appeal,  the 

appellant  has  assailed  the  judgment  dated  27.01.2015,  passed  by  learned 

Judicial  Magistrate,  Section  30,  Islamabad,  whereby  respondents  No.  1  &  2 

have  been  acquitted  in  criminal  case  FIR. No.  28,  dated  17.03.2012,  U/s 

335/324/341/34  PPC, P.S Nilore, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief facts  referred  in  the  instant  appeal  are  that  the  appellant  Raja 

Muhammad  Yasin had  lodged the  complaint  Exh.PA to  the  S.H.O, P.S Nilore, 

Islamabad  with  the  allegation  that  on  16.03.2012,  his  son  Raja  Muhammad 

Safeer, who is  police employee alongwith  his  son  Ali and  his  wife Mst. Iram 

visited the  doctor  on  their  vehicle. At about  09:30  pm,  when  they  reached  on 

the  main  road  of Village Mohri, the  road  was  blocked  by placing  stones  and 

bricks.  Two persons  were seen  and  identified by them  as  Zeshan  alias  Shani 

S/o  Parvez, Village Mohra  and  Arshad  S/o  Musarat,  Village Ara, who raised 

Lalkara  and  asked  them  to  hand  over  everything.  In  the  meanwhile  three 

unknown  persons  were seen who were standing  at  some distance,  however they 

could  not  be  identified,  that  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer  slightly  reversed  his 

vehicle, whereupon  both  the  accused  persons  opened  fire which  landed  on the 

front  of  the  vehicle  and  when  vehicle  was  turned,  Zeshan  and  Arshad 

Mehmood fired on  the  back  side of the  vehicle, which  landed  on  lower side of 

I 

2 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

his  son in the  back  and  neck,  resultantly,  he  could  not  control  the  vehicle and 

the  same  hit  the  tree,  whereupon,  his  wife and  son  were  also  injured.  The 

complaint  was  converted  into F.l.R Exh.PJ.  The injured  were taken  to hospital 

and  the  appellant's  son  was  treated  for his  injuries.  The Investigation  Officer 

took the  fire empties  from the  place of occurrence.  Prepared  the  site plan  and 

also took the  pictures  of the  vehicle bearing  registration  No. LXN-2973, Mehran 

white color driven by the  victim/injured  prosecution  witness  through  Exh.Pl  to 

Exh.P7. The respondents  accused  were arrested  in  the  said  criminal  case  and 

after  thorough 

investigation,  they  were  challaned 

in  this  case,  whereby 

prosecution  produced  11  witnesses,  and  after recording  the  statement  U / s 342 

Cr.P.C,  the 

trial  Court  acquitted 

the  accused/respondents 

from  the 

abovementioned criminal  case  through  the  impugned judgment. 

3.  Appellant in person  contends  that  learned  Trial Court  has  not  considered 

the  testimony  of injured  PWs, who remained  consistent  and  unshaken  in  the 

course  of cross-examination;  that  all the  pieces  of evidence fully establish  the 

guilt  of  the  respondents  accused; 

that  ocular  account  furnished  by  the 

prosecution  witnesses  has  been  discarded  due 

to  the  negligence  and 

misconduct  of the  Investigation  Officers, who have neither  taken  the  vehicle in 

custody  nor  produced  the  same  before the  Court.  Although  the  injured  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  and  Mst. Sofia Iram/PW-2  have been  cross-examined 

at  length  and  they  have  explained  the  entire  incident  and  even identified the 

respondents  accused  persons,  who are  known  to them.  The injuries  have been 

corroborated  by  Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar/PW-7  and  the  Investigation  Officer has 

confirmed the  involvement of respondents/  accused  persons,  but  learned  Trial 

Court  has  taken  a  different  view on  assumptions,  hence  the  appeal  may  be 

allowed and  respondents  be  convicted for  the  heinous  crime  of  attempt  to 

murder. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  Counsel  for  the  respondents  contends 

that  no 

illegality has  been  observed  in the  trial, rather  prosecution  has  failed to justify 

the  identification  of  the  accused  persons  and  the  alleged  incident  was  not 

occasioned  in  a  mode  and -  manner  referred  by  the  appellant,  rather  it  is  an 

3 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

attempt  of dacoity, which  has  been  converted  into  attempt  of murder  against 

the  respondents  accused  persons,  due  to  enmity  between  the  parties.  He 

further  contends  that  eye-witness  /PW-2 has  taken  a different view and  version 

from Raja Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1,  which  was  made  basis  of the  acquittal  of 

the 

respondents, 

even  motive  has  not  been  established 

through  an 

independent  means  and  as  such  the  entire  case  is  full of doubts,  especially 

when the  weapon  i.e. pistol was  not  recovered in this  case  during  the  course  of 

investigation. 

5.  Arguments  heard  and  record perused. 

6. 

Perusal  of record  reveals  that  the  appellant  had  lodged the  criminal  case 

F.l.R  No.  28,  dated  17.03.2012,  U/s  335/324/341/34 

PPC,  P.S  Nilore, 

Islamabad  Exh.PJ  on  the  basis  of  his  complaint  Exh.PA on  the  date  of 

occurrence  i.e.  16.03.2012  with the  contention  that  his  son  Raja Muhammad 

Safeer took his  son  for medical  treatment  alongwith his  wife Mst. Sofia lram. 

After visiting Doctor, they  were on their  way back  to home  in their  vehicle. At 

about  09:30  p.m,  the  moment  they  reached  on the  main  road  of Village Mohri, 

they  noticed  that  someone  has  blocked their  way by placing  stone  and  bricks 

on  the  road.  Two persons  were seen  and  identified by them  as  Zeshan  alias 

Shani  S / o Parvez, resident  of village Mohra and  Arshad  S / o Musarat,  resident 

of  village Ara.  Both  the  accused  persons  stopped  them  and  demanded  to 

handover  the  belongings.  At  some  distance  three  other  persons  were  also 

present,  who  were  unknown  to  him.  The  complainant's  son  namely  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  reversed  his  vehicle, on  which  both  the  accused 

opened the  fire, which  landed  on  the  front  side  of the  vehicle, and  when  he 

succeeded  to turn  the  vehicle the  accused  persons  started  firing from back  and 

the  complainant's  son  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer sustained  injury  on  his  back 

and  neck,  as  a  result  whereof  the  vehicle collided with  a  tree,  whereby  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer, his  wife and  minor  son  were injured.  Partial  investigation 

was  conducted  by  Muhammad  Akbar  S.l/.PW-8 recorded  the  statement  of 

witnesses,  prepared  site  plan  (Exh.PN), recovered the  empties  of .30 bore and 

9mm  pistols  vide recovery memo  Exh.PD and  also  photographed  motor  car 

4 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

damaged  during  the  incident  and  took the  photographs  into  possession  vide 

recovery memo Exh.PE  and  same  were extracted  from Exh.Pl  to  Exh.P7, the 

injured  prosecution  witnesses  was  given treatment  by Dr. Tanvir Afsar/PW-7, 

who  appeared  in  witness  box  and  stated  that  the  victim  Raja  Muhammad 

Safeer was  produced  in  injured  condition  by the  local police, P.S Nilore, who 

was examined  via MLC No. 549. He was  firstly attended  by Dr. Saima  and  Dr. 

Bilal. The following injuries  have been recorded in the  MLC Exh.PK. 

•  Injury No.1 on left scapular  region of lxl  c.m. 

•  Injury  No.2 near  the  back  bone  and  hemotoma  on  the  left side of chest 

8x8 c.m. 

7.  After  initial  investigation,  the  matter.  was  transferred 

to  Muhammad 

Akbar  S.I/I.O/PW-8,  who  has  submitted  the  challan.  The  Trial  Court  after 

recording  the  evidence  of  the  11  prosecution  witnesses  acquitted 

the 

respondents  accused  from  the  abovementioned  case  through  the  impugned 

judgment  dated  27.01.2015. 

8. 

The appellant  and  the  counsel  for the  respondents  have  been  heard  in 

detail. The following factors  have  been  noted  by  the  Trial Court,  which  were 

made basis  of the judgment  of acquittal  of the  respondents:- 

"The  evidence  of  prosecution  case  is  based  on  the  information. 
furnished  to  the  local police  by  PW-3,  through  written  report  as 
Exh.PA,  but  as  discussed  above  his  narration  before  the  local police 
could  not find  cross  corroboration from  prosecution  evidence,  this 
aspect  of  the  case,  if  looked  into  in  line  with  the  stance  of  the 
defence  that  the  accused  had falsely  been  implicated  in the  instant 
case,  due  to  enmity  between  the  parties  over  the  "Rishta"  of  the 
daughter  of  complainant  Mst.  Shumaila,  which 
they  have 
substantiated  through  testimony  of PW-8, the  investigating  officer of 
the  case  as  well  as  PW-2, then  undoubtedly  it would  create  a  dent 
in  the  prosecution  story  and  the  stance  of  false  implication  of 
accused  in the  case  could not be rule out altogether. 

The  investigating  officer of the  case  been  able  to take  the  vehicle  in 
question  into possession  during  the  course  of  his  investigation  but 
he  did  not  do  so.  While  appearing  in  the  witness  box  as  PW-8, 
Muhammad  Akbar  SI  admits 
the  course  of  his 
investigation,  he  had  not  taken  the  vehicle  into possession.  When 
questioned  about  the justification  for  his  not  doing,  so  he  had  not 
afforded  any  reason  much  less  of plausible  one. 

that  during 

Though few  photographs  had  been  exhibited  during  the  course  of 
evidence  of  the  prosecution  as  PW-1  to  PW-7  but  in  absence  of 
features  of  the  car  being  given  in  complaint  as  Exh.P/ A  coupled 
with  the fact  of its  not seizure  by  the  investigating  officer during  the 

5 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

course  of  investigation,  it  cannot  be  said  with  certainty  that  the 
photographs  pertains  to  vehicle  being  used  by  victim  during  the 
course of occurrence. 

Now,  here  there  were  two  main  question  raised  by  learned  defence 
counsel.  No.1,  if as  per  stance  of  the  prosecution  the  victim  Raja 
Muhammad  Safeer  reversed  his  car  after  being fired  upon  by  the 
accused  then  how  did  he  sustained  injuries  on  his  back  and  neck 
and  no.2,  if he  had  not  reversed  the  vehicle  and  had  turned  that 
towards  the  house  of Ijaz  shown  in  the  as  Exh.P/N,  then  how  it 
was  possible  for  him  to  identity  the  accused  from  their  car,  while 
they  were  present  at  point  no.2  &  3  in  the  site  plan  as  Exh.P/ N. 
These questions  are to be examined  in light of prosecution  evidence. 

To resolve  the  controversy,  I  would  make  a  reference  to  the  cross 
examination  of  the  investigation  officer,  who  had  deposed  before 
court as PW-8 and  who  is scriber of the site plan Exh.P/ N.  Who had 
admitted  in  his  cross  examination  that  in case  of turning  of vehicle 
by  victim  towards  the  house  of  the  Ijaz,  it  was  not  possible  for 
him/ them  to  identify  accused,  standing  at  point  no.2  and  3. 
Besides  this,  admission  on  the part  of investigating  officer, if even 
otherwise,  the  site plan  is  looked  into the  house  of Ijaz  and  points 
no.2  and  3  are  shown  in  opposite  direction  to  each  other  and  in 
case  of  turning  of  the  vehicle  by  victim  towards  said  house  and 
colliding  of  vehicle  with  a  tree  at  point  no. 4,  the  possibility  of 
accurate identity  of the accused  seems  to his count improbable. 

The last  aspect  of the  case  is recovery of alleged empties  from  spot 
via  recovery  memo  as  Exh.P/D  and  as  Exh.P/D/2.  Admittedly  the 
weapon  of  offence  had  not  been  recovered  by  the  accused  from 
possession  of the accused  or from  any peace  at the pointation  of the 
accused.  The  empties  so  recovered  have  not  been  sent  to  ballistic 
expert for  detennining  the  caliber of the  weapon  from  which  those 
were  being  fired.  The  stance  of  the  prosecution  is  that  after 
commission  of  offence,  the  accused  throw  away  their  pistols  in 
Rawal  Dam  and  later-on, during  the  course  of investigation  accuse 
pointed  out  the place  to local police  where  the pistols  were  thrown 
by  them  and  this fact  recorded  by  local police  by  preparing  memo 
as Exh.P/P.  " 

9. 

In  order  to  resolve  the  controversy,  it  is  necessary  to  go  through  the 

evidence  of  the  prosecution,  which  includes  the  testimony  of  injured  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer,  who  appeared  as  PW-1 and  recorded  the  stance  in  the 

following manner.- 

v!  -vn  ~J  (lfl/  JiJ  j:P(  J~  v! vd{  J~f  (LVI  v!  (.)'1  (  ol.?y  ~~J  r  v!  f  V ~k: 
L  v~  L jij  ~  J,,J ,J J ?.- .:;..1  .::.-1)  09:00  ~J .::J1.  .ilv  L (J'  _;,,, v~ ()..1  /16.03.2012 
i;;!  v! ~  ~j  L ~  0930  ~j' 2::...IJ  L !]Jr'  {  iJJ( (),1  oV1  L ?.- )JI  iJ~ (),1  {  ~IJ  -'I vi( .f 
1 .=:...v  vir.i  ss  if~;  iJJ( L  v!  _,j  J.11  V k..::....  vJA fr.  ,j (Ir  Jui;;!-~  v~  L  tft 014  Ju 
L.11  LJ,,- V reverse f iJJ( L  v! L { ;f. L iJJ( fr.  if.::....  J; ..1' ./G  { iJJ( L  (),fl  JJI  L 
'f- L1)  v! J!  '-Ji.1  fr.  ~J{ ..JJ  ~~.; (l:  (...fl  ~  v! ,:J  -1J/ .::..>~  if  vi1r.i  vin  ~1  ~  V.: tJ  h 
LJ,,- f tJJ( L  v! -~ J .::..>~  { J}  ..:;..,-))  ~~}  vin  -'f- .:;..,-n  ~1 fr.  _.;  .::.-/  ..JJ  ul  ;;.JI  l/n 
.f iJ;  ./G  ~  (l  L  cA.?  {if.  if ,Y f if L~  Ln 

L ..J (~)  {/  U/- ./G  n  ~J 

{~)JI 

6 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

l11P!  ~  '5;£ JJ( ·"'  ~.1  ~,  r.  I)  !!r '/-  {escalator  L JJ(k, ;4 ~/ rr Le  L1, f.:. '-/-  ~  ;! 
{- -''' J~ '/- !:.. ~}  2!' (li  ~  .L1.f  ~  .::..> -'' L JJ( (/1.f  ~  .::..> -'' ftr  { ki; ,£ -''' J J1  t» / 
_f:..y;  J; l)in 

10.  PW-1 acknowledged  that  his  sister  Shumaila  was  married  to  Habib ur 

Rehman  in  the  year  2012  and  his  sister  has  filed the  suit  for jactitation  of 

marriage  against  Zeshan,  which  was  filed after  the  alleged incident,  however, 

he denied  the  suggestion  of accused  side that  Zeshan  was  married  to Shumaila 

with consent  through  the  Court  marriage,  he  even denied  the  suggestion  that 

Arshad  Mehmood is  witness  of  the  said  Nikah.  The  marriage  came  to  his 

knowledge three  months  after  the  incident,  he  contended  that  the  Nikahnama 

was fake. He admitted  that  Zeshan  accused  has  filed an  application  against  his 

family members  including  the  parents  that  they  are  executing  the  Nikah  of 

Shumaila,  despite  the  fact  that  they  were  already  married,  but  the  said 

application  was  submitted  after  one year  of the  incident.  PW-1 acknowledged 

that  the  vehicle, in which  he  was  present  on the  day  of occurrence  belongs to 

his  brother,  but  he  has  not  informed the  Investigation  Officer regarding  make, 

model and  registration  number  of the  vehicle. PW-1 has  seen  the  stones  and 

boulders  lying on  the  road  from  15 to 20  feet, when  lights  of the  vehicle were 

on,  and  the  only  source  of  light  was  the  car  light  as  no  street  light  was 

available in  the  area.  He heard  7  to  8  fires and  reversed  his  vehicle towards 

house  of Ijaz. He has  neither  referred  the  c~othes of the  accused  persons  nor 

even explained the  features  of three  unknown  persons,  who were not  identified. 

PW-1 has  not  informed that  which accused  has  made  number  of fires, however, 

he confirms that  he was at  the  mercy of the  accused  persons  if they intended  to 

murder  him easily, when  the  vehicle was stopped.  PW-1 has  confirmed that  the 

vehicle was present  in the  house  and  he has  not  given any repair  documents  to 

Investigation Officer as  the  same were not demanded  by Investigation Officer. 

11.  The  star  witness  of  this  case  Mst.  Sofia Iram,  the  wife of  PW-1 Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer, appeared  as  PW-2 and  while narrating  the  stance  of PW-1 

Raja Muhammad  Safeer, categorically stated  that:- 

7 

Crl. Appeal  No. 26/2015 

f--=1..A1.11n f r.~'{..J'i:1~;...fi..:;...l.)!1:11k'  f ~~I 1Ji1r.}1J},,LJ1? '-fi  .1,11.)! I.)!(/ ,.1.J J u~LiJJ( 
iJJ(L/l?'-fi-vYllf  ),;~~!Ji  riv~J J~_y)~~·lil:1.1t°i'v!~'-.11nffr...:-/ 

..J,..t-.111/,, 
-../. v=e.J!{t ;~,J..:;...I,)! ..;/-i.)JJ t» /...! /~Lv,J1i.Jreverse 

PW-2 Mst. Sofia Iram  acknowledged that  she  has  seen  the  blockade  of the  road 

at  least  from 10 feet, the  vehicle was  reversed  and  turned  towards  the  house  of 

ljaz,  same  was  stopped  after  hitting  the  tree  half  kilometer  away.  PW-2 

acknowledged that  her  husband's  sister  Shumaila  had  filed suit  of jactitation  of 

marriage  against  Zeshan  in the  Family Court,  whereby she  denied  the  marriage 

with accused  Zeshan,  who claims  to  be  her  husband.  The Nikahnama  which 

was challenged  is  pertaining  to year  2009,  whereas  Shumaila  was  married  to 

Habib ur  Rehman  in year  2011. 

12.  While considering  the  testimony  of these  two  star  witnesses  including 

PW-1 Raja  Muhammad  Safeer, following factors  have  been  acknowledged on 

record:- 

1.  Incident  of firing  took  place  in  the  night  when  the  road 

was  blocked  through boulders  and  stones. 

2.  PW-1 and  PW-2 were present  in the  vehicle on the  alleged 

incident. 

3.  Accused  Zeshan  and  Arshad  Mehmood  were  identified  by 
Raja  Muhammad  Safeer  as  well  as  by  PW-2  Mst.  Sofia 
!ram through Car headlight. 

4.  Accused  Zeshan 

the  prosecution 
is  neighbour  of 
witnesses,  whereas  the  second  accused  Arshad  Mehmood 
is friend  of  Zeshan,  who  usually  visit  the  street  where 
PW-1 and  PW-2 live. 

5.  The  parties  are  locked  in  a family  dispute  that  sister  of 
Raja  Muhammad  Safeer  has  filed  a  suit for jactitation  of 
marriage against  Zeshan  and  denied  the  marriage. 

6.  Vehicle was  neither  taken  into possession  by  the  I.Os  of 
this  case  nor  made  part  of  the  challan  or produce  in  the 
Court. 

7.  Shumaila  married  with  Habib  Ur  Rehman  in  the  year 

2011-12. 

13.  The  prosecution 

has 

produced 

_PW-3  Muhammad  Yasin  1.e. 

Complainant/  appellant,  who is  not  eye-witness  of the  incident,  rather  lodged 

the  F.I.R and  set  the  criminal  machinery  in  motion  for  prosecution  of  the 

respondents,  however, he  has  been  cross-examined  at  length  and  he  admitted 

factum  of filing of suit  of his  daughter  against  accused  Zeshan  for jactitation  of 

8 

Crl.  Appeal  No. 26/2015 

marriage  and  during  pendency  of the  same,  his  daughter  was  married  to Habib 

ur  Rehman. 

14.  The  prosecution  has  brought  Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar/PW-7,  who  treated  the 

injured  prosecution  witness  i.e.  PW-1 Raja  Muhammad  Safeer  through  MLC 

No. 549 and  explained  the  injuries  i.e.; 

•  Injury  No.l  on  left  scapular  region  of  lxl  c.m.,  and 

•  Injury  No.2  near  the  backbone  and  hemotoma  on  the  left  side  of 

chest  BxB e, m. 

He admitted  that  due  to  the  said  injuries  the  legs  of the  injured  PW-1 Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer  were  not  working  and  he  remained 

in  hospital 

till 

17.03.2012  to 28.03.2012  and  he was  later  on sent  to Neuro Surgeon  Surgical 

Department  PIMS Hospital. He admitted  that  during  X-Ray, Metallic body was 

seen  and  he  has  submitted  his  MLC as  Exh.PK, which  was  signed  by him.  He 

acknowledged that  the  person,  who brought  the  injured  to  hospital  has  to  be 

mentioned  in the  relevant  column  Exh.PK, which is apparently  blank,  similarly, 

date  of admission  in  column  was  also  blank..  PW- 7 confirms  that  three  injuries 

were  referred  in  Exh.PK, however, injury  No.1 has  not  been  explained  as  to 

whether  the  same  is  exit or  entry  wound  and  injury  No.3 is  result  of Injuries 

No. l  & 2, he also acknowledges that:- 

L~(.)1(-Ex.P/K  T-..:,.,-.·"=,J V positionJ'.1,l..J.1 f T--c.Ciel{ f f,fseat of  injuryf T--.:..--.1'= 
.J1-0f'vh,,.,.;le~ LJ J.J,l..J,1 f VJZli.J,.::.u.r'i.fl( ;{:_ 

However, PW-7 was later  on confronted with the  specific question  as  to whether 

injury  referred  in  Exh.PK could  be caused,  when  a victim is  sitting  infront  side 

of the  vehicle Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar/PW-7  has  not  answered  the  same  and  states 

that  the  same  relates  to  circumstantial  evidence. Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar/PW-7  was 

cross-examined  in  detail  qua  the  nature  of injuries  with  reference  to  Section 

335 PPC for permanent  disability,  however, it was acknowledged by the witness 

that  he has  not  referred  Itlaf e  Uzw, which is the  result  of injuries  No. l  & 2. 

15.  While considering  the  abovementioned  evidence of PW-7 Dr. Tanvir Afsar, 

MLO, Polyclinic Hospital, who has  examined  the  injured  witness  has  confirmed 

9 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

the  treatment  of the  injured,  explained  the  injuries  in detail  and  even admitted 

and  justified  the  nature  of  injuries  caused  to  the  victim  Raja  Muhammad 

Safeer / PW-1 from  the  back,  and  the  defence  side  has  further  clarified this 

aspect  in  cross-examination  as  such  the  testimony  of Dr. Tanvir Afsar/PW-7 

has  fully established  the  crime, mode and  manner  of the  same. 

16.  The  prosecution  has  produced  Dr.  Ijaz Ahmed/PW-10,  who  conducted 

the  surgery of PW-1 Raja Muhammad  Safeer on 30.03.2012,  who contends  that 

he  has  seen  the  X-Ray of Raja  Muhammad  Safeer, in  which  two bullets  were 

found near  his  spinal  cord  and  during  his  inspection  the  lower portion  of the 

body  was  completely paralyzed  and  even  the  Catheter  was  fixed  for  renal 

function  of the  victim. He has  seen  previous  record  of Raja Muhammad  Safeer 

and  during  the  course  of operation  two slugs  of the  bullets  were extracted  from 

the  spinal  cord,  but  he  could  not  tell  the  exact  bore  of the  said  slugs.  Both 

slugs (bullets) were handed  over to the  Investigation Officer. 

17.  The above referred  stance  of the  Dr. Ijaz Ahmed/PW-10  clearly spells out 

that  victim  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer  PW-1  remained  in  hospital  for  his 

treatment  and  he  was  operated  for remaining  bullets,  which  were stuck  near 

his  spinal cord and  as  such,  his  lower body part  was paralyzed. 

18.  The last  important  piece of evidence is the  investigation  part,  which was 

initially conducted  by  Muhammad  Akbar  S.I/PW-8,  who  reached  Polyclinic 

Hospital alongwith  other  police officials and  recorded  the  statement  of  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  and  seen  his  wife  Mst.  Sofia  Iram  and  son 

Muhammad  Ali  in  injured  condition.  Recorded  the  complaint  Exh.PA and 

registered  the  F.l.R  Exh.PJ.  He  has  taken  blood  stained  clothes  of  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer through  Exh.PC from the  Doctor and  recorded  the  stance  of 

the  witnesses  and  visited  the  site  and  prepared  the  site  plan,  whereupon  he 

recovered 07  fire-arm  empties  of 9mm  and  06  fire-arm  empties  of  .30  bore 

pistol. Recovered the  vehicle bearing  registration  No. LXN-2973, Mehran  with 

broken  windscreen,  he  has  taken  the  photographs  via recovery memo Exh.PE 

and  later  on, he  was  transferred  from the  said  Police Station  to  P.S. Shahzad 

Town, Islamabad. 

10 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

19.  During  the  course  of cross-examination,  he  acknowledged that  he  has 

not  investigated  the  matter  to  the  extent  that  who brought  the  injured  to  the 

hospital  and  how  the  complainant  came  to  know  about  the  incident.  He 

recorded  the  statement  of injured  Raja Muhammad  Safeer on  17.03.2012,  who 

was  in  conscious  condition  at  that  time.  Investigation  Officer acknowledged 

that  he  has  neither  taken  the  vehicle into  possession  nor  he  has  referred  any 

reason  for not  taking  the  vehicle into custody.  Even he has  not  investigated  the 

matter  regarding  headlights  of the vehicle as  to whether  what  distance  it covers 

in  the  night.  Muhammad  Akbar  S.1/PW-8 admitted  that  there  was  no  other 

light available at  the  place  of occurrence  and  he  admitted  that  if  the  vehicle 

was placed  at  Point  No. l,  its  direction  towards  Village Chirah,  then  it was  not 

possible to  place  a  light  on  Points  No. 2  &  3  and  none  can  be  identified. He 

confirms in his  investigation  that  fire landed  on the  front  and  back  side of the 

vehicle and  no fire hit  on the  vehicle from any  other  side, whereas  the  injured 

received the  fire arm  injuries  on its  back  side. The Investigation  Officer has  not 

taken  any  opinion  from  the  doctor  regarding  the  body  paralysis  of  Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer/victim  as  to  whether  it  is  permanent  or  of  temporary 

nature. 

20.  The  matter  was  also  investigated  by  PW-9  Maqsood  Ahmed  Qasori, 

Inspector,  CIA Wing, who admitted  that  when  investigation  was  handed  over to 

him, he  prepared  the  memo of possession  Exh.PH regarding  recovery of copies 

of the  passport  of the  accused,  affidavit of Shumaila,  l.D Card  and  Nikahnama. 

He also admitted  that  the  accused  persons  disclosed  that  they  had  thrown  the 

weapon of offence in  Rawal Dam after  the  alleged incident,  as  such,  the  same 

was  not  recovered, but  he  has  also  confirmed that  he  has  received two slugs 

through  Dr. Tanvir Afsar and  Ijaz Ahmed through  Exh.PQ. 

21.  During  the  course  of cross-examination,  he  admitted  that  the  reason  of 

dispute  is Nikah of accused  Zeshan  and  Shumaila,  who married  to each  other 

in a concealed manner;  he  also  admitted  that  the  dispute  between  the  accused 

and  injured  was  due  to the  Volley Ball Match and  quarrel  took  place year  ago. 

H~ has  not  verified the  bore  or  weapon  of  the  slugs  by  sending  them  to 

11 

Crl.  Appeal  No. 26/2015 

Forensic  Science  Laboratory.  He  has  also  admitted  that  he  has  visited  the 

hospital  on  24.04.2012  alongwith  other  police officials, but  he  has  not  taken 

over the  vehicle into  possession/  custody,  which  was  being  driven  by injured 

Raja Muhammad  Safeer on the  day of occurrence.  He admitted  that  the  vehicle 

was handed  over to  him  on  18.04.2012  on  the  date  of investigation  and  then 

took the  stance  that  only pictures  were handed  over to him,  however, he  could 

not  explain  the  reasons  as  nobody  has  restrained  him  from  taking  into 

possession  the vehicle nor  he has  seen  the vehicle from his  own eyes neither  he 

has  verified  the  capacity  and  powers  of  the  headlights  of  the  vehicle  to 

ascertain  whether  anything  could be seen in its light at  night. 

22.  While considering  the  above position  stated  by  both  the  Investigation 

Officers, following facts  have been admitted  on record:- 

1.  PW-8  Muhammad  Akbar  S.I  has  not  taken  the  vehicle 
into 
I custody  after  the  incident,  which  was  being 
injured  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer  on  the  day 

registration  No.  LXN-2973  Mehran, 

bearing 
possession 
driven  by 
of occurrence. 

2.  Only  photographs  were  taken  into  possession 
Exh.PE referred as Exh.P 1  to Exh.P7 in this  case. 

through 

3.  No  reasons  has  been  put  forward  as  to  why  the  vehicle 

was  not taken  into custody  by  the I. 0. 

4.  PW-9  Maqsood  Ahmed  Qasoori,  Inspector,  Second  1.0 
confirms  that  weapon  of  offence  was  not  recovered, 
despite  his  best  effort  from  Rawal  Dam,  which  was 
thrown  by  the  accused persons  after the incident. 

5.  The  motive  narrated  by  PW-9  /I.O  is  the  concealed 
of  Shumaila  with  Zeshan  and  Volley  Ball 
and  Raja 

marriage 
match  quarrel 
Muhammad  Safeer  a year  ago from the  alleged incident. 

the  accused 

between 

6.  Two  slugs  were  recovered  near  the  back  bone  of  the 
injured Raja Muhammad  Safeer  by Dr.  ljaz Ahmed,  which 
were  taken  into  custody  by  PW-:9,  but  were  not  sent  to 
FSL. 

7.  PW-9  has  neither  took  the  vehicle  into  possession  nor 
made  any  efforts  to take  over the  vehicle for  the purpose 
of investigation  and  even  he has  not seen  the  vehicle from 
his own  eyes. 

23.  The accumulative  effect of the  entire  case  gives rise  to  a  situation  that 

the  matter  was  not  investigated  properly  by  both  the  Investigation  Officers 

namely  Muhammad  Akbar,  S.l/PW-8  and  Maqsood Ahmed Qasoori, Inspector, 

CIA Wing/ PW-9, who have not  made any  serious  effort to investigate  the  matter 

12 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

as 

they  have  not 

taken 

over 

the  vehicle  bearing  Registration 

No.LXN-2973, Mehran,  driven  by the  injured  Raja Muhammad  Safeer on  the 

day of occurrence,  despite  the  fact that  firing was  made  on the  said vehicle and 

it  is an  admitted  position  by the  Investigation  Officers that  the  fire was made 

on  the  vehicle and  photographs  thereof  were  taken  as  shown  in  Exh.Pl  to 

Exh.P7 without  any  justified  reason  as  to why the  vehicle was  not  taken  into 

custody.  Such  type  of  negligence and  behavior  of  the  Investigation  Officers 

affects the  prosecution  case,  although  there  is  no  fault  on  the  part  of injured 

Raja Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  in this  regard.  It is the  duty  of the  Investigation 

Officer to take  over the  case  property  in a  proper  manner  and  in this  case  the 

vehicle in  question  was  the  main  part  of  the  prosecution  case,  which  was 

intentionally  not  taken  into  custody  by the  I.Os and  this  factum  persuaded  the 

learned  Trial Court  to  pass  the  order  of acquittal  of the  accused  persons  as 

discussed  in  Para-20  of the  impugned  judgment.  In my humble  view, it  is not 

the case  of defence that  Raja Muhammad  Safeer was injured  in the  said vehicle 

or  the  incident  had  not  taken  place,  even the  Trial Court  has  made  serious 

errors  while  discarding 

the  evidence  of  Exh.Pl 

to  Exh.P7,  which  are 

photographs  of the  vehicle, which clearly establish  that  the  firing was  made  on 

the  front and  back  side of the  vehicle. The vehicle was  damaged  as  highlighted 

in Exh.Pl,  which  further  confirms  the  entire  story  of injured  Raja Muhammad 

Safeer/PW-1 and  his  wife PW-2 Mst. Sofia lram.  The firing marks  were present 

on the  back  side of the  vehicle, which  has  been  seen  in  Exh.P6, but  all these 

facts  have  been  discarded  by  the  learned  Trial Court  without  rendering  any 

plausible  explanation. 

24.  The  wisdom  behind  the  collection of evidence is  required  in  terms  of 

Criminal Procedure  Code and  Police Rules are  that  the  1.0 has  to  investigate 

the  matter  and  bring  the  evidence to  connect  the  accused  persons  with  the 

alleged crime, which  is  the  primary  role of the  Investigation  Officer, although 

such  role  was  not  performed  in  a  proper  manner,  which  affects  the  entire 

prosecution  case,  even  then 

the  evidence  available  on  record  i.e.  the 

photographs  falls within  the  concept  of documentary  evidence and  same  were 

13 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

prepared,  taken  into  possession  during  the  course  of  investigation,  which 

apparently  discloses  the  mode and  manner  of the  entire  crime. 

25.  The view taken  by the  learned  Trial Court  regarding  non-production  of 

vehicle has  to  be  considered  in  the  light  of duties  extracted  from the  Police 

Rules,  1934, as  such,  the  concept  of custody  of the  case  property  has  been 

highlighted  in  Police Rules  22.16,  22.18  and  22.49.  For ready  reference,  Rule 

22. 16 is reproduced  as  under: 

22.16.  Case property.  --  (1)  The  police  shall  seize  weapons, 
articles  and  property  in  connection  with  criminal  cases  and  take 
charge of property  which  may  be unclaimed. 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(!) 

under  the  implied  authority  of Section  170,  Code of Criminal 
Procedure; 
in the  course  of searches  made  in. police investigations  under 
Sections,  51,  165 and  166, Code of Criminal Procedure; 
under  Section  153,  Code  of  Criminal Procedure,  as  regards 
weights,  measures,  or  instruments  for  weighting  that  are 
false; 
under  Section  550,  Code  of  Criminal Procedure,  as  regards 
property  alleged  or suspected  to have  been  stolen  :  provided 
if  the  property  consists  of  an  animal  or  animals 
that 
belonging to Government  or to persons  of good status  it may 
be  made  over  to  them  or  to  a  commissioned  or  a  gazetted 
officer, under  the  orders  of a Magistrate,  who  is empowered 
to  make  such  an  order  under  Section  523,  Criminal 
Procedure Code. 
under  Section  550,  Code  of  Criminal Procedure,  as  regards 
property  found  under  circumstances  which  create  suspicion 
of the  commission  of an  offence; when  an  offence  in  respect 
of  an  animal  is  committed  and  such  animal  is  not  stolen 
property  such  animal  shall  be seized  and  send  with  the  case 
to the Magistrate  having jurisdiction; 
under  Section  25  of  the  Police Act,  as  regards  unclaimed 
property; 

Ordinarily  the  police  shall  not  take  possession  of  moveable 
property  as  unclaimed  when  it  is  in  the  possession  of  an 
innocent finder,  but  in  cities  and  in  cantonments  the  police 
may,  in compliance with  an order issued  under  Section 26  or 
27  of  the  Police  Act,  take  possession  and  dispose  of 
unclaimed  property  made  over to them  by  innocent finders. 

Such  property  shall  be  entered  in  the  store-room  register, 
unless  a special  register is prescribed for  the purpose  by  the 
District Magistrate. 
under the provisions  of Local and  Special Laws. 

(g) 

(2) 
Each  weapon,  or article of property  not being  cattle,  seized 
under  the  above  rule, shall  be marked  or labelled  with  the  name  of 
the  person  from  whom,  or  the  place  where,  it  was  seized,  and 
reference to the  case  diary  or other report submitted  from  the police 
station. 

14 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

If articles  are  made  up  into  a  parcel,  the  parcel  shall  be 
secured  with  sealing  wax  bearing  the  seal  impression  of  the 
responsible  officer, and  shall  be similarly  marked  or labelled.  Such 
articles  or  parcels  shall  be  placed 
in  safe  custody,  pending 
disposal  as provided  by  law  or rule. 

Cattle  shall  be places  in  the pound  and  shall  be  carefully 
described  in  the  case  diary  or other  report regarding  their  seizure 
from  the police station. 

All  expenses  for  feeding  and  watering  cattle  kept  in  the 
pound  in connection  with  cases  shall  invariably  be  recovered from 
the District Magistrate  and  not from  the  complainant. 

The  police  shall  sent  to  headquarters  or  to  magisterial 

(3) 
outposts--- 

(a) 

(b) 

all  weapons,  articles  and  property  connected  with 
cases  sent for trial; 
suspicious, 
ordered  to do so  by  a competent  Magistrate. 

in-claimed  and  other  property,  when 

(4)  Motor vehicles  detained  or seized  by  the police  in connection 
with  cases  or accidents  shall  be produced  before a Magistrate  after 
rapid  investigation  or  by  means  of  in-complete  challan.  The 
evidence  relating  to  the  identity  or condition  of  the  vehicle  should 
be led and  disposed  of at an early  date,  and  the Magistrate  should 
then  be  invited  to exercise  the  discretion  vested  in him  by  Section 
516-A,  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  to  order  that  the  vehicle  be 
made  over to the  owner pending  conciusion. of the  case  on security 
to be produced  whenever  demanded  by  the  Court. 

Besides  the  above  referred  concept  of  case  property, 

the  role  of  the 

Investigating  Officer in  such  type of dealings  at  the  investigation  stage  has  to 

be  considered  in  the  light  of  Rules  25.1  and  25.2,  even  the  property  not 

required  shall  be returned.  The relevant  provision of Clause  25.49  is as under: 

Property  not  required  to  be  retumed.-On 

25.49. 
the 
conclusion  of  an  investigation  the  investigating  officer shall  make 
over to the  proper persons  all property  which  he  may  have  taken 
in to his  charge  in the  course  of the  investigation  and  which  is  not 
further  required  in  connection  with  case.  A  receipt for property  to 
made  over shall  be taken  on the  inquest  report. 

26.  The  Investigating  Officer is  expected  to  take  steps  to  secure  technical 

assistance  and  advice whenever  it  appears  desirable  during  investigation  for 

the  purpose  of  evidence or  for  demonstration  in  the  Court.  Such  technical 

assistance  is  from the  experts  notified in  their  fields, i.e.  fingerprint  bureau, 

photographs,  handwriting  experts,  fire-arms  expert,  chemical  examiners, 

serologist and  inspector  of explosives, who have been  notified and  appointed  by 

the  Provincial Government  being experts  in relevant  fields, as  such,  the  powers 

15 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

available to the  Investigating  Officers are  to be considered  in the  light of Rules 

25.14  and  25.15.  On the  other  hand,  Sections  160 and  175 of the  Cr.P.C. also 

empower the  Investigating  Officer to ensure  attendance  of witnesses  or persons 

in  the  Police Station,  who appear  to  be acquainted  with circumstances  of the 

case.  Similarly,  the  case  property  may  also  be  referred  to  the  Magistrate 

concerned  for execution  of bond, whereafter  the  same will be released. 

27. 

I  have also gone through  the  powers referred in Sections  515  and  516A of 

the  Cr.P.C., which  deal with order  for custody  and  disposal  of property  pending 

trial in certain  cases,  their  procedure  and  concept  of dealing with  the  affairs of 

properties  taken  into  custody  by the  Investigating  Officer during  the  course  of 

inquiry,  even the  suspected  properties,  stolen  or  otherwise,  have  to  be  dealt 

with in  terms  of Section  550  Cr.P.C. All these  provisions  highlight  the  role of 

the  Investigating  Officer and  if  such  functions  and  powers  have  not  been 

carried  out  in  a  manner  required  under  the  law and  Police Rules,  the  same 

should  be  declared  as  a  defective investigation  and  is  to  be  dealt  with under 

Chapter XIV (Discipline and  Conduct) of the  Police Rules,  1934. 

28.  While considering  this  background,  the  role of the  learned  Trial Court  as 

well as  of the  appellate  court  is  more  delicate  while extracting  the  evidence 

justiciable  on  record  under  the  principles  of Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984. 

The material  and  evidence placed on record when came before the  Court,  if was 

sufficient to connect  the  accused  with commission  of crime, the  accused  could 

still  be  convicted, notwithstanding  minor  omissions  that  had  no  bearing  on 

outcome of the  case.  Reliance is placed upon  2017  SC.MR 283  (The State/ANF 

VS Muhammad  ArshadJ. It  is  also  settled  law that  complainant  should  not 

suffer  for  fault  of  prosecution  or  Investigating  Officers,  who  remained 

negligent in  discharging  of their  official duties  and  functions  as  held  in  case 

reported  as  2011  SC.MR 713  (Ansar Mehmood v. Abdul KhaliqJ. Similarly, if 

the  Investigating  Officer has  conducted  defective investigation  and  has  not 

secured  incriminating  material  i.e.  the  bloodstained  clothes  or  vehicle,  it 

reflects the  working of Investigating  Officer and  it could  not  cause  harm  to the 

prosecution  case.  Reliance is  placed  upon  2008  SC.MR 1228  (Abdul Majeed 

16 

Crl. Appeal  No. 26/2015 

VS  The  State}.  The  Hon 'ble  Peshawar  High  Court  has  also  gone  one  step 

further  while dealing  with  the  case  of defective investigation  and  declared  that 

any  defect, irregularity  or  even illegality in  the  investigation  would  not  vitiate 

the  trial  unless  it  is  shown  to have prejudiced  the  accused  in any  manner  and 

similarly no objection regarding  any flaw in the  investigation  or trial  can  prevail 

at  appellate  or  revisional  stage  unless  it  is  proved  to  have  brought  about 

miscarriage  of  justice  or  occasioned  failure  of  justice.  Reliance  is  placed 

upon  1995  P.Cr.LJ  313  Peshawar  (Muhammad  Ashraf  Khan  Tareen  VS 

The  StateJ. The  apex  Court  has  also  reiterated  similar  principles  in  case 

reported  as  1995  SC.MR 1365  (Sheraz Asghar  VS The StateJ. 

29.  While  considering  the  above  legal  position,  when  the  duty  has  not 

properly been  performed  by the  Investigation  Officer, then  the  complainant  or 

the  prosecution  should  not  suffer  for  the  illegality,  misconduct  of  the 

Investigation agency  for want  of recovery as  held  in  PLD 2020  SC 295  llrfan 

Alt  Sher VS The StateJ. The apex Court  has  taken  a serious  view while dealing 

with such  kind  of defective investigation  where  bloodstained  articles  inside  the 

motorcar  were  not  taken  by  the  Investigating  Officer,  but  the  same  was 

considered with reference  to the  injuries  of the victim and judgment  of acquittal 

was  converted  into  conviction.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  PLD  2019  SC  261 

(Khadiia  Siddiqui  VS Shah Hussain]. 

30. 

In  view of above,  the  findings qua  the  non-production  of the  vehicle is 

reflected from the  record,  which  is  the  sole intentional/willful  mistake  of both 

the Investigation Officers, but  the  other  evidence available on record i.e. Exh.Pl 

to Exh.P7 and  admission  by the  Investigation  Officer qua  the  vehicle does  not 

persuade  this  Court  to disbelieve the  prosecution  case. 

31. 

It is  the  duty  of this  Court  being an  Appellate Court  in  terms  of Section 

423  Cr.P.C to  exercise its  powers in  disposal  of appeal  on  the  basis  of record 

subject  to  ''perusing  such  record" and  "hearing", the  appellant  or  his  pleader 

and  it  has  been  followed by  this  Court,  however, in  case  of  appeal  against 

acquittal,  the  powers are  specifically provided in terms  of Section 423(a) Cr.P.C, 

the  Appellate Court  can  reverse  such  order  of an  acquittal,  direct  that  further 

17 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

inquiry  be  made  or  if the  Court  comes  to  a  conclusion  or  finds  the  accused 

guilty, pass  the  sentence  on  him  according  to  law  and  as  such  there  is  no 

restriction  upon  the  Appellate Court  to  convict the  acquitted  accused  in  any 

case  subject  to appreciation  of evidence. 

32.  While considering  the  powers  conferred  under  the  said  provision,  the 

evidence  recorded  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  fully  been  scrutinized, 

whereby the  primary  factors which overwhelmed the  learned  Trial Court's  mind 

to  pass  the  judgment  of acquittal  is  the  non-production  of  vehicle  bearing 

Registration  No.  LXN-2973,  which  is  the  primary  evidence, but  it  is  not  the 

duty  of the  injured  PW-1 to conduct  investigation  by himself or  to produce  the 

vehicle, even no  fault  of the  appellant  or  the  injured  prosecution  witnesses, 

who remained  in hospital  for their  medical treatment  have been  noted,  however 

Investigation Officers have not  performed their  lawful duties  in accordance  with 

law. Perusal  of judgment  discloses  the  shortsightedness  of the  learned  Trial 

Court, who has  not  considered  the  medical evidence, which is independent  and 

also  in  line with  the  testimony  of injured  PW-1/Raja  Muhammad  Safeer and 

his  wife Mst. Sofia Iram/PW-2,  who remained  consistent  about  the  mode and 

manner  of crime, even they  were consistent  upon  the  identification  of both  the 

accused  respondents,  who were identified in  the  vehicle headlights  as  both  the 

accused  were seen  in front  of the  vehicle, and  it  does  not  appeal  to a  prudent 

mind that  person  could  not  be identified in the  vehicle headlights,  while sitting 

in the front seat  of the  vehicle, especially when one of the  co-accused  Zeshan  is 

neighbour  and  another  co-accused  Arshad  Mehmood, who is  friend  of Zeshan 

and  usually  visits  the  street  of the  complainant/  injured  prosecution  witness. 

33.  There is no dispute  qua  the  identification  of respondents  accused  whose 

presence  have been  corroborated  by both  the  eye-witnesses,  even defence side 

had  failed to  create  any  doubt  in  the  evidence of both  the  witnesses  i.e. Raja 

Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  and  Mst. Sofia Iram/PW-2,  who were cross-examined 

at 

length,  but  nothing  has  been  brought  on  record  to  establish 

that 

respondents  were  not  present  in  the  scene  of occurrence  or  the  evidence of 

PW-1 and  PW-2 is contradictory  or based  upon  hypothesis. 

18 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

34.  Eye-witnesses  Raja Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1 and  Mst. Sofia Iram/PW-2 

consistently  supported 

their 

initial  version  of  causing 

injuries  by  the 

respondents  accused  and  the  specific role  attributed  to  Zeshan  and  his  co- 

accused  Arshad  Mehmood, which  has  been  substantiated  by medical  evidence 

of Dr. Tanvir Afsar/PW-7  and  further  confirmed by Dr. Ijaz Ahmed/PW-10,  who 

has  operated  the  injured  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  and  recovered two 

slugs  from  the  backbone  of  the  injured,  who  was  paralyzed  from  his  lower 

portion. 

35.  The learned  Trial Court  has  also given much  importance  to the  statement 

of Dr. Tanvir Afsar/PW-7  and  1.0, who has  given a  different view qua  the  site 

plan,  but  at  the  same  time  Doctor  Tanvir  Afsar/PW-7  has  confirmed  the 

injuries  of Raja  Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1 on  the  basis  of Exh.PK that  these 

injuries  were  caused  due  to  firing from  back  side,  which  has  further  been 

substantiated 

through  the  photographs  i.e.  Exh.  Pl  to  Exh.P7,  especially in 

picture  Exh.P6, which  clearly refers  the  bullet  mark  in the  lower portion  of the 

vehicle boot (dickey), even back  screen  of the  vehicle found  missing,  all these 

aspects  clearly  established  the  story  of prosecution  witnesses  as  correct  and 

based  upon  truthful  version. 

36.  The error  committed  by the  learned  Trial Court  is mainly based  upon  the 

conduct  of Investigation  Officers, who have  not  investigated  the  matter  in  a 

proper  manner,  similarly, learned  Trial Court  has  also  placed  heavy reliance 

upon  non-disclosure  of injuries  of Mst. Sofia Iram/PW-2,  which  was  the job  of 

the  doctor  at  that  point  of time,  hence  prosecution  case  could  not  suffer for 

such  negligence of doctor. 

37. 

I  have given an  anxious  thought  to the  statement  of respondents  accused 

Zeshan  recorded  under  Section  342 Cr.P.C, who has  denied  the  entire  incident 

in  his  statement,  while  answering  the  question  No.13, he  has  narrated  the 

version in the  following manner:- 

"I am  innocent. In fact  (Zeeshan) contracted marriage with  daughter 
of  complainant  (Shumaila)  with  our  own  free  will  and  mutual 
understating  which  was  not  in  the  knowledge  of  our families.  The 
above  said  marriage  took place  in Islamabad  on  25.11.2019.  That 
both of us  kept  on waiting for  a suitable  time  to disclose  the  above 

19 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

said  marriage,  however,  in  the  year  2011  complainant  party 
engaged Shumaila to Habib ur Rehman upon which I had to disclose 
our marriage. On hearing this, the complainant party  turned inimical 
towards  me.  They  contracted Nikah  pf  Shumaila  with  Habib  ur 
Rehman on 28.10.2011  which is inf act zina. 

So far as  matter of the incident is concerned as per talk of the town 
it was pure dacoity I robbery. Such offences are rampant in our area 
due to which the complainant party got an opportunity to manipulate 
me and my friend Arshad who is unfortunately witness  of my Nikah 
with Shumaila. It is important to mention that the second witness  of 
Nikah is  standing  with  the  complainant party  now  and  that  is  the 
reason he was not manipulated in the present case. 
I  am  innocent,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  this  case,  manner  of 
occurrence is  maliciously false,  due  to pitch dark  there is  always  a 
question of mistaken  identity. Safeers vehicle has  never been taken 
into possession. 

38.  While  considering 

the  above  mentioned  stance  of  the  respondents 

accused  as  well as  co-accused,  the  motive part  was  explained  by the  accused 

side with the  reasons  that  Zeshan  contracted  the  marriage  with  Shumaila,  the 

daughter  of the  complainant  in  a  concealed  manner,  which  was  not  known to 

the  families of  the  complainant  side  and  they  had  married  Shumaila  with 

Habib ur  Rehman,  which  resulted  into the  disputed  position  and  as  such,  this 

aspect  gives a  conclusion  that  Zeshan  is  well known  to  the  complainant  side 

and  it is not  the  case  of substitution  of accused  which  a  rare  phenomena.  The 

respondents  accused  have  been  clearly identified and  seen  in  the  incident  for 

causing  a  specific role of firing from front and  back  side of the vehicle, even the 

motive is  double  edge  weapon  and  in  this  regard,  the  motive  for  causing 

injuries  to the  Raja Muhammad  Safeer, who is a police official fully attracts  the 

situation  and  the  respondents  accused  tried  to eliminate  him  or to teach  him a 

lesson  for his  actions  against  Zeshan,  even it  has  not  been  denied  that  the 

Shumaila,  real  sister  of the  injured  Raja Muhammad  Safeer has  filed a  suit  for 

jactitation  of marriage  after  the  Nikah referred  by the  accused  Zeshan,  but  all 

these  aspects  were not  given fruitful thought  by the  learned  Trial Court. 

39. 

In this  case  the  recovery of weapon of offence was  not  made  out  from the 

accused  side,  though  it  is  not  essential  in  every case  that  weapon  of offence 

could  be  recovered as  the  reason  narrated  by  the  Investigation  Officer/ PW-9 

fully explained  the  circumstances,  in which  the  weapon  of offence were thrown 

20 

Crl. Appeal  No. 26/2015 

in  the  Rawal  Dam  by  the  accused  persons  and  same  was  not  traceable, 

therefore, only piece of evidence is the  medical evidence, even in this  matter  the 

second  Investigation  Officer has  not  transmitted  the  recovered slugs  from the 

body of Raja Muhammad  Safeer which were handed  over by Doctor Ijaz Ahmed, 

to the  Forensic  Science Laboratory for determination  of its  origin, similarly, the 

first Investigation  Officer has  not  submitted  the  fire empties  to the  FSL and  as 

such,  this  is  the  classic  example for the  abuse  of powers of the  Investigation 

Officer, who are  not  equipped  with the  concept  of investigation  and  they  lack 

their  basic  abilities  to  investigate  such  type of simple crime under  the  police 

rules,  however, the  accused  could not be spared  for the  negligence of the  I.Os. 

40.  The entire  case  and  discussion  referred  above gives rise  to  a  situation 

that  both  the  respondents  accused  persons  resorted  to  firing  and  caused 

serious  injuries 

to  the  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1,  which  has  been 

corroborated  through  medical  evidence and  he  remained  under  treatment  for 

considerable  period and  even medically examined  by Doctor Ijaz Ahmed/PW-10 

as  his  lower portion  of the  body was  paralyzed  at  that  time, although  later  on, 

it  has  been  recovered and  found  fit,  but  the  fact  remains  that  the  injuries 

caused  to  the  Raja  Muhammad  Safeer/PW-1  are  of  fatal  nature  and  are 

considered  as  attempt  to  commit  murder.  The  intention  and  knowledge of 

respondents  are  apparent  from  the  record,  and  their  actions,  mode  and 

manner,  m  which  the  entire  crime  was  committed,  the  motive  is  fully 

established,  it  affects both  the  sides,  but  in  this  case  it  leans  in  favour of the 

prosecution  against  the  respondents.  Although, the  Investigating  Officer has 

not  produced  the  vehicle which  was  being driven by injured  Raja Muhammad 

Safeer, but  such  defective investigation  could  not  be  burdened  on  the  victim 

Raja Muhammad  Safeer as  it is the  Investigating Officer who has  not performed 

his  lawful duties,  therefore,  in  such  type  of  situation  the  Court  has  to  see 

whether  the  crime  has  been  committed.  While considering  this  aspect,  the 

record of investigation  fully satisfied  this  Court  that  the  mode and  manner  in 

which crime was  committed  is directly linked with the  present  respondents  and 

the  allegations  leveled by the  prosecution  and  the  injured  PWs fully attract  the 

21 

Crl. Appeal No. 26/2015 

involvement of respondents  in  the  said  heinous  crime, therefore,  no premium 

could  be  given  to  them.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  PLD  2019  SC  595 

(Muhammad  Azhar  Hussain  VS  The  Statel.  The judgment  of acquittal  will 

not justify  in this  regard,  which  seems  to be perverse,  arbitrary  and  not  passed 

with  judicial  approach.  The  overwhelming incriminating  evidence  was  not 

considered  by  the  learned  Trial  Court,  therefore,  while  relying  upon  the 

approach  adopted  by the  apex  Court  in  case  reported  as  PLD 2019  SC 261 

(Khadiia  Siddiqui  VS Shah  Hussaini,  this  Court  considers  it  appropriate  to 

pass  the judgment  of conviction. 

41.  For what  has  been  discussed  above, instant  appeal  is  ALLOWED.  The 

judgment  dated  27.01.2015,  passed  by learned  Judicial  Magistrate,  Section 30, 

Islamabad  is  hereby  SET-ASIDE. Respondents  Zeshan  and  Arshad  Mehmood 

are hereby  CONVICTED under  Section 324 / 34 PPC and  sentenced  to seven (07) 

years  rigorous  imprisonment  with fine of Rs.  100,000/-  each  to be paid  to the 

victim Raja Muhammad  Safeer as  they  have shared  the  common intention  in 

terms  of Section  34  PPC. The charge  under  Section 341  PPC has  also  been 

proved  and  Respondents  Zeshan  and  Arshad  Mehmood  are  hereby 

CONVICTED under  Section  341  PPC and  sentenced  to two (02) years  R.I with 

fine of Rs. 30,000 /-  each  to  be paid  to the  victim. The offence under  Section 

335  PPC is  neither  proved at  this  stage  nor  any  permanent  disability  of Raja 

Safeer came  on record  or proved. Both the  respondents  be taken  into custody 

and  transmitted  to  jail  for  completion of  their  sentence.  The  sentences  so 

awarded  shall  run  concurrently  with benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. 

42.  Before  parting  with  the  judgment, 

the  conduct  of  the  Investigation 

Officers  namely  Muhammad  Akbar  S.I/PW-8  and  Maqsood  Ahmed 

Qasoori/PW-9  discloses 

their 

inefficiency,  criminal  misconduct 

and 

unprofessional  attitude  towards  the  investigation, which has  been  conducted  in 

violation of the  Police Rules,  1934 and  the  settled  principles  of investigation, 

therefore, they  are  held  guilty  of  criminal  misconduct  and  are  liable  to  be 

prosecuted  under  the  relevant  provisions  of law. Reliance is placed  upon  2019 

P.Cr.LJ  640  Peshawar  (Inspector Syed Rahim  VS The  StateJ, 2016  SCMR 

22 

Crl. Appeal No.  26/2015 

2057  llmdad  Ali  Khawafa  VS TIM Stated  and  2020  P.Cr.LJ  524  Lahore 

(Allah  Rakha  VS  The  State}.  Copy of this  judgment  be  transmitted  to  the 

Inspector  General of Police, Islamabad  to take  legal action  against  them,  who 

shall  submit  the  compliance report  to  this  Court  as  to  what  action  has  been 

taken  against  them. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR  KAY~I) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court  on: --~-'l)_/f\ __ ~---~-).1)--. 

_ 

RAM ZAN 

JUDGE 

