ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
     E.F.A.No.01 of 2021 

Mst. Abida Zakir  
VS          

Raja Aman Ullah and another  

Date of Hearing:   
Appellant by: 
Respondents by:  

20.10.2021  
Raja Muhammad Khan, Advocate  
Raja Abid Hussain Janjua and Rehmat Ali,  
Advocate for respondent No.1, 
Mr. Ali Waqas, Advocate for the C.D.A. 

___________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

appeal, the appellant, Mst. Abida Zakir, impugns the judgment dated 

04.01.2021  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  appellant’s  application  filed  under 

Section  44-A  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  (“C.P.C.”)  for  the 

enforcement  of  the  order  dated  06.07.2018  and  decree  dated 

07.11.2019  passed  by  the  Central  Family  Court,  United  Kingdom, 

was  dismissed.  Vide  the  said  order  dated  06.07.2018,  the  said 

foreign court held that Raja Aman Ullah Khan/respondent No.1 “must 

pay”  to  the  appellant  a  sum  of  Pounds  Sterling  577,665  along  with 

costs amounting to Pounds Sterling 78,098 by 4 p.m. on 06.10.2018. 

Furthermore, the freezing order issued on 06.10.2015 was confirmed 

and  ordered  to  remain  in  full  force  and  effect  until  compliance  by 

respondent  No.1  with  the  order  to  pay  the  said  amount  to  the 

appellant.  Vide  decree dated  07.11.2019,  the marriage  between the 

appellant  and  respondent  No.1  was  declared  to  have  been  void  by 

law,  and  the  appellant  was  freed  from  bond  of  marriage  with 

respondent No.1.  

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  the  instant  appeal  are 

that  the  appellant  had  instituted  proceedings  against  respondent 

No.1  under  the  provisions  of  the  Matrimonial  Causes  Act,  1973  

before the Central Family Court sitting at the Royal Courts of Justice, 

London,  United  Kingdom.  On  06.10.2015,  the  said  Court  issued  an 

interim freezing order against respondent No.1 restraining him from 

disposing  of  or  dealing  with  or  otherwise  diminishing  his  interest  in 

 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

two  properties  in  London,  one  property  in  Rawalpindi  and  two 

properties 

in  Islamabad.  The  appellant  brought  this  order  to 

Pakistan,  and  on  27.10.2015  she  filed  an  application  under  Section 

44-A C.P.C. for its enforcement before the District Court, Rawalpindi.  

3. 

Vide  order  dated  15.02.2017,  the  said  application  was 

dismissed. Perusal of the said order shows that during the course of 

the  arguments,  respondent  No.1  undertook  not  to  alienate,  transfer 

or  sell  the  two  properties  in  Islamabad  and  one  property  in 

Rawalpindi  till  final  adjudication  of  the  cases  pending  before  the 

Courts in Pakistan and the United Kingdom. In the said order, it was 

observed that after the said undertaking, the appellant’s grievances 

had  been  “almost redressed.”  Apparently,  the  appellant  had  also 

applied  for  the  appointment  of  a  receiver.  The  learned  Court 

observed  inter alia  that  the  order  dated  06.10.2015  passed  by  the 

foreign  court  was  not  conclusive  in  nature,  and  that  orders  passed 

by foreign courts have no binding force in Pakistan unless and until a 

specific  treaty  in  this  behalf  had  been  executed  between  the  two 

countries. For the present purposes, it is not necessary to comment 

on  the  legality  of  the  said  order.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  said  order 

dated 15.02.2017 was not challenged any further. 

4. 

The  proceedings  before  the  foreign  court  culminated  in  the 

final  order  dated  06.07.2018.  Vide  the  said  order,  respondent  No.1 

was directed to pay the appellant Pounds Sterling 577,665 and costs 

in  the  sum  of  Pounds  Sterling  78,098  by  4  p.m.  on  06.10.2018.  The 

freezing  order  dated  06.10.2015  had  been  confirmed  by  the  foreign 

court on 04.12.2015. In the final order dated 06.07.2018, the foreign 

court had held that the said freezing order shall remain in force and 

effect  until  respondent  No.1’s  compliance  with  the  direction  to  pay 

the said amount to the appellant.  

5. 

For  the  enforcement  of  the  said  final  order  dated  06.07.2018, 

the  appellant  filed  an  application  under  Section  44-A  C.P.C.  before 

the  District  Court,  Islamabad.  Respondent  No.1  contested  the  said 

application  and  in  his  written  reply  he  pleaded  inter alia  that  the 

application was not maintainable since the appellant had earlier filed 

a  similar  application  before  the  District  Court  at  Rawalpindi.  Vide 

 
3 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

judgment  dated  04.01.2021,  the  District  Court  at 

Islamabad 

dismissed the said execution application primarily on the ground that 

the  appellant  had  earlier  filed  an  execution  application  before  the 

District  Court  at  Rawalpindi  for  the  execution  of  the  interim  order 

dated  06.10.2015  passed  by  the  said  foreign  court,  and  that  the 

District  Court  at  Rawalpindi  had  recorded  respondent  No.1’s 

statement to the effect that the properties with respect to which the 

said application was filed would not be disposed of. For the purposes 

of  clarity,  the  operative  part  of  the  said  judgment  is  reproduced 

herein below:- 

“The petitioner through the instant petition is trying to seek another 
execution of order dated 06.07.2018 and decree dated 07.11.2019 of 
Central Family Court United Kingdom, while she has already invoke 
the jurisdiction of District Court at Rawalpindi for execution of the 
above referred foreign order / decree. If the petitioner has any 
grievance with regard to the conduct of judgment debtor that he has 
resiled  from  his  statement  recorded  during  the  execution 
proceedings of her earlier execution petition filed at Rawalpindi, 
then she has a remedy to approach the said forum instead to file the 
instant execution petition.” 

6. 

Against  the  said  judgment  dated  04.01.2021  the  appellant  has 

preferred the instant appeal. 

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  after  narrating  the  facts 

leading to the filing of the instant appeal, submitted that the learned 

Court  below  erred  by  not  appreciating  that  the  proceedings  before 

the District Court at Rawalpindi were only for the enforcement of an 

interim  freezing  order  passed  by  the  foreign  court  on  06.10.2015; 

that  the  appellant  had  filed  an  application  for  the  execution  of  the 

said  order  dated  06.10.2015  before  the  District  Court  at  Rawalpindi 

since one of the properties with respect to which the freezing order 

had  been  issued  was  situated  in  Rawalpindi;  that  since  respondent 

No.1 had undertaken before the said Court that he would not dispose 

of  the  properties  with  respect  to  which  the  freezing  order  has  been 

issued, the appellant was satisfied with the said undertaking and had 

therefore not challenged the said order any further; that it is after the 

District  Court  at  Rawalpindi  dismissed  the  appellant’s  execution 

application  on  15.02.2017  that  the  foreign  court  passed  the  final 

order  on  06.07.2018;  that  the  appellant 

filed  the  execution 

application  before 

the  District  Court  at 

Islamabad 

for 

the 

 
 
4 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

enforcement  of  the  said  final  order  dated  06.07.2018;  that  the 

appellant had sought the enforcement of the freezing order only with 

respect  to  respondent  No.1’s  two  properties  in  Islamabad;  that 

under Section 44-A C.P.C., the final order passed by the court in the 

United Kingdom is to be executed in Pakistan as if it had been passed 

by  the  District  Court 

in  Pakistan;  and  that  such  execution 

proceedings  cannot  be  stalled  or  stopped  due  to  the  pendency  of 

proceedings  between  the contesting  parties  before any  other  Court 

in Pakistan. Learned counsel for the appellant prayed for the appeal 

to be allowed and for the impugned judgment dated 04.01.2021 to be 

set-aside. 

8. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

submitted that the appellant was forum hunting; that after her earlier 

execution  application  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  15.02.2017 

passed  by  the  District  Court  at  Rawalpindi,  she  filed  a  second 

execution application before the District Court at Islamabad; that the 

final order dated 06.07.2018 passed by the foreign court was an ex-

parte  order  and  cannot  be  enforced  against  respondent  No.1;  that 

respondent No.1 is an unwell senior citizen and did not have “proper 

knowledge”  of  the  proceedings  before  the  foreign  court;  that  while 

filing  the  earlier  execution  application  before  the  District  Court  at 

Rawalpindi,  the  appellant  had  abandoned  her  claim  over  the  two 

properties in Islamabad; that the appellant is estopped from seeking 

the execution of the final order dated 06.07.2018 with respect to the 

two  properties  in  Islamabad;  that  the  second  execution  application 

had  been  filed  by  the  appellant  only  to  cause  embarrassment  and 

mental  stress  to  respondent  No.1;  and  that  since  the  family  laws  in 

Pakistan  are  different  from  those  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the 

enforcement of the final order would amount to violation of the laws 

of  Pakistan.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  prayed  for  the 

appeal to be dismissed. 

9. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. The facts leading to the filing of the instant  appeal  have 

 
5 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 5 above, and need 

not be recapitulated.  

10.  Section 44-A C.P.C. reads thus:- 

"44-A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in the United Kingdom 
and other reciprocating territory. (1) Where a certified copy of a 
decree of any of the superior Courts of the United Kingdom or any 
reciprocating territory has been filed in a District Court, the decree 
may be executed in [Pakistan] as if it had been passed by the District 
Court. 
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a 
certificate from such superior Court stating the extent, if any, to 
which the decree has been satisfied or adjusted and such certificate 
shall,  for  the  purposes  of  proceedings  under  this  section,  be 
conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or adjustment. 
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified 
copy of the decree apply to the proceedings of a District Court 
executing a decree under this section, and the District Court shall 
refuse execution of any such decree, if it is shown to the satisfaction 
of the Court that the decree falls within any of the exceptions 
specified in clauses (a) to (f) of Section 13. 

Explanation  I. "Superior  Courts"  with  reference  to  the  United 
Kingdom, means the High Court in England, the Court of Session in 
Scotland, the High Court in Northern Ireland, the Court of Chancery 
of the County Palatine of Lancaster and the Court of Chancery of the 
County Palatine of Durham. 

Explanation 2. "Reciprocating territory" means [the United Kingdom 
and such other country or territory as] the Federal Government  
may, from time to time, by notification in the (official Gazette], 
declare to be reciprocating territory for the purposes of this section; 
and "superior Courts", with reference to any such territory, means 
such Courts as may be specified in the said notification. 

Explanation 3. "Decree", with reference to a superior Court, means 
any decree or judgment of such Court under which a sum of money 
is payable, not being a sum payable in respect of taxes or other 
charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty, and 
a) With reference to superior Courts in the United Kingdom, includes 
judgments, given and decrees made in any Court in appeals against 
such decrees or judgments, but 
b) In no case includes an arbitration award, even if such award is 
enforceable as a decree or judgment." 

11.  Section  44-A  envisages  presentation  of  an  application  seeking 

execution  of  a  decree  of  a  superior  court  in  the  United  Kingdom  or 

any  reciprocating  territory  before  a  District  Court  in  Pakistan. 

Section 44-A C.P.C. was enacted to make decrees of superior courts 

in the United Kingdom or any reciprocating territory executable in the 

same  manner  as  decrees  passed  by  Courts  in  Pakistan.  For  the 

avoidance of doubt Explanation 2 to Section 44-A C.P.C. clarifies that 

“reciprocating territory” includes the United Kingdom.  

 
 
 
 
 
6 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

12.  On 08.06.2020, the appellant filed an application under Section 

44-A  C.P.C.  for  the  enforcement  of  the  final  order  dated  06.07.2018 

passed by the Central Family Court in the United Kingdom. The Court 

of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad  dismissed  the 

appellant’s  application  for  the  execution  of  the  final  order  dated 

06.07.2018  passed  by  the  foreign  court  on  the  sole  ground  that  the 

District  Court  at  Rawalpindi  had  dismissed  her  application  for  the 

execution  of  the  interim  freezing  order  dated  06.10.2015  passed  by 

the  said  foreign  court.  The  application  before  District  Court  at 

Rawalpindi was also filed under Section 44-A C.P.C.  

13.  Since the appellant was seeking to enforce the  foreign court’s 

interim  freezing  order  dated  06.10.2015  with  respect  to  properties 

including a property in Rawalpindi, she was well within her rights to 

have filed the execution application under Section 44-A C.P.C. before 

the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Rawalpindi.  With 

the  dismissal  of  that  application  vide  order  dated  15.02.2017,  the 

matter  regarding  the  enforcement  of  the  foreign  court’s  said  order 

dated  06.10.2015  came  to  an  end.  After  the  dismissal  of  the  said 

execution application, the foreign court passed the final order dated 

06.07.2018.  As  mentioned  above,  the  foreign  court  has  directed 

respondent No.1 to pay the appellant Pounds Sterling 577,665 along 

with  costs  amounting  to  Pounds  Sterling  78,098  by  4  p.m.  on 

06.10.2018,  and  until  the  payment  of  the  said  amount  the  freezing 

order  with  respect  to  the  five  properties,  including  two  properties 

situated in Islamabad shall remain in full force and effect.  

14. 

It  is  an  admitted  position  that  till  date  the  direction  issued  to 

respondent  No.1  by  the  foreign  court  in  the  final  order  dated 

06.07.2018 has not been complied with by respondent No.1. In other 

words,  the  said  final  order  remains  unsatisfied.  Could  in  these 

circumstances  the 

learned  District  Court  at 

Islamabad  have 

dismissed  the  appellant’s  application  under  Section  44-A  C.P.C.  on 

the  sole  ground  that  earlier  she  had  filed  an  application  for  the 

enforcement  of  the  interim  freezing  order  dated  06.10.2015  before 

the District Court at Rawalpindi? I would say not. The freezing order 

was  interim  in  nature  and  did  not  dispose  of  the  entire  case. 

 
7 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

Furthermore, it was not an order “under which a sum of money [was] 

payable” and therefore was not a “decree” in terms of Explanation 3 

to Section 44-A C.P.C. Undoubtedly, the final order dated 06.07.2018 

that had been brought before the learned District Court at Islamabad 

for execution is indeed an order for the payment of money. Assuming 

that respondent No.1 was to discharge his obligation under the final 

order  dated  06.07.2018  by  paying  Pounds  Sterling  577,665  along 

with costs amounting to Pounds Sterling 78,098 to the appellant, the 

need  for  enforcing  the  freeze  order  on  the  two  properties  at 

Islamabad  would  not  arise.  The  said  interim  freeze  order  was 

subsequently confirmed and made an integral part of the final order 

dated  06.07.2018.  In  paragraph  10  of  the  appellant’s  application 

under  Section  44-A  C.P.C.  filed  before  the  District  Court  at 

Islamabad, it was clearly pleaded that the said application had been 

filed with respect to the two properties in Islamabad. In other words, 

the  appellant  was  not  seeking  to  enforce  the  final  order  dated 

06.07.2018  with  respect  to  any  property  beyond  the  territorial 

jurisdiction  of  the  District  Court  at  Islamabad.  In  this  view  of  the 

matter,  the  appellant  rightly  filed  the  said  application  before  the 

District Court at Islamabad.  

15.  A  transferee  Court  under  Section  39  C.P.C.,  which  is  called 

upon to execute  a  decree passed  by  a  competent Court  against  the 

judgment  debtor,  cannot  permit  the  judgment  debtor  to  go  behind 

the decree. Section 44-A C.P.C. expressly permits the foreign decree 

to be questioned before an executing Court in Pakistan on any of the 

grounds  mentioned  in  Clauses  (a)  to  (f)  of  Section  13  C.P.C.,  which 

read thus:-  

“13. When foreign judgment not conclusive. A foreign judgment 
shall be conclusive as to any matter thereby directly adjudicated 
upon between the same parties under whom they or any of them 
claim litigating under the same title except--  
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent 
Jurisdiction;  
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;  
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded 
on an incorrect view of international law or a refusal to recognise 
the law of Pakistan in cases in which such law is applicable;  
(d) where the proceedings in which the Judgment was obtained are 
opposed to natural justice;  
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud ;  

 
8 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force 
in Pakistan.”  

16.  Now,  Section  13  C.P.C.  provides 

that  except 

for  six 

circumstances  mentioned  therein,  a  foreign  judgment  shall  be 

conclusive  as  to  any  matter  thereby  directly  adjudicated  upon 

between the same parties or between the parties under whom they or 

any of them claim litigating under the same title. The legislature in its 

wisdom  has  deemed  it  appropriate  to  carve  out  exceptions  to  the 

conclusiveness  of  a  foreign  judgment  of  a  superior  Court  in  the 

United Kingdom or any reciprocating territory. The binding character 

of the judgment may  be displaced  only  by  establishing  that  the  case 

falls within one or more of the six clauses of Section 13 C.P.C. and not 

otherwise.  In  considering  whether  a  judgment  of  a  foreign  court  is 

conclusive, 

the  Courts 

in  Pakistan  will  not 

inquire  whether 

conclusions  recorded  by  a  foreign  court  are  supported  by  evidence 

or  are  otherwise  correct.  The  Division  Bench  of  the  Hon'ble  High 

Court  of  Sindh  in  the  case  of  Syed  Jaffer  Abbas  VS  Habib  Bank 

Limited (PLD 2014 Sindh 209) has held as follows:-  

“A foreign judgment, even in terms of section 44-A, CPC, (wherein 
direct execution can be filed on the basis of such foreign judgment), 
is not conclusive, and is subject to satisfaction of exceptions as 
contained in section 13, CPC by virtue of sub section (3) of section 
44-A, CPC. This means that the provisions of section 44-A and 
section 13 are not independent of each other and are in fact 
interlinked and dependent in as much as even a final judgment of a 
foreign court, after its approval from the appellate Court (of a 
country with whom there is an international treaty) cannot be 
executed directly without recourse to the provisions of exception as 
contained in section 13, CPC and the Courts in Pakistan can even 
refuse the execution of such final judgments of the foreign Courts, if 
they fall under any of the exceptions as contained in section 13, CPC 
This understandably means that no foreign judgment or decree 
could be executed on the basis of the provisions of section 44-A, 
CPC independently, without recourse to and satisfaction of the 
provisions of section 13, CPC.” 

17.  As for the contention of the learned counsel for respondent No.1 

that  respondent  No.1  did  not  have  “proper  knowledge”  of  the 

proceedings before the foreign court or that the execution of the final 

order dated 06.07.2018 would violate the laws of Pakistan, Section 44-

A(3) of C.P.C. provides that the District Court shall refuse execution of 

any such decree if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the 

decree falls within any of the exceptions specified in clauses (a) to (f) 

 
 
 
 
9 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

of  Section  13  C.P.C.  Therefore,  it  will  be  open  to  respondent  No.1  to 

contend  in  the proceedings before the Court in which the appellant’s 

application  under  Section  44-A  C.P.C.  was  filed  that  the  final  order 

passed  by  the  foreign  court  is  not  a  foreign  judgment  within  the 

meaning  of  Section  13  of  the  Code  or  the  same  is  not  conclusive 

because  the  judgment  falls  within  any  of  the  exceptions  specified  in 

clauses (a) to (f) of Section 13 C.P.C.  

18.  Section 44-A C.P.C. does not require the District Court in which 

the  decree  of  any  superior  Court  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  any 

reciprocating  territory  is  submitted  for  execution  by  a  decree  holder 

must  be  a  Court  which  could  have  been  competent  to  pass  such  a 

decree  if  in  the  first  instance  a  suit  was  filed  by  the  decree  holder 

against the judgment debtor in Pakistan. The scheme of Section 44-A 

C.P.C. is alien to the scheme of domestic execution as provided under 

Section  39(2)  C.P.C.  which  requires  the  “transferee  Court”  must  be 

otherwise  competent  to  assume  jurisdiction.  In  the  case  of  Oakwell 

Engineering  Ltd.  VS  Enernorth  Industries  Inc.  (2006  VII  AD  (Delhi) 

836)*,  an  application  under  Section  44-A  C.P.C.  was  filed  before  the 

Delhi  High  Court  for  the  execution  of  a    decree  passed  by  the  High 

Court  of  the  Republic  of  Singapore.  An  objection  was  taken  to  the 

maintainability  of  the  said  application  on  the  ground  that  the  Delhi 

High  Court  did  not  have  the  territorial  jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  upon 

the  matter  since  the  registered  office  and  business  was  at  Ontario, 

Canada. The said objection was spurned by the Delhi High Court in the 

following terms:-  

“The scheme of Section 44A of the CPC is entirely different. It makes 
no mention of jurisdiction to try. Only thing necessary is that the 
decree  has  been  obtained  from  any  superior  court  of  any 
reciprocating  territory.  The  decree  holder  is  required  to  file  a 
certified copy of the decree along with a certificate from such 
superior court stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been 
satisfied. There is no requirement under Section 44A of the CPC that 
the District Court in which the foreign decree is presented for 
execution should be also a court which could have entertained the 
suit. The decree has to be executed in India as if it had been passed 
by the District Court in India. Since there is no requirement that the 
District Court to whom the decree is presented for execution should 
also have the jurisdiction to entertain the suit had it been presented 
before  it,  the  point  raised  by  the  respondent  particularly  with 
reference to the judgment of World Tanker (supra) is entirely foreign 
to the context. It may be noted at this point that where a decree is 

 
 
10 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

transferred from the court which has passed the decree to another 
court for execution under Section 39 of the CPC, the transferee court 
would be the court of competent jurisdiction if such court has the 
jurisdiction to try the suit in which such decree was passed. The 
present proceedings are, however, not governed by Section 39 of the 
CPC. Section 44A of the CPC, in distinction with Section 39 of the 
CPC, makes no such demand on the District Court to which the 
decree is presented for execution. Hence, the objection to the 
jurisdiction of this Court on this score has also to be rejected.” 

A similar view was taken by the Delhi High Court in a subsequent 

judgment  in  the  case  of  Goyal  Mg  Gases  Private  Ltd.  VS  Messer 

Griesheim Gmbh (211 (2014) DLT 481), wherein it was held as follows:- 

“It is clear that the legislature has consciously in its wisdom chosen 
not to infuse the conception of 'competent jurisdiction' in Section 44A 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in contradistinction to Section 
39 which  provides the  mechanism  for  execution  of  'domestic 
decrees'. The requirements saddled on the executing court under the 
scheme of Section 39 are alien to the 'District Court‟; the jurisdiction 
of which may be invoked by the holder of a foreign decree in terms of 
Section  44A.  Rather  it  may  be  pertinently  observed  that  the 
legislature has vested such 'District Court' the power to execute the 
'foreign decree' as if it had been passed by itself. The conception of 
'competence of jurisdiction' of executing court contained in Section 
39 being wholly absent in the language employed by the legislature in 
Section 44A of the Code, the same cannot be circuitously injected by 
this Court as the same would tantamount to legislative re-writing, 
which is impermissible.” 

19. 

In  view  of  the  above,  I  hold  that  it  was  wholly  unlawful  for  the 

learned  Court  below  to  have  dismissed  the  appellant’s  application 

under Section 44-A C.P.C. for the enforcement of the final order dated 

06.07.2018 passed by the Central Family Court in the United Kingdom 

on the ground that earlier the appellant had filed an application for the 

execution of an interim freezing order passed by the said foreign court 

before  the  District  Court  at  Rawalpindi.  The  learned  Court  below 

appears  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  application  under 

Section 44-A C.P.C. had been filed before it for the enforcement of the 

said  final  order  which  was,  in  essence,  an  order  for  the  payment  of 

money. The enforcement of the freezing order, which had been made 

an  integral  part  of  the  said  final  order,  was  sought  only  to  secure 

respondent  No.1’s  assets  in  Islamabad  against  which  the  said  final 

order could be enforced. Consequently, the instant appeal is allowed; 

the impugned judgment dated 04.01.2021 is set aside; and the matter 

is remanded to the Court of learned District Judge (West), Islamabad, 

 
 
 
 
 
11 

                                            E.F.A.No.01/2021 

for  further  proceedings  on  the  appellants  application  under  Section 

44-A C.P.C.     

20.  Any observations made in this order shall not come in the way of 

respondent No.1 to resist or object to legal proceedings instituted by 

the appellant  for the  enforcement  of the final order dated  06.07.2018 

passed  by  the  Central  Family  Court  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  any  of 

the  grounds  mentioned  in  clauses  (a)  to  (f)  of  Section  13  C.P.C. 

Furthermore,  a court hearing  the  matter in  post-remand  proceedings 

shall also not be influenced by any observations made herein.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON 07/12/2021 

                                                                               (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan  

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Uploaded by IT Department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
