ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P.  N0.1753  OF  2019 

MUHAMMAD  WAHEED  MUSHTAQ 
VS 
MST.  TALIHA  MAQSOOD,  ETC. 

Petitioner by 

Mr. Ahmad ud Din,  Advocate. 

Respondents by 

Respondent No.  3&  4 Ex-parte. 

Date  of hearing 

18.02.2020 

LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ, J. 

Through 

instant  writ  petition 

the 

Petitioner  has  assailed  orders  dated  02.02.2019,  whereby 

the 

learned 

Additional  District 

Judge-II,  East,  Islamabad  dismissed  his  appeal  for 

non-prosecution  and  order  dated  10.04.2019,  whereby,  his  application  for 

restoration of appeal was also dismissed by learned Additional District Judge  

East, Islamabad, respectively. 

2. 

Notice of the Writ Petition was initially issued to the Respondent Nos.  1 

&  2 on 06.05.2019 but on the next date of hearing (09.10.2019) no one was in 

attendance  on  their  behalf  despite  service  of  notice,  therefore,  office  was 

directed  to  repeat  notice  to  the  said  Respondents  with  the  direction  to  file  a 

specific report  in this regard and as per office report notices were  served upon 

the  Respondents  on  24.10.2019,  but  still  on  18.11.2019, no  one  appeared  on 

behalf of the Respondents when the case was called for hearing, hence, notices 

were  ordered  to  be  repeated  and  office  was  again  directed  to  submit  report 

regarding  service  of  notice.  As  per  office  report,  notices  re-issued  to  the 

Respondents through  Senior Civil Judge on 23.11.2019 were also served upon 

Respondent  No. I  through  her  mother  and  on  Respondent  No.2  through  her 

grandmother,  on  10.12.2019. However,  when  case  was  fixed  for  hearing  on 

18.02.2020, no one appeared on behalf of Respondent Nos.  I  &  2. As the  said 

notices  are  received  by  mother  of  Respondent  No. I  and  grandmother  of 

Respondent No.2 thus the  service is held to be good and the  Petition  is being 

decided ex-parte on the basis of available record after hearing the arguments of 

learned Counsel for the Petitioner. 

Page 2of4 

W.P.No.  1753/2019 

3. 

Learned  Counsel  for  the  Petitioner  argued  that  suit  for  dissolution  of 

marriage on the basis of Khula as well as recovery of maintenance was filed by 

Respondents  Nos.  1  and  2,  before  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  East  

Islamabad,  which  was  partially  decreed,  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

31.03.2018,  by  fixing  maintenance  of  Plaintiff/Respondent  No.1 

at 

Rs.15,000/- for iddat period that became total Rs. 45,000/- and Rs.  10,000/- per 

month  for  minor  child/Respondent  No.2,  from  the  date  of institution  of  suit 

along with  10% annual increase. This judgment  and decree was challenged by 

the Petitioner before the  Additional District Judge, East-Islamabad, by  way of 

Appeal  under  section  14  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964, 

wherein  he  prayed  for  suspension  of  operation  of  impugned  order,  and  the 

learned  Judge,  vide  order  dated  26.04.2018,  suspended  the  operation  of 

judgment  and  decree  dated  31.03.2018  and  fixed  the  interim  maintenance  at 

Rs.5,000/- per month for the minor. However, on 02.02.2019, as no one was in 

attendance on behalf of present Petitioner, therefore, his appeal was dismissed 

for  non-prosecution.  Learned  Counsel  submitted  that  he  filed  restoration 

application  before  the  Court  on  28.02.2019,  but  same  was  dismissed  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  East-Islamabad,  on  the  ground  that  no 

sufficient  cause  is  shown  by  the  Petitioner  for  his  non-appearance.  Hence 

present petition. 

4. 

Learned  Counsel  for the  Petitioner contended that he kept  on  appearing 

on each and every date of hearing to pursue his case while Respondents Nos.  1 

and 2,  despite service of notice remained absent during the proceedings before 

the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  however,  on  the  single  default  of 

appearance  on  02.02.2019,  his  appeal  was  dismissed  for  non-prosecution. 

Learned counsel submitted that he filed restoration application before the Court 

on  28.02.2019,  contending  therein  that  due  to  misunderstanding  regarding 

lawyer's  strike,  he  could  not  put  appearance  on  the  due  date.  The  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  East-Islamabad, however,  dismissed  the  application 

on the ground that the Petitioner has failed to annex copy of notice of strike of 

Bar in support of his contentions, therefore, no sufficient cause is shown by the 

Petitioner  for  his  non-appearance.  Learned  counsel  reiterated  the  contentions 

raised in the  application for restoration of appeal and submitted that  Petitioner 

will suffer irreparable loss if the appeal is not restored and decided on merits as 

Page 3 of4 

W.P.No.  175312019 

the question of maintenance of the minor is  involved which is to be decided on 

the basis of his financial position. 

5. 

Arguments advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner have been 

heard  and  relevant  record  including  the  impugned  orders  have  also  been 

perused with his able assistance. 

6.  While arguing his case Learned Counsel for Petitioner  submitted that he 

was  under  the  impression  of  lawyer's  strike  on  02.02.2019,  therefore,  non  

appearance  on  the  said  date  of  hearing  was  not  willful,  whereas,  he  was 

regularly  appearing  during the  case proceedings  without  any  default.  Learned 

Counsel has also referred the order sheets reflecting his attendance on the dates 

of  hearing.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  cases  having 

substantial issues such as in the present  case should not be dismissed for non  

prosecution and one chance should be granted in the interest of justice  and fair 

play  at  least to  the  counsel  who  are  regularly  attending  the  proceedings.  The 

practice of dismissing the cases on technicalities without considering the merits 

has  not  been  approved  by  the  superior  courts  and  same  is  the  position  with 

dismissal  of  cases  for  non-prosecution  and  the  denial  to  its  restoration  in  a 

mechanical  manner  is  also  declared  to  be  arbitrary,  unreasonable  and  legally 

not justified.  The learned  Counsel for the Petitioner  relied on the judgment  in 

the  case  titled  Abdul  Gha(oor  &  Another  VS  Mir  Maqbool  and  11  others 

reported as  (2009 MLD  1015  (Karachi), wherein the  Hon'ble  Court has held 

as under.: 

that 

technicalities 

"It  is  now  well-settled  principle  of  law 
in 
dispensation of justice  should be avoided and as far  as practicable  the 
cases  are  to  be  decided  on  merits.  The  Court  would  be justified  to 
dismiss  a  case for  non-prosecution if it  is  satisfied  that  the  defaulting 
party  is trying to linger on the proceedings. Jn case when on at least 2 
or three dates  the defaulting party  avoids  to appear and proceed  with 
the  case  the  Court  would  be justified  to  dismiss  the  case  in  non  
prosecution.  However,  dismissing an  appeal for  one day's  absence  of 
the party  of the appellants  and refused to readmit appeal  is bit harsh. 
The Court has to strike a balance between the two extremes i.e.  neither 
it should  allow  endless chances to  a party  to proceed  with a case and 
thus delay  the justice  nor a party  is  to  be dealt  with  in such  a harsh 
way by penalizing  it for one day's  absence. ". 

Another  case  cited  by  learned  counsel  for the  Petitioner  is  Anavat  Masih  & 

others  v.  Munshi  Masih  and  others  reported  as  (2001 CLC  591) wherein the 

Court  has  observed  that  cases  are  to  be  heard  and  decided  on  merits. 

Furthermore, the Hon'ble  Lahore High Court, vide verdict given  in  case titled 

Page  4 of4 

W.P.No.  1753/2019 

Saeed  Ahmed  VS  Ghulam  Fatima  reported  as  (PLD  2019  Lahore  723)  has 

also held that: 

"Even  otherwise  law favours  adjudication  of  cases  on  merits. 
Non-suiting  a  party  on  mere  technicalities  has  never  been 
approved. Reference  can be made to Anwar Khan  v.  Abdul  Fazal 
Manan  (2010 SCMR 973). The consistent rule is that in the matter 
of restoration generous consideration should weigh with the Court 
and  every possible  attempt  should  be  made  to  allow  the parties 
opportunity  of  producing  evidence  and  seeking  decision  on 
merits.". 

6. 

Respectfully  following the rulings and principles laid down in the above 

said judgments,  I  am of the view that the learned Additional District Judge was 

not  justified  in  non-suiting  the  Petitioner  by  dismissing  the  case  for  non 

appearance  on  only  one  date  and  thereafter  refusing  to  allow  the  restoration 

application submitted by him. 

7. 

For what  has been discussed above, instant writ petition  is allowed  and 

impugned orders dated  10.04.2019 and 02.02.2019 are set-aside and the appeal 

is deemed to be pending before the learned Additional District Judge which is 

directed  to  be  decided  on  merits  by  allowing  opportunity  of hearing  to  the 

parties in accordance with law. 

Ad nan 

(LUBNA SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

