ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMAllAD HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Writ Petition No.366 / 2020 

Muhammad Nawaz 
"Pewu 
Justice of Peace, Islamabad-West and others. 

Petitioner  by: 

Syed Salman Aziz, Advocate. 

Proposed accused by: 

Mr. Zahid Asif Chaudhry, Advocate. 

State By: 

M/s  Zohaib Hassan Gondal and Hamad 
Saeed Dar, State Counsel, Muhammad 
Riaz- Inspector  Legal, Fazal  Khan Sub  
Inspector, Turab ul Hassan- A.S.I. 

Date of Hearing: 

16.07.2020. 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANI.  J:-  The 

petitioner, 

Muhammad  Nawaz  S/o  Saleem  Ahmed,  has 

invoked 

the 

Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  by  filing  instant  petition 

under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan,  1973  seeking  a  direction 

to  respondent  No.4  for 

registration of criminal case against the proposed accused persons. 

2. 

Briefly  stated  facts  of  the  instant  petition  are  that  on 

28.11.2019,  petitioner was  present inside  his  house along with  his 

friend  Adnan  and  petitioner's family  members. At  about  02:00  pm, 

proposed  accused  while  armed  with  weapons  entered  into  his 

house  and  started  abusing  and  torturing/  threatening  him  and 

others.  The  petitioner  and  his family  members were  confined  in  a 

room. They searched the house of the petitioner, and took away an 

amount  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  in  cash  from  the  cupboard.  One  Bilal 

Shafqat  and  Zeeshan  Sadiq  witnessed  the  said  occurrence;  the 

alleged  accused  also  forcibly  took  the  petitioner  and  his  friend  in 

two  motor  cars  and  one  motor  bike  to  an  unknown  place, 

thereafter,  to  the  Police Station Abpara,  where  they  demanded  an 

amount  of  Rs.5,00,000/-  and threatened  that  if the  said  amount  is 

2 

W.P No.366/2020 

not  paid,  they  would  be  involved  in  false  criminal  cases,  as  such, 

they  extorted  an  amount  of  Rs.1,50,000/-  but  even  then,  they 

lodged false  F.l.R  No.409 &  410  of 2019  under Section 9-B CNSA 

against the petitioner and his friend namely Adnan. 

3. 

The  petitioner submitted an application for  registration of the 

criminal  case  against the  proposed accused  persons to the  S.H.O 

concerned  Police Station,  but to  no avail. Thereafter, the  petitioner 

filed  an application  under Section 22-A  Cr.P.C.,  before the  learned 

Ex-Officio Justice  of  Peace, Additional  Sessions Judge  Islamabad  

West,  for  issuance  of  direction  for  registration  of  F.l.R  which  was 

dismissed vide order dated 15.01.2020, hence, the instant petition. 

4. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  the 

impugned  order  has  been  passed  on  the  basis  of  surmises  and 

conjectures;  therefore, the  same  is liable to  be set  aside. That the 

impugned  order  is  absolutely  unlawful  arbitrary  and  against  the 

facts  and  law; that the  police is bound to  register the criminal case 

if the same discloses commission of a cognizable offence and lastly 

prayed  that  a  direction  be  issued  to  the  respondent  No.2  to  4  to 

register criminal case against the proposed accused persons. 

5. 

Conversely,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  proposed  accused 

strongly opposed the contentions raised by the  learned counsel for 

the  petitioner  contending  that  a  false  and frivolous  story  has  been 

narrated by the  petitioner; That  no offence  has been committed  by 

the  proposed  accused;  that  several  F.l.Rs  have  been  registered 

against  the  petitioner  and  others;  that  F.l.R  No.410  has  been 

registered  against  witnesses  of  the  petitioner  namely Adnan,  Bilal 

and  Shafqat;  that  they  are  involved  in  narcotics  business; that  the 

witnesses  have  got 

recorded 

their  statements  against 

the 

petitioner;  that  the  petitioner  is  a  dealer  of  narcotics;  false  and 

frivolous  story  has  been  concocted  against the  police  officials just 

to save their skin. Lastly, prayed for rejection of the instant petition. 

6. 

The learned State counsel submitted that when the petitioner 

was  produced  before  the  learned  Magistrate,  he  did  not  file  any 

application  for  conducting  his  medical examination;  that  witnesses 

of the petitioner are also accused of criminal cases under CNSA. 

3 

W.P No.366/2020 

7. 

Heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties,  and  have  gone 

through the available record, perused the application under Section 

22-A Cr.P.C and the impugned order. 

8. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner  and  his 

witnesses  are  involved  in  so  many  criminal  cases  of  narcotics. 

Record further  reveals that a  thorough inquiry was conducted and it 

was found  that the  petitioner has submitted the  application against 

the  police  officials  just  to  save  his  skin  from  the  criminal  cases 

registered  against  him  and  his witnesses.  During the  said  inquiry, 

the petitioner also failed to produce any evidence with regard to the 

commission  of  theft  of  Rs.2,00,000/- from  his  house  by the  police 

officials and also with  regard to the alleged torture  upon him by the 

proposed  accused.  The  record  further  depicts  that  Ali  Zaman 

Constable  (No.3792)  was  on  official  duty  in  the  official  vehicle 

No.GV-177, as  gunman  on  the  alleged  day of  occurrence.  Further 

an F.l.R  No.410/2019 is  already registered against witnesses of the 

petitioner  namely  Adnan,  Bilal  and  Shafqat.  As  such,  keeping  in 

view  the  above  facts  and  circumstances,  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge  has  rightly  declined 

the  application  of  the 

petitioner.  Further, it  is  a  settled principle of  law that the  Ex-Officio 

Justice  of  Peace whilst  seized of a  petition under Section 22-A/22- 

B  of  Cr.P.C  is  not  to  act  mechanically  by  issuing  a  direction  for 

registration of a  criminal case in  each and every case, which has to 

be  decided  on  its  own  peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  as  has 

been held by the  Hon'ble Lahore high Court,  Lahore in  case "Mian 

Abdul  Waheed  VS  Additional  Sessions Judge.  Lahore  and  others" 

(2011  P .Cr.L.J  438).  In  any  case,  the  allegations  leveled  against 

the  proposed  accused  by  the  petitioner  cannot  be  addressed  by 

this  Court  while  exercising 

its  extraordinary  constitutional 

jurisdiction,  as the same entail a factual inquiry. 

9. 

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  "Muhammad 

Bashir  v.  Station  House  Officer.  Okara  Gantt  and  others"  (PLO 

2007  SC 539) has been pleased to observe as under: 

"40. Therefore, in our opinion, the only jurisdiction  which 
could be exercised by an Ex-Officio Justice of the  Peace 
under  section  22A  {6}  Cr.P.C.  was  to  examine  whether 

4 

W.P No.36612020 

the  information  disclosed by the applicant did or did not 
constitute  a  cognizable  offence  and  if  it  did  then  to 
direct  the  concerned  S.H.O.  to  record  an  FIR,  without 
going  into  the  veracity of  the  information  in  question, 
and  no  more.  Offering  any  other  interpretation  to  the 
provisions  in  question  would  be  doing  violence  to  the 
entire  scheme  of  the  Cr.P.C.  which  could  not  be 
permitted. 

41.  We  are  conscious of  the  fact  that  in  pursuance  of 
petitions  filed  under Article 199 of the  Constitution,  the 
High  Courts, at  times,  did refuse  to issue  writs directing 
recording  of F/Rs.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  exercise  of 
discretion under the said jurisdiction was not  dependent 
illegality  committed  by  a  competent 
only  on  an 
authority  but  was  also  controlled  by  some  other 
important  consideration  such  as  the  seeker  of  a  writ 
being  an  aggrieved  person;  availability  of  alternative 
remedies  such  as filing  of a  complaint  etc.  in  criminal 
matters  and  the  applicant being  qualified, in  equity, for 
the  grant  of  the  sought  relief.  The powers  of  the  Ex  
Officio Justice  of  Peace  under  section  22-A  (6)  of  the 
Cr.P.C.  could,  therefore,  not  be  equated  with  the 
constitutional jurisdiction vesting in a High  Court." 

10. 

In  the  facts  and  circumstances  of this  case,  the  learned  Ex  

officio Justice  of  Peace was  satisfied that  a  case for  issuance of a 

direction  for  registration of  a  criminal  case was  not  made out  and, 

therefore,  rightly  dismissed  the  application  under  section  22-A  of 

Cr.P.C. filed by the petitioner. 

11. 

For what  has been discussed above, the  learned counsel for 

the  petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  or  irregularity  in 

the  impugned  order,  calling  for  interference  by  this  Court  in  its 

constitutional jurisdiction.  Resultantly, the instant petition having no 

force is  hereby dismissed. 

(GHULAM AZ.AM ~RANI) 

JUDGE 

) 

