ORDER SHEET
IN THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 

          JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

           W.P No.1780 of 2020 

                                                        VS 

Ayesha  Naeem  & others 

M. Touseeq  Danial  Bhatti 

Date  of Hearing:       

17.08.2020 

Petitioner  By:  

Mr.  Muhammad  Saqib  Bhatti 
Advocate.     

Respondents  By:    

Ms.  Saima  Uzman  Chatha 
Advocate. 

----------------------- 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani, J:    Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court filed under Article 199 

of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  with  the 

following  prayer;- 

“  It  is,  therefore,  respectfully  prayed  that  impugned 
order  dated  02.03.2020  passed  by  learned  Judge 
Family  Court  may  please  be  set  aside  in  the  best 
interests of justice. 

Any other relief which this Hon’ble Court deems fit and 
just also be awarded in favour  of the petitioner.” 

2. 

Briefly stated facts of the instant petition  are  that  the respondents 

filed a  suit for recovery of  maintenance of respondent  No.2/minor at  the 

rate  of  Rs.  84,000/-  per  month  stating  therein  that  the  petitioner  is 

running  the  business  of  restaurant  in  the  name  and  style  of  “Bhatti 

Snack  Bar”  at  Rose  &  Jasmine  Garden,    Islamabad  and  he  is  earning 

Rs.  5,00,000/-  per  month  and  he  can  easily  pay 

the  claimed 

maintenance  of  the  minor.  It  has  been  further  averred  in  the  plaint  that 

the  minor is school going.  Her school fee, transportation,  medical, food, 

clothing and other expenses  are  more  than  Rs.89,590/- per  month.  The 

   
 
 
 
                                 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
                                               
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

petitioner  /defendant  contested  the  suit  on  factual  as  well  as  on  legal 

grounds  by  filing  written  statement  and  stating  therein  that  “  Bhatti 

Snack  Bar”  is  not  a  restaurant,  rather  the  same  is  a  “Khokha”  which  is 

sole ownership of petitioner’s disabled elder brother namely Muhammad 

Taufeeq Umar; that he is a jobless person  and has no source of income; 

that  he  just  helps  his  brother  and  he can only pay  Rs.5000/- per  month 

to the  minor  as  maintenance  allowance.   

3. 

The  learned  Trial Court  after  hearing  the  parties  tentatively  made 

an assessment and fixed an amount of Rs.20,000/- per month as interim 

maintenance  allowance  for  the  minor  vide  order  dated  02.03.2020.  

Feeling  aggrieved,  the  petitioner  has filed  instant  petition. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  contended  that 

the 

impugned  order  has  been  passed  without  any reasoning, therefore,  the 

same   is  hit  by Section 24  of the  General  Clauses  Act;  that  the  learned 

Trial Court  without  any evidence  just on the pleading of  the respondent/  

plaintiff  has  fixed  the  maintenance  allowance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.20,000/- 

per  month  whereas  this  amount  is  not  possible  from  his  insufficient 

source of income.  Next contended  that  the  petitioner is dependent  upon 

his  disabled  brother,  who  is  running  the  “Khokha”  for  his  livelihood  and 

his  elder  brother  is  also  paying  monthly  Rs.5000/-  for  the  minor.  Lastly  

prayed  for  acceptance  of  writ  petition  and  for  reduction  in  maintenance  

allowance. 

5. 

Conversely,  learned counsel for  the respondent  has  opposed  the 

contention  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contending 

that no  maintenance has been  deposited by  the petitioner  for the  minor. 

The  minor is  school going.  The  learned  Trial  Court has rightly assessed 

the monthly maintenance at the rate of Rs.20,000/- per month and urged 

for dismissal  of the  instant  petition. 

 6. 

I have heard  the arguments of learned counsel for the parties and 

have  perused  the  material  available  on record.   

7. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  respondent  has  filed  a  suit 

for maintenance of the  minor, who is in the custody of respondent  No.1. 

The  learned  Trial  Court  on  submission  of  written  statement,  has 

assessed an amount of  Rs.20,000/- per  month for the financial needs of 

the  minor,  as interim  maintenance  allowance.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

8. 

The learned Judge, Family Court, had passed the impugned order 

in  terms  of  the  provisions  of  Section  17-A  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family 

Courts Act, 1964,  which  was  added  to  the West  Pakistan Family Courts 

Act,  1964  vide  Ordinance  No.IV  of  2002.  Under  Section  17-A  ibid,  a 

Family  Court  has 

the 

jurisdiction 

to  pass  an 

interim  order 

for 

maintenance  at any stage  of the  proceedings in  a  suit for  maintenance. 

Where  such  interim  maintenance  is  fixed,  payment  is  required  to  be 

made  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  each  month  failing  which  the  Family 

Court  is  empowered  to  strike  off  the  defense  of  the  defendant  and 

decree  the  suit.  

9. 

The  purpose  behind  the  provision  of  interim  maintenance  is  to 

ensure  that  during  the  pendency  of  the  suit  before  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court,  financial  constraints  faced by the  minors  are ameliorated.   

10.  The stance  taken  by the petitioner in his  petition did not persuade 

me  to  interfere  in  the  impugned  order,  which  is  interim  in  nature.  The 

petitioner,  who  is  the  father  of  the  minor,  cannot  expect  her  mother  to 

keep  her  and  also  to  pay  all  her  expenses.  However,  the  petitioner  is 

under  a  legal  as  well  as  a  moral  obligation  to  maintain  and  support  his 

children,  more  so when  they  are minors.   

11. 

In  this  regard,  I  am  fortified  by  the  law  laid  down  in  the  case  of 

Syeda  Farhat  Jehan  v.  Syed  Iqbal  Hussain  Rizvi  (2010  YLR  3275) 

wherein  it has  been  held  as under:- 

“The  right  of  maintenance  is  natural  right  of  minor 
children and their father could  not be allowed under any 
circumstance 
the  same. 
to  be  negligent  about 
Furthermore, it  was  held  that it was  the  legal and  moral 
duty  of  a  father  as  the  natural  guardian  of  his  minor 
children  to  keep  maintaining  them.  No  excuse,  big  or 
small could absolve a father from his duty of maintaining 
his  minor  as  guardian  through  the  divine  relation  of 
Almighty  Allah.” 

12.  Perusal  of  the record reveals  that  the impugned order  passed by 

the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  is  only  an  interlocutory  order.  The 

maintenance  fixed  through  such  an  interim  order  is  only  temporary.  As 

and  when,  the  final  order  is  passed  the  amount  fixed  by  the  learned 

Judge, Family Court,  may be  modified and revisited in that  the quantum 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

of  maintenance  can  be  increased  or  decreased  af ter  appraising, 

evaluating  and  examining  the  evidence  produced  by  the  both  the 

parties.  The 

impugned  order 

fixing 

the 

interim  maintenance  of 

Rs.20,000/- per month for the minor child of the petitioner is not the kind 

of an  order that  warrants interference  in  the constitutional jurisdiction of 

this  Court.  In  the  cases  of  Munir  Alam  v.  Civil  Judge,  Family  Court, 

Lahore (2009 CLC 442), Abrar  Hussain.  v. Mehwish Rana (PLD 2012 

Lahore  420)  and  Shahid  Ali  Gil  v.  Mst.  Ruqayya  Bano  (2015  MLD 

265),  the  Hon'ble'  High  Courts  have  dismissed  Writ  Petitions  against 

orders  fixing  interim  maintenance.  Furthermore,  in  the  case  of  Ali 

Adnan Dar v. Judge, Family Court (PLD 2016 Lahore 73), the Hon'ble 

Lahore  High  Court  did  not  entertain  a  Writ  Petition  against  an  interim 

order under Section 17-A  of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964 

fixing  an  amount  to  be  paid  as  an  interim  maintenance.  The  said 

judgment enumerates  the following  guidelines to  be followed in  matters 

regarding  interim  maintenance:-   

"I.  Maintenance  allowance  is  indispensable  right  of  the 
mother  and  children,  so 
for  grant  of 
maintenance allowance must be passed at a "convenient 
stage" of the proceedings. 

the  order 

II. Although section 17-A of the ibid Act empowers Family 
Court to pass an order for grant of interim maintenance 
allowance  at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings,  in  the 
normality  of  the  circumstances,  it  must  be  passed  after 
hearing  "both  of  the  parties"  unless  the  attitude  and 
conduct  of the defendant/father  is evasive. 

III. The order for grant of interim maintenance is made on 
the  basis  of 
the  material 
tentative  assessment  of 
available on file and keeping in  view the social status of 
the  parties.  Further,  both  the  above,  material  available 
and  social  status,  should  be  mentioned  in  the  order  for 
the grant of interim maintenance. Further the quantum of 
interim maintenance should be "bare  minimum" to meet 
the  day  to  day  needs  of  the  recipient  in  the  narrow 
context. 

IV.  Although  the  family  laws  have  been  enacted  to 
promote,  protect  and  advance  the  rights  of  women  and 
children  yet  at  the  interim  stage,  the  version  of  the 
respondent/defendant  be  given  a  sympathetic  or 
somewhat  preferable  consideration  because,  non-
payment of interim maintenance allowance will cut throat 
of  his  invaluable  right  i.e.  "right  to  defence"  and  in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

consequential  effects,  children/women  would  be  the 
losing and deprived parties. 

V. Further, if the case is not decided within the statutory 
period  as  given  in  Section  12 -A  of  the  West  Pakistan 
Family  Courts  Act,  1964  either  party  may  apply  to  the 
High Court for appropriate direction.  However,  the order 
for  grant  of  interim  maintenance  shall  hold  the  field 
unless  reviewed  by  High  Court  under  section  12-A  or 
Family  Court  itself  reviews  it  at  any  stage  as  observed 
below. 

VI. Family Court, according  to section  I2-A" of  the West 
Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  is  under  legislative 
direction to decide the case within six months. Although 
this  provision  is  directive  as  no  penalty/consequences 
are  mentioned  for  non-compliance  and  in  this  regard  
reference is made to (2001 SCMR 1001). But in case the 
matter is  not decided within six  months and the delay is 
due  to the plaintiff party, then Family Court either on its 
own  motion or on  the application of  the defendant/father 
review  its  earlier  order  for  grant  of  interim  maintenance 
allowance." 

In  the  case  reported  as  Mohtarma  Benazir  Bhutto    VS    The  State 

(1999  SCMR  1447),  it has been  held  as under:- 

“Orders at interlocutory stages should  not be brought to 
higher courts to obtain pragmatic orders as it intends to 
harm  the  advancement  of  fair  trial,  curtailing  remedies 
under the law, and even reducing the right of appeal.” 

13.  One  of  the  grounds  taken  by  the  petitioner  in  his  writ  petition  is 

that  he  is  dependent  upon  his  disabled  brother,  who  is  running  a 

“Khokha”  for  his  livelihood  and  his  elder  brother  is  also  paying  monthly 

Rs.5000/-  for  the  minor  whereas  stance  of  the  respondent  is  that  the 

petitioner is running the business of restaurant in the name and style of “ 

Bhatti  Snack  Bar”  at  Rose  &  Jasmine  Garden,  Islamabad  and  he  is 

earning  Rs.5,00,000/-  per  month.    By  taking  this  ground  petitioner  has 

raised a factual dispute,  which cannot be resolved  without the recording 

of evidence. On account of this factual controversy, the instant petition is 

not  maintainable.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon  the  cases 

reported  as  “Col.  Shah  Sadiq  VS  Muhammad  Ashiq  and  others”  (2006 

SCMR 276), “Muhammad Saleem Bhatti VS Syed Safdar Ali Rizvi and 2 

others”  (2006  SCMR  1957)  and  Muhammad  Shahbaz  Khalid    VS  

Judge  Family  Court,  Lahore  (PLD 2013  Lahore  64).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

14.  Section 14(3) of  the West Pakistan  Family Courts Act, 1964, bars 

an appeal or revision against an interim order passed by a Family Court. 

The  filing  of  Writ  Petitions  against  interim  orders  passed  by  the  Family 

Courts is to be discouraged because an aggrieved party will have a right 

to  agitate  his  grievance  before  the  appellate  Court  when  the  interim 

order  merges  into  a  final  order.  The  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act, 

1964, being a special law barring a right of appeal or revision against an 

interim maintenance order, a writ petition against an order under Section 

17-A  of  the  said  Act,  would  be  maintainable  only  and  only  if  such  an 

interim order is coram non judice, wholly without jurisdiction or based on 

mala fides.  The  quantum of  the interim  maintenance cannot be  made  a 

ground  for invoking  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of this  Court.   

15.  Keeping in  view the  above facts  and circumstances, it can safely 

be  held  that  the  father  should  not  be  punished  by  way  of  interim 

maintenance  allowance  order  so  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  pay  the 

maintenance  and  resulted  into  consequences  provided  in  Section  17-A 

of the Family Courts Act, 1964, therefore, it is the imperative duty of the 

Family  Court  to  adopt  a  pragmatic  approach  and  fix  the  interim 

maintenance  on the  following  principles: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Financial  status  of  father  shall  be  kept  in  view, 
which  should  be  based  upon  salary  slips,  bank 
statements,  income 
tax  record,  and  business 
income  reflected  on  record  or  throug h  any  other 
documentary  proof  placed  by  either  side  in  the 
Court. 

Interim  maintenance  should  be  fixed  not  on  hard 
and  fast principles, rather based  upon a tentative 
view. 

Maintenance should not be fixed on a higher side, 
which  may  result  into  technical  k nockout  of  the 
father so that he could not able to pay the interim 
maintenance,  therefore,  his option should also be 
considered  for  payment  of  interim  maintenance, 
which he agrees to pay before the Family Court. 

iv. 

In  cases,  where  father  has  not  explained  his 
monthly  income  or  his  financial  status  in  the 
the 
pleadings,  rather  concealed  his 

income, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

Family  Court  can  rely  upon  the  facts  narrated  in 
plaint or on the basis of attached documents vis-a-
vis the needs of minor and the verbal stance given 
by father without reference to his written statement 
will  not be considered justified, hence the Family 
Court  shall  exercise  discretion  to  fix  the  interim 
maintenance  while applying the above principles. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

viii. 

ix. 

In  cases,  where  determination  of  adequacy  or 
inadequacy  of  quantum  of  maintenance  requires 
factual 
the 
maintenance  should  be  fixed  after  consultation 
with  the father and mother as  well as keeping in 
view the day-to-day  requirements  of minor. 

inquiry  and  evidence 

trial, 

in 

The  needs of minor should be considered on the  
basis  of  social  stratification  of  family  in  which 
minor has been brought  up. 

in  which 

The  financial  status  of  father  could  also  be 
considered  on  the  basis  of  facts  narrated  in 
pleadings of the parties,  which includes the living 
standard  and  previous  matrimonial  life  of  the 
parties 
the  mother/wife  has  been 
provided  with  particular  kind  of  living,  housing 
facilities, 
immovable 
properties  of  husband  and  the  lifestyle  in  which 
husband/father  was  living  prior  to  separation  or 
divorce  or  before 
for 
maintenance. 

institution  of  suit 

transportation, 

gifts, 

the 

fix 

In  cases,  where  father  being  civil  servant  or 
employee  of  any  organization,  department  or 
company  has  not  appended  his  salary  slips  or 
bank statements, the Family Court shall ask for an 
undertaking  or  affidavit  regarding  his  salary  and 
thereafter  shall 
interim  mai ntenance, 
the 
however  after  the  trial  of  the  case,  if  the  court 
comes to the conclusion that at the time of fixation 
of 
the 
father/husband  has  stated  a  fact  beyond  his 
pleadings  or  undertaking,  which  is  found  to  be 
false,  such  father  be  burdened  with  heavy  costs 
and action of perjury may also be initiated against 
him. 

interim  maintenance 

allowance 

The  Family  Court  may  also  call  the  employer  of 
father,  HR  department,  admin  department,  bank 
managers,  land  revenue  department,  tax  record, 
and banking details as well as salary details of the 
father  directly  from  the  relevant  offices  while 
deciding the question of interim maintenance for a 
prima facie  view  to  fix  the allowance in favour of 
minor  so  that  no  inadequacy  is  attributed  while 
fixing the maintenance  allowance.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

W.P No.1780 of 2020 

16.  Keeping  in  view  the  above  principles,  when  the  petitioner/father 

has  taken  the  plea that he is  dependent upon  his  disabled brother,  who 

is  running  a  “Khokha”  for  his  livelihood  and  his  elder  brother  is  also 

paying  monthly  Rs.5000/-  for  the  minor,  he  could  not  pay  the  interim 

maintenance  allowance  of  Rs.20,000/-  per  month  to  the  minor,  which 

prima  facie,  seems  to  be  exorbitant  at  this  stage,  but  this  Court,  in 

constitutional  jurisdiction,  is  not  able  to  determine  this  factual  aspect  of 

adequacy  or  inadequacy  of  the  interim  maintenance  allowance  on  the 

basis  of  principles  laid  down  by  the  superior  Courts,  where  such  order 

could  not  be  assailed  in  constitutional  jurisdiction.  Perusal  of  record 

reveals  that  the  suit  before  the  learned  Trial  Court  was  filed  on 

14.09.2019 and  the same has not  been concluded  within  a  period of  six 

months  as  prescribed  by  Section  12-A  of  the  W est  Pakistan  Family 

Court  Act,  1964,  therefore,  in  order  to  meet  ends  of  justice,  the  Judge 

Family  Court is  directed  to decide  the  suit  for recovery of  maintenance, 

filed by respondents  No.1  & 2, preferably  within  a period  of two  months 

so  that  the  father/petitioner  could  only  be  burdened  with  the  interim 

maintenance for two months only, which would subsequently be merged 

into   final judgment.   

17. 

In  view  of  what has been  discussed  above,  this petition is  hereby 

dismissed  with  the  direction  to  the  Judge  Family  Court  seized  with  the 

matter  to conclude  the  suit  within  two  months  after receipt  of this order. 

18.  The observations hereinabove are tentative in nature and shall not 

prejudice  the  case  of  the  parties  at  the  time  of  final  adjudication  of  the 

case.  

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani 

     Judge 

Announced  in Open  Court,  on this  25th  day of August,  2020. 

S.Akhtar 

Approved for reporting 

       Judge 

Uploaded By: Engr. Um er Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
