ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.1732-2019 

Mrs. Shamshad Butt 

VS

Deputy Commissioner, CDA, Islamabad and others. 

Petitioner by:  

Sardar Shabbir Hussain, Advocates. 

Respondents by: 

Ch.  Kamil  Hayat,  Advocate 
respondents No.1 to 3. 
Respondent No.4 Ex-parte 

for 

Date of Hearing: 

09.06.2022. 

……………………………………………………………………………….  

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI  J.  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner  Mrs.  Shamshad  Butt  has  assailed  the  letter  dated  30.10.2018, 

issued by the Estate Management Officer, CDA and order dated 02.04.2014 

passed  by  Deputy  Commissioner,  CDA  under  section  49-C  of  the  CDA 

Ordinance  1960  as  well  as  clause  2.17.3  of  Islamabad  Sector  Zoning 

Building Regulation 2005. 

2. 

Brief facts referred in the  instant petition are that the petitioner Mrs. 

Shamshad  Butt  has  purchased  House  No.  47,  Street  No.56,  Sector  F-6/4 

Islamabad  through  transfer  letter  dated  01.08.1985,  thereafter  leased  out  to 

National Rural Support Programme / respondent No.4, which is a Non-profit 

Organization,  registered  under  Companies  Ordinance,  1984  for  residential 

purposes  which  is  next  to  the  House  No.  46,  45  Agha  Khan  Road,  Street 

No.56,  Sector  F-6/4  Islamabad,  already  under  lease  of  respondent  No.4  by 

another  landlady  Humaira  Sheraz.  The  Deputy  Commissioner    CDA  has 

imposed the penalty of Rs.500,000/-, vide order dated 02.04.2014 alongwith 

additional  payment  of  fine  of  Rs.5000/-  per  day  on  the  ground  of  non- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 2 

conforming  use  of  the  premises  in  terms  of  Section  49-C  of  the  CDA 

Ordinance  1960  and  finally  the  Estate  Management  Directorate  CDA  has 

issued  letter  dated  30.10.2018  by  informing  the  petitioner  at  her  Canadian 

residence  that  sum  of  Rs.28,80,357/-  has  been  imposed  on  account  of  fine 

and restoration charges of the plot are still outstanding, which gives rise to 

filing of the instant writ petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the  petitioner  is  a  dual 

national being permanent resident at Canada and was never been served with 

a  notice  regarding  initiation  of  any  proceedings  by    CDA  authorities;  even 

the final show cause notice dated 13.05.2014 was posted on a fake address in 

the  name  of  wrong  person  known  as  Mrs.  Shad  Begum;  no  report  from 

Building  Control  Section,  CDA  is  available  on  record  to  justify  that  the 

premises was used for non-conforming use; even otherwise petitioner could 

not  be  burdened  with  the  act  of  tenant,  though  no  action  was  taken  by  the 

CDA against the tenant for ejectment, if at all the building was used in non-

conforming  manner.  The  other  houses  occupied  by  the  tenant  were  also 

under  similar  category,  but  no  proceedings  were  taken  against  the  said 

landlords. The actions taken by the respondent Authorities are in violation of 

CDA Ordinance 1960 as the Islamabad Residential Sectors Zoning (Building 

Control) Regulations 2005 are ultra vires to the parent law, even the  recent 

SROs  impliedly  repeal  the  previous  SRO  in  terms  of  Islamabad  Sector 

Zoning Regulations. The respondent authorizes have violated  the  principles 

of audi alteram partem as no right of hearing was afforded to the petitioner 

and  was  condemned  unheard,  as  such  the  penalty  imposed  upon  the 

petitioner and even the restoration charges are not legally justiciable from the 

record.  

4. 

Conversely 

learned  counsel 

for 

the  CDA  has  opposed 

the 

maintainability  of  instant  petition  on  the  ground  that  the  petitioner  has 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 3 

intentionally entered into lease agreement with the commercial organization. 

The subject plot was cancelled after issuing notices to the petitioner, which 

were not considered by the petitioner and as such, plot could only be restored 

subject to payment of charges after inverting the same from non-conforming 

to conforming-use. Besides, notices were issued and delivered to respondent 

No.4;  however,  no  one  appeared  on  their  behalf,  therefore,  this  court  left 

with no option but to precede ex-parte. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner  being  owner  of  House 

No.47,  Street  No.56,  Sector  F-6/4  Islamabad  has  leased  out  the  same  on 

27.04.2006 to National Rural Support Programme (NRSP), located at House 

No.46,  Street  No.56,  Agha  Khan  Road,  Sector  F-6/4  Islamabad  against  the 

monthly  rent  of  Rs.230,000/-  whereby,  the  said  tenant  has  converted  the 

house into an office without the consent of the petitioner / landlady. Due to 

the  said  non-conforming  usage,  proceedings  have  been  initiated  against  the 

petitioner and consequently the Deputy Commissioner CDA, Islamabad has 

imposed fine of Rs.500,000/- in terms of clause 2.17.3 of Islamabad Sector 

Zoning  Building  Regulation,  2005  and  further  directed  to  evict  the  tenant 

from  the  said  premises,  whereafter,  the  conveyance  deed  /  allotment  letter 

will be cancelled. However, the action was culminated into final letter dated 

30.08.2018,  which  conveyed  imposition  of  fine  of  Rs.28,80,357/-  as 

restoration charges of the said plot. 

7. 

In order to proceed with the case, this Court has confronted the CDA 

authorities  to  demonstrate  from  their  record  as  to  whether  any  notice  has 

been served upon the petitioner, who claims to be Canadian citizen, living in 

Ontario,  Canada  or  any  other  notice  which  has  ever  been  served  upon  the 

petitioner before taking the final action. The comments filed in this case are 

silent qua service of any notice, even the record is also silent qua the joining 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 4 

of  petitioner  in  any  proceedings  before  the  final  action  by  the  respondent 

authorities. 

8. 

I  have  gone  through  the  appended  record,  which  reveals  that  at  the 

time  of  execution  of  lease  agreement  dated  27.04.2006  by  the  petitioner  / 

landlady  with  National  Rural  Support  Programme  (NRSP)  qua  the  subject 

premises,  she  has  mentioned  her  address  as  House  No.25-D,  Officers  

Colony,  Ghazi  Road,  Lahore    and  similar  address  was  referred  as  a 

permanent  address  on  the  CNIC  of  the  petitioner  alongwith  the  present 

address  of  Ontario,  Canada,  even  the  notice  u/s  49-C  of  CDA  Ordinance 

1960  for  non-conforming  use  issued  by  the  Deputy  Director-II  (EM)  East, 

CDA dated 15.04.2014 was transmitted on the leased premises as well as on 

the  address  i.e.  (K-46,  Saddar  Road  Attock  City)  which  was  the  original 

address available on the record of the Estate Management Directorate at the 

time  of  transfer  of  subject  plot  in  favor  of  petitioner  vide  allotment  letter 

dated 01.08.1985. The second notice available on record was of 13.05.2014, 

which was issued on the similar address in the name of one lady Mrs. Shad 

Begum  instead  of  Mrs.  Shamshad  Begum.  All  these  aspects  clearly 

established that the minimum requirement of service of notice has not been 

complied  with,  neither  any  ample  proof  has  been  placed  on  record  by  the 

CDA authorities, where any postal receipt or service receipt, would confirm 

the delivery of notice, especially when the petitioner is admittedly residing in 

Ontario,  Canada  as  reflected  from  her  passport  appended  with  this  case, 

which  has  not  been  denied  by  the  CDA  authorities  through  any  counter 

evidence.  Therefore,  at  this  stage,  this  court  has  been  guided  with  the 

principles  set  out  in  1984  SCMR  993  (Mst.  Amina  v.  Abdul  Qadir  and 

others),  2007  SCMR  1105  (Muhammad  Bashir  and  others  v.  Abbas  Ali 

Shah), 1979 CLC 732 [Lahore] (Ahmad Dar VS Mian Abdul Majid), 2012 

MLD  1487  (Muhammad  Iqbal  v.  Sardar  Khan),  2013  YLR  2132  (Sheikh 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 5 

Wajaht  Ali  v.  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa,  through  Secretary 

Industries),  AIR  2002  [SC]  3557  (Basant  Singh  and  another  v.  Roman 

Catholic  Mission),  2005  CLC  3  (Pakistan  State  Oil  Company  Limited  v. 

Sikandar A. Karim), 2007 SCMR 1105 (Muhammad Bashir and others v. 

Abbas Ali Shah), PLD 1991 [SC] 660 (W.A.P.D.A v. Saeed Baddar), 1986 

MLD  396  (Girdhari  Lal  B.  Bhattia  v.  Saeed  Ahmad  Kazi),  whereby  the 

following principles were high-lighted:  

i.  When  any  authority  claims  that  notice  has  been  served 

upon the consignee, proper approved registered address 

should be mentioned in the postal record. 

ii.  Postal  receipt  may  also  be  produced  in  order  to  prove 

the  due  communication  of  the  letters  /  notices.  The 

presumption  of  service  is  rebuttable  if  the  other  side 

deny such service on oath. 

iii. 

In case the service has been denied than onus is shifted 

upon 

the  sender 

to  produce 

the  postman  or 

to 

demonstrate  form  any  record  of  these  receipt  that  the 

subject notice was served upon the consignee. 

iv.  Registration  receipt  showing  correct  address  would  be 

evidence of dispatch and delivery of notice or material. 

v.  Postal 

receipt  and  acknowledgment  on 

record 

indication dispatch and receipt of notice. 

vi.  The signature appended on the acknowledgment receipt 

of notice will  also  be  considered as the presumption  of 

due service of notice. 

vii. 

 Notice  sent  by  registered  post-AD  and  received  back 

with  endorsement  “refused”,  presumed  to  have  been 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 6 

received  by  the  addressee  and  considered  refused  by 

him with due knowledge.  

viii.  Onus to prove service of notice constitutes to be on the 

party  relying  on  such  notice;  unless  there  is  other 

evidence to indicate that denial of service by addressee 

is against the record. 

ix.  U/S 27 of General Clauses Act 1897 the service shall be 

deemed  to  be  effected  by  properly  addressing,  pre-

paying  and  posting  by  registered  post,  a 

letter 

containing  the  document,  and  unless  the  contrary  is 

proved,  to  have  been  effected  at  the  time  at  which  the 

letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. 

By  applying  the  above  mentioned  legal  principles  set  out  under  the 

concept  of  section  27  of  General  Clauses  Act,  1897  by  different  superior 

courts, the CDA authorities are not in position to justify that any valid notice 

has  ever  been  served  upon  the  petitioner  on  her  known  address,  nor  any 

postal receipt has been produced on record, neither any postman or a person 

has  been  produced 

to  confirm 

that  notice  was  served  with  due 

acknowledgment.  Hence,  the  due  requirement  of  Article  10-A  of  the 

Constitution  of  Pakistan  1973  or  fair  trial  and  due  process  has  not  been 

attended  to,  as  a  result  whereof,  the  civil  rights  determined  by  the  Deputy 

Commissioner CDA as well as by the Estate Management u/s 49-C of CDA 

Ordinance 1960 and regulations there under have been settled in violation of 

principle  of  audi  alteram  partem.  The  concept  of  due  process  of  law  has 

been  enshrined  in  Article  10-A  of  the  Constitution  of  Pakistan  1973, 

whereas,  the  said  principle  is  based  upon  due  right  of  hearing  in  terms  of 

principles  of  natural  justice  where  no  right  of  hearing  and  opportunity  of 

being  heard  was  granted,  the  action  is  to  be  treated  illegal  as  held  in  PLD 

 
 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 7 

1964 [SC] 673 (Saiyyid Abdul A’la Maudoodi v. The Government of West 

Pakistan). Similarly the Lahore High Court in recent announcement reported 

as  PLD  2021  [Lahore]  211  )Muhammad  Khalid  Javed  and  Others  VS 

Lahore Development Authority and others) wherein it was held that where 

law  provides  a  mechanism  for  doing  an  act,  taking  an  action  or  initiating 

certain measures then the same must be compiled with as and when the law 

provided or where things are to be done in a particular manner, the same are 

to be done in that manner and if anything is done contrary or in deviation to 

that,  the  same  shall  be  deemed  to  have  not  been  done  at  all  in  terms  of 

Article 10-A of the Constitution. The basic theme behind Article 10-A of the 

Constitution is to cover substantive procedural process, it could be termed as 

having been designed to secure justice as a living reality. Similarly the right 

to fair trial after due process was a bedrock of the rule of law and was closely 

linked  with  human  rights  protection,  more  particularly  the  rights  to  life, 

liberty  and  property  as  held  in  2021  CLC  1841  [Lahore]  (Muhammad 

Nawazish Ali v. Family Judge). 

9. 

Now adverting towards the  question of non-conforming use in terms 

of Section 49-C of the CDA Ordinance means that if any building, structure, 

work  or  land  in  erected,  constructed  or  used  in  contravention  of  the 

provisions  of  this  Ordinance  or  of  any  rule,  regulation  or  order  made 

thereunder,  is  the  concept  of  non-Conforming  use  in  general.  Whereas,  the 

particular  concept  of  Non-Conforming  use  has  also  been  high-lighted  in 

terms  of  clause  2.17  of  the  Islamabad  Residential  Sector  Zoning  (Building 

Control) Regulations 2005 which is as under:- 

2.17.1 

No  land  or  building  [or  part  of  the  building] shall 

be put to a non-conforming use. 

2.17.2 

Any  building  [or  part  of  the  building]  or  structure 

designed  or  intended  for  a  use,  not  authorized  or 

permitted  under  these  Regulations  or  conditions  of 

allotment, shall either be removed or converted into 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 8 

a  building  or  structure  designed  or  intended  for  a 

use  authorized  or  permitted 

under 

these 

Regulations or conditions of allotment. 

2.17.3 

A non-conforming use of a residential building may 

render  the  owner  and  the  occupant  of  the  building 

liable,  on  first  conviction  to  pay  a  fine  of  [Rs.0.5 

million] and in the case of failure to discontinue the 

non-conforming  use  within  15  days  of 

the 

conviction,  to  an  additional  fine  which  may  extend 

to  [five  thousand  rupees  (Rs.5000)]  for  every  day 

during which he has persisted in the failure. After a 

persistent non-conforming use for a period for three 

months,  the  owner  or  as  the  case  may  be  the 

occupant  shall  be  liable  to  be  evicted  from  the 

building  summarily  and  the  allotment/conveyance 

deed of the plot may also be cancelled. 

2.17.4 

The  penalty  mentioned  above  in  this  regard,  shall 

be imposed by the Deputy Commissioner only. 

By going through the above referred provisions read with Section 49-

C  of  the  CDA  Ordinance  1960  it  appears  that  every  building  constructed 

within Islamabad residential sectors is to be used for the purpose mentioned 

in the allotment letter or under the regulations, whereas, the subject property 

was  allotted  for  a  residential  purpose  as  defined  in  clause  1.2.121  of  the 

regulations  which  defines  „Residential  Building‟  means  a  building 

authorized  for  residential  occupancy  by  one  or  more  families,  but  does  not 

include hotels or lodging houses; as such the concept of commercial use has 

not been referred in this definition, though, it is permissible to lease out the 

residential  premises  /  house,  for  residential  use,  which  itself  is  against  the 

receiving of monthly rent, but for residential purpose and not a guest house, 

which is a commercial activity. At the same time the concept of commercial 

building  has  also  been  defined  in  clause  1.2.32  of  the  regulations  means  a 

building  erected  on  commercial  plot  allotted  for  shops/  offices  with  or 

 
 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 9 

without  residential  flats/apartments  or  any  other  commercial  use.  Hence, 

this court is of the view that the principal use of the said building / house is 

for  a  residential  purpose  and  occupancy  of  different  families,  whereas,  the 

action taken by the CDA authorities is of non-conforming use primarily with 

the allegation of establishment of an office, though,  the petitioner has denied 

these  allegations.  In  such  scenario  primary  onus  in  terms  of  Article  117  of 

Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  has  to  be  discharged  by  the  CDA  officials 

that  a  building  which  was  authorized  for  residential  use  has  been  used  for 

non-conforming  manner,  which  may  render  the  owner  and  occupant  of 

building  liable  to  penalty  and  eviction  from  the  building  and  allotment  and 

conveyance  deed  of  plot  may  be  cancelled  under  chapter  2,  clause  2.1.4  of 

the  Islamabad  Residential  Sectors  Zoning  (B.C)  Regulations,  2005. 

However,  before  taking  such  an  action  certain  duties  have  been  attached  to 

the  Building  Control  Section  to  inspect  the  property  and  generate  a  report 

qua the use of such property contrary to the authorized usage to initiate the 

action prima facie on the charge that building was under use in violation of 

regulations and the purpose defined in its allotment letter.  

10. 

This  Court  has  confronted  the  respondents  counsel  to  demonstrate 

from  any  record  qua  the  use  of  building  /  house  under  non-conforming  use 

through any report of Building Control Inspector, who visited the house and 

submitted any detail or evidence that the same was used for an office by the 

petitioner, but no such documentary evidence is available on the record. This 

aspect prima facie demonstrates that the action is not based upon any Field 

Inspector  Report  of  Building  Control  Section  CDA  nor  any  such  officer’s 

name has been reflected in the parawise comments, even no report on behalf 

of the CDA has been filed to justify that CDA authorities have inspected the 

property in question on a particular date and time, nor any kind of evidence 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 10 

was  collected  from  the  subject  premises  to  issue  notice  of  non-conforming 

use. 

11. 

Learned  counsel  for  CDA  contends  that  the  petitioner  herself 

acknowledges in the lease agreement that building in question was leased out 

to  the  National  Rural  Support  Programme  (NRSP)  which  itself  is  a 

commercial entity and using the said building for commercial purposes, that 

might be true but as far as lease agreement is concerned, there is not a single 

acknowledgment  by  the  petitioner  that  she  extended  permission  to  use  the 

building  for  commercial  purposes  or  for  establishing  an  office,  nor  it could 

be  demonstrated  through  any  other  document  of  National  Rural  Support 

Programme  (NRSP),  that  subject  premises  is  the  office,  though  the  notices 

appended in this case refer that occupants have opened / established an office 

in residential premises. In such scenario this court is of the view that before 

taking such action under the law, the Inspector of Building Control Section, 

CDA shall bring on record the following measures:-   

i.  The  Building  Control  Section  through  notified  Inspector 

shall  visit  the  premises  and  collect  any  incriminating 

material, i.e. office card, letter head, any correspondence in 

which  the  building  address  has  been  used  for  commercial 

purposes. 

ii.  The  Building  Inspector  may  prepare  a  concise  report  of 

visit  /  inspection  of  the  residential  building  and  record 

those  particulars  through  which  it  could  be  prima  facie 

established that building has been used for non-Conforming 

use. 

iii.  The  Building  Inspector  may  take  photographs  or  a  video 

evidence to establish the non-conforming use or may record 

any statement of the official / occupant of the building qua 

its usage. 

If  the  above  referred  evidence  are  not  available  as  a  minimum 

standard  to  take  action  for  non-Conforming  use  before  the  Deputy 

 
 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 11 

Commissioner CDA, then there is no need to issue notice to the other side in 

terms of section 49-C  of CDA Ordinance 1960. The plain language of said 

provision  of  law  casts  duty  upon  the  Deputy  Commissioner,  to  satisfy 

himself  before  issuance  of  notice  that  minimum  requirements  have  been 

demonstrated by the Building Control Section CDA, which is not the case in 

hand  to  the  extent  of  petitioner,  therefore,  the  only  evidence  which  is 

available on record is the lease agreement of petitioner, which has not been 

filed  by  the  respondents  /  CDA,  hence,  the  primary  onus  to  prove  the 

commercial  use  of  building  /  house  as  per  the  lease  agreement  has  been 

shifted upon the respondents / CDA as per Article-122 of Qanun-e-Shahadat 

Ordinance  1984,  which  has  not  been  discharged  before  passing  of  the 

impugned orders. 

12.  Concerning,  the  action  against  the  owner  of  the  premises  who  is  not 

privy to the illegal acts of the tenant, rather it is the tenant who is using the 

subject  premises  in  violation  of  lease  agreement  and  CDA  by  laws,  but  no 

action was taken by the CDA authorities against the occupant / tenant, rather 

a  premium  has  been  given  to  such  an  illegal  occupant  by  not  sealing  the 

premises, is another act whose burden has been imposed upon the landlord, 

like in this case. 

13.   

It  is  not  the  case  of  petitioner  landlady  that  she  has  leased  out  the 

premises on commercial basis rather any such Non-conforming use was the 

sole act of the lessee, though there is no direct evidence available on record 

and  even  the  CDA  authorities  are  not  in  position  to  demonstrate  as  to  why 

they have not taken action against the subject premises by sealing the same 

by issuing the notice to the subject occupant, such a pick and choose exercise 

by the CDA authorities is in clear violation of principle of fairness. 

14. 

This Court has attended the proposition in hand while considering the 

mandate  of  case  law  reported  as  PLD  2022  [Islamabad]  22  (Raja  Zahoor 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 12 

Ahmad  VS  Capital  Development  Authority)  whereby,  it  was  held  that 

properties are subjected only to such use as is authorized by the regulations 

promulgated  under  the  CDA  Ordinance,  1960  which  is  a  mandatory 

obligation  of  the  authority,  as  such,  this  aspect  primarily  imposes  a  duty 

upon the allottee/the occupant to use the building or premises in accordance 

with  the  law  i.e.  CDA  Ordinance,  1960  read  with  Islamabad  Residential 

Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulations-2005.  Therefore,  any  use 

which did not conform with the classification made by CDA or as prescribed 

under the regulation which amount to non-conforming use within the concept 

provided in the regulation would render owner and occupant liable for action 

under the law, as held in 2017  MLD  627 [Islamabad]  (Col. (R)  Javed Agha 

VS Arshad Mahmud and four others). No doubt, the mess of non-conforming 

use has disrupted civic fiber in the city, manipulated  master plan of capital, 

and infringed fundamental rights of inhabitants and posed serious threats and 

enhanced  diminishing  law  and  order  situation  as  held  in  2015  YLR  998 

[Islamabad] (Javed Agha VS Arshad Mahmud and others).  

15. 

This  Court  is  of  the  view  that  majority  of  the  properties  were  used 

illegally  in  a  non-conforming  manner  by  the  owners  /  allottee  or  the 

occupants  like  tenants.  In  such  scenario  the  landlord  and  tenant  both  are 

responsible  for  non-conforming  use  of  the  building  /  house  in  terms  of 

Section  49-C  of  the  CDA  Ordinance,  1960,  however,  in  case  if  the  owner/ 

landlord  is  having  knowledge  qua  the  factum  of  non-conforming  use,  he 

shall  take  action  under  the  law  against  the  tenant  at  the  first  instance  for 

eviction  in  terms  of  The  Islamabad  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance,  2001  by 

considering that the building can only be used for the purpose of living and 

not to run any commercial activity, which is violation of terms of agreement 

or  against  the  law,  is  a  ground  of  eviction  in  terms  of  Section  17  of  The 

Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 and residential building for non-

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 13 

conforming use has been declared illegal and no premium can be given to a 

tenant  to  enjoy  the  same  under  the  garb  of  so-called  permission  of  the 

landlord  if  any  as  held  in  2019  MLD  590  (Shuja  Ahmed  VS  Additional 

District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad.  In  case  the  tenant  has  already  left  the 

premises  after  non-conforming  use  of  a  residential  house,  the  landlord  / 

owner can proceed against such a tenant and may recover the damages if the 

landlord  /  allottee  has  been  prosecuted  in  terms  of  Islamabad  Residential 

Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulations-2005  by 

the  Deputy 

Commissioner  and  under  the  regulations,  landlord  and  tenant  both  are  held 

responsible for non-conforming use of the property. However, the owner can 

take  a  plea  that  he  has  not  given  his  property  for  non-conforming  use  but 

such  a  plea  required  to  be  adjudicated  and  onus  is  upon  the  landlord  / 

allottee, to demonstrate that he has absolved from any penal action in terms 

of  Section  49-C  of  the  ordinance,  otherwise  both  are  held  liable  for  the 

penalties,  but if the tenant/occupant had  vacated the premises  then only the 

owner  was  liable  for  the  penalties  as  held  in  2021  CLC  1014  [Islamabad] 

(Ghulam Ahmad Qureshi VS Commissioner CDA, Islamabad and others).  

Similarly, where the landlord claims that he/she was not served with 

any  notice  on  the  residential  address  other  than  the  premises  which  was 

under  non  conforming  use  or  the  allottee/landlord  was  out  of  country  ,  in 

such  eventuality  the  landlord/allottee  has  to  provide  the  travelling  record, 

document,  passport  etc.  from  where  it  could  be  ascertained  that  he/she  was 

abroad at the time of passing of impugned orders, otherwise he /she would be 

liable  as  held  in  (2017  CLC  [Islamabad]  143,  (Bashir  Ahmed  v.  Deputy 

Commissioner Islamabad).  In the present case, the petitioner/landlady, who 

claims to be a Canadian citizen was admittedly out of country and has placed 

her passport on record to demonstrate her plea, though the impugned orders 

were passed in absence of petitioner and her plea of out of country has not so 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 14 

far  been  appreciated  by  any  forum,  which  requires  adjudication  after 

affording proper opportunity of hearing under the law.  

16. 

Learned counsel for the CDA has also raised a question that petitioner 

has  not  availed  the  remedy  of  appeal  in  terms  of  Section  36  of  CDA 

Ordinance,  1960,  against  the  order  passed  by  Deputy  Commissioner  CDA 

under Section 49-C of CDA Ordinance, 1960, as a result whereof instant writ 

petition is not maintainable. No doubt, Section 36 of CDA Ordinance, 1960, 

provides  a  remedy  of  appeal  and  review  to  all  those  persons  who  are 

aggrieved from the order of Deputy Commissioner CDA , where fine/penalty 

has  been  imposed  upon  the  petitioner  for  non-conforming  use  of  any 

building  but  the  question  arises  as  to  whether  such  remedy  is  equally 

efficacious  or  otherwise  is  a  question  depending  upon  the  circumstances  of 

each case, even there is no absolute bar in entertaining such a petition, which 

is qualified on certain principles of law, where there is a jurisdictional error, 

lack of authority or the order is void ab-initio, as held in 2016 PTD [Lahore] 

358  (M.Z.  International  VS  The  Assistant  Commissioner  Inland  Revenue 

Audit-5).  Similarly  if the order passed by the court  or tribunal suffers from 

want  of  jurisdiction  and  is  void  ab  initio  order,  in  such  scenario,  rule  of 

available appeal can be dispensed with as held in 2004 SMCR 400 (Farzad 

Raza Naqvi VS Muhammad Din).  

17. 

It  is  also  settled  law  that  where  order  or  any  action  against  the 

complainant  was  patently  illegal,  void  and  want  of  jurisdiction,  any  further 

recourse  to  alternative  remedy  might  only  be  counter-productive  and  such 

mischief requires an immediate action to nip the same from bud by invoking 

the  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  in  such  a  matter  existence  of  alternate 

remedy  would  not  bar  the  exercise  of  constitutional  jurisdiction  by  High 

Court as held in  PLD 1990 [SC] 399 (Edulji Dinshaw Limited VS Income 

Tax  Officer),  therefore,  the  objection  raised  by  the  counsel  for  CDA  is  not 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 15 

justiciable  in  the  present  circumstances,  where  petitioner  was  not  given 

opportunity of hearing in proper manner, especially when no notice was ever 

served  upon  the  petitioner,  nor  any  evidence  of  non-conforming  use  was 

placed  before  Deputy  Commissioner,  CDA  in  shape  of  any  report  or  other 

documentary  evidence  of  direct  nature,  which  could  not  be  rebutted 

otherwise.  

18. 

This Court has also observed that CDA Authorities took the action for 

sealing  of  the  premises  which  were  under  continuous  non  conforming  use. 

However, no such action was taken in the  present case by the CDA despite 

having knowledge that the house in question was under non-conforming use 

as  per  stance  of  Building  Control  Section,  CDA  though  it  is  their 

responsibility  to  proceed  against  occupant/tenant  after  giving  him  a  notice, 

otherwise,  adverse  presumption  has  been  generated  against  the  CDA 

authorities  in  terms  of  Article  129(g)  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  In 

cases where properties were sealed with its fixture and fittings same could be 

de-sealed  for  limited  purposes  for  removal  of  those  articles,  furniture  and 

fittings laying to be handed over to its lawful occupant as held in 2017 CLC 

[Islamabad]  150  (M/s  Labels  Franchise  VS  Capital  Development 

Authority). 

19. 

The  epitome  of  above  discussion  demonstrates  the  factual  resume  in 

favour of petitioner/landlady, who had no conscious knowledge qua the non-

conforming use of the premises by the tenant/occupant, especially when she 

was out of country, which has prima facie been justified from the  traveling 

itinerary  demonstrated  from  the  attached  passport,  in  such  scenario,  the 

circumstances are entirely different, which could not be equated with the case of 

Ghulam  Ahmad  Qureshi  supra,  whereas  one  thing  is  clear,  that  action  should 

have been taken against the tenant, who at the fist instance, is occupying the 

premises and guilty of non-conforming use, which is the case put forward by 

 
 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 16 

the  CDA  authority  before  this  Court.  Therefore,  CDA  authorities  could  not 

take  a  cover  and  plea  that  the  owner  should  be  prosecuted  in  the  first 

instance,  rather  it  is  their  legal  obligation  to  take  action  against  the  first 

available  person,  whether  he  is  landlord/  tenant,  who  is  violating  the 

regulations  and  By-laws  of  CDA,  even  no  report  of  Inspector,  Building 

Control Section, CDA has been placed on record.   

20. 

In  view  of  the  above  discussion,  this  Court  comes  to  an  irresistible 

conclusion that the CDA authorities including the Deputy Commissioner and 

Officers  of  Building  Control  Section  are  to  follow  certain  important 

guidelines for future purpose while dealing with the cases of non-conforming 

use in Islamabad Capital Territory, which are as under: 

i. 

The Building Control Inspector who visit the building / office / 

house,  which  was  under  non-conforming  use  has  to  submit  a 

written report clearly stating therein the name, date, time when 

the building was visited as well as the reasons on the basis of 

which he reaches to the conclusion that building is under non-

conforming use.                          

ii. 

The  report  must  contain  the  timeline  of  non-conforming  use 

tentatively  to  assess  the  quantum  of  fine  by  the  Deputy 

Commissioner, CDA till the removal of non-conforming use. 

iii. 

Any visiting card, sign board, pictures, video evidences, letter 

head correspondence, which could be made basis of opinion of 

non-conforming  use  of  the  building may  also  be  made  part  of 

the  report  including  but  not  limited  to  the  statement  of 

individual who are occupant in the building, if any. 

iv. 

The  Deputy  Commissioner  CDA  on  the  basis  of  such  report 

may initiate the proceedings in terms of Section 49-C of CDA 

Ordinance,1960  read  with  the  relevant  clauses  of  Islamabad 

Residential  Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulations-

2005,  shall 

issue  notice 

to 

the  occupant/allottee/owner 

accordingly.  

v. 

The Deputy Commissioner after issuing notice to the occupant 

at  the  first  instance,  if  comes  to  conclusion  that  building  is 

continuously  under  non-conforming  use  and  he  has given  due 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 17 

opportunity of hearing to the occupant, who whether joins the 

proceedings or otherwise, may pass an-interim order of sealing 

of the premises by all means without the final verdict. 

vi. 

In  case,  the  occupant  undertakes  to  remove  subject  non-

conforming  use  within 

reasonable 

time, 

the  Deputy 

Commissioner  may  on  the  undertaking  give  such  opportunity 

for  removal  of  the  non-conforming  use  for  a  limited  period, 

which  could  be  verified  after  the  specified  time  line.  In  case, 

the  occupant  has  not  removed  the  property  from  non-

conforming use, Deputy Commissioner may pass a final order 

of imposing penalty and sealing of the premises. 

vii. 

The  Deputy  Commissioner  shall  issue  notice  to  the  allottee 

alongwith  the  report  of  Building  Control  Inspector  conveying 

him non-conforming use of the property.  

viii.  The  Deputy  Commissioner  shall  ensure  the  proper  service  of 

notice  to  the  occupant  by  way  of  Registered  Post  and  also  by 

Special  Messenger  and  may  even  affix  the  notice  upon  the 

subject premises before taking the action.  

ix. 

The  Deputy  Commissioner  shall  take  the  report  of  Building 

Control Section, CDA and may put the same or confront to the 

occupant  or  the  allottee  for  his  input  or  rebuttal  by  way  of 

affidavit  and  may  also  extend  an  opportunity 

to 

the 

occupant/landlord/allottee to rebut the same.   

x. 

The  Estate  Management  Section  of  the  CDA  can  only  cancel 

the allotment or conveyance deed of such premises under non-

conforming  use,  if  the  Deputy  Commissioner  reaches  to  the 

conclusion  that  the  owner  is  guilty/liable  for  non-conforming 

use under the law and even persistently using the building in a 

similar manner, despite passing of the order. 

xi. 

The  Estate  Management  Section,  CDA  shall  independently 

issue  a  notice  to  the  allottee  before  cancellation  of  allotment 

on  the  basis  of  order  of  the  Deputy  Commissioner  if  no 

plausible explanation has been rendered by the allottee within 

prescribed time referred in the notice.  

xii. 

In terms of clause 2.17.5 of Islamabad Sector Zoning Building 

Regulation  2005,  the  building  under  non  conforming  use  may 

be  sealed  after  expiry  of  15  days  of  first  notice  issued  by 

Building  Control  Directorate  by  Director  Enforcement,  CDA 

 
 
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 18 

or  any  person  empowered  by  the  Authority  in  presence  of 

Magistrate of CDA upon issuance of order for sealing of said 

premises by Director Control Building CDA.    

xiii.  The Deputy Commissioner, CDA while imposing fine upon the 

occupant shall pass speaking order justifying his penal action 

against the occupant/allottee.  

21.  While  taking  analogy  from  the  above  guidelines,  the  case  of 

petitioner 

falls  within 

the  exceptional  category,  where  neither 

opportunity  of  hearing  was  afforded  to  the  petitioner  nor  any  report  of 

Building  Control  Section  for  non-conforming  use  has  been  placed  on 

record  and  even  no  concrete  evidence  of  non-conforming  use  has  been 

demonstrated. 

In  such  scenario, 

the  orders  passed  by  Deputy 

Commissioner,  CDA  or  by  the  Estate  Management,  CDA  are  to  be 

treated in excess of jurisdiction and considered to be passed in violation 

of  principle  of  natural  justice.  No  doubt  the  High  Court  in  exercise  of 

remedial jurisdiction will not review the findings of the case rendered by 

the  lower  forum,  whereas  in  this  case  the  factual  aspect  has  not  been 

appreciated by the Deputy Commissioner as well as the CDA authorities 

under  CDA  By-laws,  rather  they  violated  the  fundamental  rights  of 

petitioner  and  imposed  a  fine  which  has  not  been  proved  under  the 

principle  of  due  process  of  law  and  fair  trial,  rather  the  findings  are 

based  upon  no  evidence.  Hence,  the  impugned  orders  could  not  be 

termed  as  fair  rather  passed  in  disregard  to  statuary  provisions  of  law 

and resulted into complete failure of justice. 

22. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  writ  petition  is 

ALLOWED  and  both  the  orders  passed  by  Deputy  Commissioner,  CDA, 

whereby fine has been imposed and order of Estate Management Officer qua 

the cancellation of allotment of plot are hereby SET-ASIDE, the proceedings 

before the Deputy Commissioner CDA are  deemed to be pending,  whereby 

the petitioner shall join the proceedings and may submit her detailed version 

 
 
     
W.P No.1732/2019 

Page | 19 

in writing with affidavit as well as with any other documentary evidence to 

justify  her  stance.  The  Deputy  Commissioner  CDA,  shall  extend  the 

opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  petitioner  and  decide  the  matter  afresh  while 

considering  timeline  submitted  by  the  petitioner,  when  she  was  out  of 

country as well as the Building Control Section, CDA reports if any or any 

other evidence under the law. 

23. 

It  is  expected  from  the  Deputy  Commissioner  CDA,  to  decide  the 

matter within period of next four (04) months under intimation to this Court. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 24.06.2022.   

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting 

A.Waheed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
