ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.820/2018 
Malik Muhammad Younas 
VS
Capital Development Authority through its Chairman & 03 others 

Petitioner by: 

Malik Muhammad Zubair, Advocate. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Intizar Hussain, Advocate for 
Respondent No.1 (CDA) 

Mr. Muhammad Asif Khan, Advocate 
for Respondent No.2. (IESCO) 

Mr. Muhammad Aftab Ahmad, AAG. 

Date of Decision: 

08.02.2021. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  writ  petition, 

the  petitioner  seeks  direction  to  be  issued  to  the  respondents  to  permit 

installation  of  new  electricity  and  gas  meters  in  village  Dherik  Mori, 

Islamabad  and  that  to  de-notify  the  award  dated  22.08.2008  or  in 

alternative,  a  fresh  award  at  current  rate  of  land  and  BUP  may  be 

announced.  

2. 

Succinctly,  the  Capital  Development  Authority  (CDA)  announced 

acquisition award, dated 22.08.2008, with respect to revenue estates Bheker 

Fateh  Bukhsh,  Seri  Saral,  Shah  Allah  Ditta,  Pind  Sangral,  Dherk  Mori, 

Maira Sumbal Akku, Maira Sumbal Jaffar and Thallah Syedan, Islamabad 

without  making  any  payment,  even  otherwise,  sale  and  purchase  of  the 

land  as  well  as  built  up  properties  have  adversely  been  affected,  moreso, 

the  CDA  restricted  the  IESCO  (Respondent No.2)  and  D.G.  Gas,  Ministry 

of  Petroleum  and  Natural  Resources  (Respondent  No.3)  not  to  permit 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.820 of 2018  

        Page 2 

electricity  and  gas  connection  to  the  said  areas.  As  such,  petitioner  being 

resident  of  the  affected  area  i.e.  Dherik  Mori,  is  aggrieved  due  to  the 

inaction  on  the  part  of  respondents  authorities.  Hence,  instant  writ 

petition.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contended  that  the  inaction  of  the 

respondents is derogatory and violative of the Constitution of the Islamic 

Republic of Pakistan, 1973 with respect to fundamental rights guaranteed 

therein,  as  such,  the  petitioner  is  not  being  treated  in  accordance  with 

Article  25  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973, 

which  makes  entitled  all  citizens  equal  before  the  law;  that  the  CDA  has 

not  made  any  payment  relating  to  the  award  dated  22.08.2008,  even  the 

residents  of  purportedly  acquired  revenue  states  have  been  deprived  of 

their fundamental rights and basic necessities.  

4. 

Conversely, learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.1  and  2  contended 

that the Hon’ble apex Court, in HRC No.6465-G/2017, has directed not to 

provide  any  electricity  connection  to  buildings  not  sanctioned  by  the 

competent authority, as such, since the matter has already been decided by 

the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  not 

maintainable; that since award has been announced and ownership of the 

suit land has been transferred to the CDA, there is no question of further 

construction upon the CDA land or without its NOC.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner  Malik  Muhammad 

Younas is aggrieved with the acquisition proceedings of his land  situated 

in village Dherik Mori (Sector E-13 Golra Railway Station, Islamabad) and 

as  such,  the  acquisition  claim  has  not  yet  been  settled.  The  petitioner  has 

 
 
W.P. No.820 of 2018  

        Page 3 

simultaneously  challenged  the  award,  dated  22.08.2008,  and  claims  that 

installation of new electricity and gas connection for his properties may be 

resumed,  which  has  been  restricted  by  the  respective  departments  being 

basic necessity of life.  

7. 

It  has  been  observed  that  the  award  has  been  made  by  the  Deputy 

Commissioner, CDA on 22.08.2008 by acquiring the land of Mouza Bheker 

Fateh  Bukhsh,  Seri  Saral,  Shah  Allah  Ditta,  Pind  Sangral,  Dherk  Mori, 

Maira Sumbal Akku, Maira Sumbal Jaffar and Thallah Syedan, Islamabad, 

comprising  of  21723  Kanal  &  10  Marla,  at  flat  rate  of  Rs.800,500/-  per 

Kanal,  as  a  result  whereof  the  land  was  transferred  in  the  name  of  CDA, 

however  it  has  been  notified  in  the  award  that  the  land  owners  /  affectees 

having  less  than  4  Kanal  of  land  will  be  entitled  to  receive  compensation  under 

CDA Acquisition and Rehabilitation Regulations, 2007 (Land Sharing Basis). As 

such,  the  affectees  /  land  owners  are  entitled  for  allotment  of  plot  as 

compensatory benefits.  The  petitioner’s  forefathers  had  been living  in  the 

land  in  question  since  age,  thus  making  the  petitioner  a  permanent 

resident of said area, as such, the petitioner  now intends to get electricity 

and  gas  connection  for  his  property  due  to  increase  in  the  number  of 

family  members,  per  se,  the  IESCO  authorities  /  respondent  No.2  have 

taken  the  stance  that  they  have  no  objection  on  installation  of  new 

electricity  meter  if  the  CDA  issues  the  NOC.  On  the  other  hand,  the 

respondent  SNGPL  has  not  contested  this  petition.  Similarly,  the  Cabinet 

Division  has  provided  a  summary  of  the  Cabinet,  whereby  it  has  been 

recommended  to  remove  the  restriction  on  installation  of  new  electricity 

and  gas  connections  imposed  by  the  Cabinet  vide  their  decision  dated 

19.04.2004.  

 
 
W.P. No.820 of 2018  

        Page 4 

8.  While  considering  this  background,  the  Federal  Cabinet  in  their 

decision,  dated  08.09.2020,  (removal  of  difficulties  in  installation  of  new 

electricity and gas meters in Islamabad), a Committee, comprising for Minister 

for  Law  &  Justice  being  its  convener  with  Chairman,  CDA  and  other 

advisors  and  members,  has  been  constituted  to  give  its  recommendation 

within the period of 60 days, however till date no such decision has been 

passed or brought on record, therefore, this Court has no other option but 

to review the entire case on its merits.  

9. 

The  original  decision  passed  by  the  Federal  Cabinet,  dated 

19.05.2004, is reproduced as under:  

i. 

Henceforth,  construction  in  contravention  of  zoning  law 

should not be allowed to be development in Zone-II, III & IV 

Islamabad on Government or private land and,  

ii.  WAPDA,  SNGPL,  PTCL  shall,  henceforth,  not  provides 

connections  in  the  above  mentioned  Zones  unless  an  NOC 

has  been  obtained  by  the  applicant  from  CDA.  CDA  issues 

proper detailed guidelines for the facility of the public in this 

regard.  

10.  While  going  through  above  decision,  it  has  categorically  been 

construed  that  construction  as  well  as  installation  of  electricity,  gas  and 

PTCL connections  is barred in Zone-II, III and IV under  Islamabad Capital 

Territory (Zoning) Regulations, 1992 and as such, the area in question falls 

within  Zone-I  of  the  Regulations,  1992,  which  is  excluded  from  previous 

order  of  the  Federal  Cabinet.  Similarly,  the  CDA  has  placed  on  record  a 

detailed order, dated 09.11.2020, with reference to Ministry of Interior and 

Ministry  of  Law  &  Justice,  while  considering  the  recommendation  given 

 
 
 
W.P. No.820 of 2018  

        Page 5 

by the Committee appointed by the Federal Cabinet, whereby it was held 

that: 

1. 

Zone-I: 

There  is  no  issue  of  utility  connections  in  the 

sectors developed by CDA because buildings  are constructed 

after the approval of CDA.  

2. 

Zone-II, IV & V:  Private  housing  socities  have  been 

allotted  to  develop  their  projects  in  these  zones  after  the 

approval  of  Layout  Plans  (LOP)  and  issuance  of  NOCs  of 

their  schemes  from  CDA.  Some  of  the  LoP  /NOCs  of  the 

housing schemes were subsequently cancelled by CDA due to 

the default on the part of the sponsors / developers.  

3. 

Zone-III. 

The utility connections may only be provided to 

the villagers / native  & their legal heirs who are included in 

the  Award  List  subject  to  verification  from  Union  Councils. 

No  connection  shall  be  allowed  to  the  settlers  who  do  not 

belong to the recognized village.  

11.  While considering the above referred state of affairs, it appears that 

there  is  no  restriction  on  installation  of  electricity  or  gas  connection  in 

Zone-I,  if buildings  / properties are  constructed in  accordance with CDA 

by-laws,  however  for  utility  connection  in  villages  /  native  areas, 

including  the  awardees,  are  allowed  subject  to  verification  from  the 

concerned Union Councils. This aspect has been referred for Zone-III and 

as  such,  there  is  no  decision  made  by  the  CDA  qua  any  rural  area  of 

Zone-I, therefore, the analogy drawn for  Zone-III qua village areas has to 

be  applied  to  the  residents  of  Zone-I  in  their  native  villages,  especially 

when they are not compensated till date.  

12. 

The IESCO authorities conceded before this Court that they have no 

objection  on  grant of  electricity connection,  if  CDA  issues  NOC,  however 

at  this  point  of  time,  the  CDA  authorities  have  half-heartedly  settled  the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.820 of 2018  

        Page 6 

issues  by  way  of  order,  dated  09.11.2020,  excluding  certain  areas  which 

itself is discrimination and violation of settled fundamental guarantees of 

the individuals.  

13. 

It  has  also  been  argued  on  behalf  of  the  respondents  that  HRC 

No.6465-G/2017  and  HRC  No.113/2018  (in  the  matter  of  large  scale 

encroachment  of  botanical  gardens  and  unplanned  /  unregistered  plazas 

in Bani Gala) are pending before the apex Court, whereby different orders 

have  been  passed  and  on  the  strength  of  these  orders,  the  IESCO  and 

SNGPL are not allowing installation of new connections, therefore, I have 

gone through different orders of the apex Court  passed in above referred 

HRCs with the assistance of  learned counsel for the parties  and observed 

that  order,  dated  03.04.2018,  is  relating  to  encroachment  in  botanical 

garden in area of Bani Gala and the apex Court has further taken notice of 

recent construction carried out in areas of Bani Gala, Bhara Kahu, Shadra, 

Begowal,  etc.,  as  well  as  the  catchment  area  of  Rawal  Lake  in  order  to 

protect  the  Rawal  Lake  from  pollution  caused  by  the  nearby  residents, 

whereas the apex Court vide order dated 24.04.2017 imposed restriction on 

the  issuance  of  electricity  and  sui  gas  connection  in  or  around  Korang 

Road  to  Murre  Road,  Bani  Gala,  and  at  the  same  time,  unauthorized 

cutting  of  trees  has  also  been  banned.  It  has  also  been  observed  in  the 

order  dated  13.02.2018  that  there  was  no  restriction  on  new  electricity  or 

gas  connection  if  the  resident  can  satisfy  the  relevant  agency  that  the 

construction  has  been  raised  in  accordance  with  law.  All  these  orders  of 

the  apex  Court  clearly  establish  that  the  restrictions  are  to  the  extent  of 

Bani  Gala,  Korang  Road  and  the  adjoining  population  of  Murre  Road,  as 

 
 
W.P. No.820 of 2018  

        Page 7 

such,  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  Zone-I,  which  has  also  been  conceded  by 

the CDA vide their letter dated 09.11.2020.  

14. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  report  submitted  by  the  CDA  in  this 

case  qua  the  status  of  land  in  question,  which  reveals  that  the  built-up 

properties award has not yet been concluded and as such, the survey has 

not been conducted by the CDA or Survey of Pakistan, even otherwise, the 

question  of  genuineness  of  the  local  population  is  yet  to  be  settled.  A 

restriction  has  admittedly  been  imposed  by  the  CDA  authorities,  though 

they themselves are responsible for their delay and inactions, which could 

not  be  made  basis  to  deprive  the  residents  of  Islamabad  of  their  right  to 

install  new  electricity  and  gas  connection,  especially  when  the  award 

concerning the built-up properties has not yet been finalized.  

15.  Keeping in view the above position, the IESCO and SNGPL have no 

justified  standing  to  deprive  the  petitioner  of  his  fundamental  rights  i.e. 

right to life in terms of Article 9 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 

of  Pakistan,  1973  and  as  such,  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  Federal 

Government  has  already  given  its  view,  which  has  been  reflected  from 

CDA’s letter dated 09.11.2020 qua electricity and gas connection, therefore, 

instant writ petition is ALLOWED to the extent of installation of electricity 

and  gas  meters  and  respondents  IESCO  and  SNGPL  are  directed  to 

provide installation of new electricity and gas connection to the petitioner 

within period of 30 days, subject to fulfillment of other codal formalities.  

Khalid Z. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
                         JUDGE 

 
 
            
 
                 
 
 
 
