JUDGMENT 

  MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.---Through  this  writ  petition,  the  petitioner  has 
assailed the concurrent findings of learned Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad and 
learned Family Judge (West), Islamabad, passed vide orders dated 08.06.2018 and 20.01.2016, 
respectively, whereby appeal and suit filed by petitioner have been dismissed. 

2.  Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  matter  are  that  petitioner  filed  suit  for  recovery  of 
dower and maintenance at the rate of Rs.500,000/- per month from December, 2012 with the 
contentions that she tied the knot with Respondent No. 1 in July, 2012, whereby Respondent 
No.  1  promised  to  give  the  petitioner  Rs.500,000/-  as  maintenance  per  month,  half  of  his 
propertied,  outcome  of  his  businesses,  other  properties  and  shares  from  all  the  companies, 
whereafter they lived together till November, 2012, however differences cropped up between 
the parties when Respondent No. 1 refused to give the petitioner a copy of Nikahnama and 
maintenance as agreed. The suit was contested by Respondent No. 1, whereafter the learned 
Family Judge vide order dated 20.01.2016 dismissed the suit of petitioner, which compelled 
the petitioner to file appeal before the learned Additional District Judge, which was dismissed 
vide impugned judgment dated 8.6.2018. Hence, the instant writ petition. 

3.  Learned  counsel  for  petitioner,  inter  alia,  contends  that  both  the  Courts  below  have 
failed to appreciate the fact that Respondent No. 1 admitted before the Jirga that petitioner is 
his wife and passed the impugned orders; that the documentary communication produced by 
the petitioner in shape of WhatsApp and e-mails has been admitted by Respondent No. 1 in his 
cross-examination; that non-production of Nikahnama is not an acknowledgeable ground for 
dismissal of suit; that Qanun-e-Shahadat Order; 1984 was promulgated for the purpose of using 
modern techniques and devices to prove the events and circumstances of the case, especially 
under Article 73 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 and Electronic Transaction Ordinance 
clearly stated the electronic evidence is primary evidence, rather than secondary one; that the 
impugned  orders  dated  08.06.2018  and  20.01.2016  are  without  merit  and  have  been  passed 
without due process of law, therefore, the same may kindly be set aside and suit of petitioner 
may kindly be decreed in her favour. 

4.  Conversely, learned counsel for Despondent No. 1 contends that the allegations levelled 
by  petitioner  are  baseless  and  denied  the  existence  of  marriage;  that  the  impugned  orders 
passed by both the Courts below are well within the four corners of law and have righ tly been 
passed, therefore, the instant writ petition may kindly be dismissed. 

5.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

6.  From the perusal of record, it has been observed that the petitioner has filed a suit for 
recovery  of  dower  and  maintenance  amount  of  Rs.  500,000/-  per  month  on  the  ground  that 
Respondent No. 1 entered into marriage with her in July, 2012 in accordance with Islamic rites 
and  ceremony  and  Respondent  No.  1  agreed  to  pay  maintenance  Rs.500,000/-  per  month 
against dower amount half of his properties including a house in Sector F-6, Islamabad, a house 
in  Sector  F-10,  Islamabad  and  House  No.  28,  Begum  Sarfraz  Iqbal  Road,  Sector  G-6/4, 
Islamabad, and shares from all his companies and half of shares of his properties in UAE . 

7.  As per stance of petitioner, she resided with Respondent No. 1 in his apartment i.e. Flat 
No. 508, Al-Safah Towers, F-11 Markaz, Islamabad till the end of November, 2012 and during 
this period, on the request of petitioner to provide her copy of Nikahnama, Respondent No.1 
had not provided the same on one pretext or other, whereafter Respondent No. 1 shifted the 
petitioner from the said flat with a request that he is going to sell the flat and he will get her a 
new  house.  Respondent  No.  1  while  contesting  the  suit,  filed  his  written  statement  and  by 
straightway denying the factum of Nikahnama took the specific stance that petitioner is not his 
lawfully wedded wife and this led to the question mark that as to whether the parties entered 
into a valid Nikah or otherwise? 

8.  To reach at just conclusion, I have gone through the evidence of petitioner filed through 
affidavit  of  evidence  in  which  she  has  reiterated  her  stance  and  mainly  relied  upon:  the 
Communication  made  through  SMSs  to  prove  her  alleged  relationship  of  being  wife  of 

 
 
  
Respondent No.1. For ready reference, the same is reproduced as under: 

"I cancelled my visit to restaurant and was coming to u, but it stop me, your friends will 
not like an old husband! Ok, b happy with friends!" 

"Ooho! Hum Shaher se jaan ban gae hain! Bai wah" 

9.  During  the  course  of  cross-examination,  petitioner  acknowledged  that  she  neither 
produced any witness from Ufone Cellular Company nor any certificate to justify the contents 
of SMS received from a particular number. 

10.  The  petitioner  has  also  produced  Haji  Syed  Akhtar  Hussain  Shah  as  PW-2,  who 
submitted  his  affidavit  as  Exh.P7  and  contended  that  he  is  witness  of  Jirga  conv ened  for 
reconciliation  of  petitioner  with  Respondent  No.  1.  However,  during  the  course  of  cross -
examination, PW-2 Haji Syed Akhtar Hussain Shah acknowledged the following facts: 

11.  The petitioner has also produced one Qazi Muhammad Irshad, another member of Jirga, 
who  submitted  his  evidence  as  Exh.P3  and  reiterated  the  stance  of  Jirga  meeting  with  the 
acknowledgment that he has not seen the Nikahnama of marriage of petitioner with Respondent 
No. 1. 

12.  Similarly,  I  have  also  gone  through  evidence  of  Respondent  No.1,  wherein  no 
acknowledgment  has  been  made  by  Respondent  No.1  in  his  cross-examination  about  the 
alleged relationship. 

12.  In general, the entire evidence is silent about the following facts:- 

i.  The petitioner has not produced any witness of Nikah. 

ii.  The petitioner has failed to produce any Nikah Khwan or Nikahnama in this case. 

iii.  The  petitioner  has  not  produced  any  witness  or  close  relative  who  can  say  in 
unequivocal terms that the parties lived together as husband and wife for a particular 
of time. 

iv.  The  petitioner  has  not  produced  any  documentary  proof  in  shape  of  photographs 
captured  or  videos  recorded  on  the  day  of  Nikah  or  any  other  function  in  which 
petitioner and Respondent No. 1 could be seen as husband as wife. 

v.  The  petitioner  has not produced  any  documentary  evidence  to prove the  quantum  of 

dower and maintenance. 

14.  Besides  the  above  referred  deficiencies,  I  have  also  gone  through  the  judgment  of 
learned Trial Court dated 20.01.2016, wherein detailed reasoning on Issue No. 1 has been given 
in the following manner: 

"Perusal  of  available  material  and  evidence  of  parties  reveals  following  points  to 
determine fact of marriage: 

i.  Admittedly no witness of marriage has been produced by plaintiff both counsel have 
relied upon same judgment. Plaintiff relied upon PLD 1990 SC 28 this judgment has 
upheld decision made in PLD 1989 Lahore 200 which has been relied by defendant. It 
was  held  in  referred  judgment  that  non-registration  of  marriage,  does  not  in  itself, 
invalidate marriage, if it is otherwise proved to have taken place, in accordance with 
requirements  of  Islamic  law  non-registration  may,  however  cause  some  doubts  on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existence  and  solemnization  of  marriage  if  factum  of  marriage  is  in  serious  dispute 
between parties to marriage. 

ii.  According to Islamic law, both men and woman have rights over each other when they 
enter  into  a  marriage  contract.  A  marriage  contract  gave  rise  to  different  financial, 
social, religious and moral rights and obligations. In absence of a written Nikahnama, 
cautious approach is to be adopted to hold existence of a marital relationship and said 
decision should only be based upon strong evidence. 

iii.  Learned  counsel  for  plaintiff  submits  that  according  to  Islamic  law;  in  absence  of  a 
written Nikahnama/document, marriage between parties can be proved by establishing 
offer, acceptance and/or long standing cohabitation. 

iv.  Plaintiff has relied upon message dated 11.07.2010, wherein, defendant allegedly said 
"Salam, good morning, how are you, dear, please do not go, I cannot live without you, 
I want to marry you, please", learned counsel for plaintiff referred said message as an 
offer,  but  Plaintiff  has  neither  produced  her  reply  to  said  message,  nor  produced 
messages exchanged during communication before or after said messages. Moreover, 
said message is contrary to plaintiff stance as according to Paragraph No. 04 of plaint 
parties entered into marriage in the month of July 2012, and this message has reported 
to  be  send  much  earlier  i.e.  on  11.07.2010.  In  these  circumstances,  element  of 
offer/acceptance is missing from available record. 

v.  Learned  counsel  of  plaintiff  stressed  upon  message  dated  19.12.2012,  wherein 
defendant allegedly said "Ooho! Hum Shoher se Joan ban gae hain! Bai wah", learned 
counsel  for  Plaintiff  referred  said  message  as  admission  of  marriage,  however,  here 
again  plaintiff  has  not  produced  her  messages  to  draw  inference  under  what 
circumstances said message has been made. 

vi.  To prove factum of cohabitation, plaintiff stated in Paragraph No. 6 that she res ided 
with defendant at his apartment from (sic.) till end of November 2012; however she has 
failed to convincingly prove factum of her residence at referred flat. Learned counsel 
for plaintiff relied upon 1991 CLC 1290 and submits that continuous cohabitation, gave 
a  presumption  of  marriage.  However,  facts  and  circumstances  of  referred  case  are 
distinguished from matter under adjudication in as much as in reported case, there was 
continuous cohabitation of more than twenty years, moreover in said case husband has 
died and legal heirs have challenged factum of marriage, whereas in the instant matter, 
defendant himself is denying any cohabitation with plaintiff. 

vii.  Plaintiff has referred in Paragraph No. 10 of plaint that plaintiff tried to contact with 
defendant through family members, but not a single family member has come forward 
to depose in favour of plaintiff. PW-3 who deposed in favour of plaintiff admitted that 
he is not relative of plaintiff and only met her on 04.08.2013 when jirga was held. 

viii. Evidence  is  to  be  led  according  to  pleadings,  and  any  improvement  is  liable  to  be 
rejected straight-away. In the instant case plaintiff has made numerous improvement in 
her evidence, some of them are referred as follows: 

a.  Plaintiff  has not mentioned time,  place,  date  of  marriage  in plaint,  however, she  has 

referred exact date in paragraph No. 04 of her affidavit in evidence Ex P1; 

b.  Plaintiff has not mentioned any of number of defendant in her plaint, but subsequently 

she has mentioned exact numbers of defendant in her affidavit in evidence; 

c.  Plaintiff has not referred any specific message in plaint, but referred specific messages 

in paragraph No. 03 and No. 09 of her affidavit in evidence; 

d.  Plaintiff has also deposed in Paragraph No. 10 of affidavit that defendant admitted her 

as wife in front of his son, but no such fact has been mentioned in plaint; 

e.  Specific detail events of reconciliation as mentioned in paragraph No. 13-16 as referred 

in affidavit are also beyond pleadings. 

 
 
ix.  Learned  counsel  for  plaintiff  referred  that  during  cross-examination  defendant  has 
volunteered  that  plaintiff  got  information  from  his  employee  "Nayab"  and  name  of 
"Nayab" has also been referred during communication. Be that as it may, it would only 
establish  that  parties  were  in  contact,  however,  question  here  is  whether  this 
communication or contact was converted into marital relations or not? 

x.  List  of  witnesses  produced  by  plaintiff  has  referred  name  of  "Sania"  as  witness  of 
Nikah, but said witness has not been produced by plaintiff nor any reason has been put 
forward for her non-appearance, therefore, borrowing analogy from illustration (g) of 
Article 129, Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, it is presumed that if said "Sania" would 
be produced, she would deposed against plaintiff; 

xi.  Main evidence of Plaintiff is list of messages, which, as per her stance have been made 
during communication with defendant, plaintiff has produced as many as twenty two 
(22) pages comprising of messages, but she has only produced four  messages, sent by 
her  to  defendant.  Due  to  reasons,  best  known  to  plaintiff,  she  has  concealed  her 
communication  with  defendant,  in  this  way  she  has  not  approached  this  Court  with 
clean hands; 

xii.  Plaintiff has relied upon messages allegedly made during her conversation with son of 
defendant, however, during all communications; she has been demanding financial help 
from  said Jahanzeb  and  said  messages, in  no  way  established  marital  relationship of 
plaintiff and defendant. 

Keeping in view, material available on record, and points mentioned hereinabove, this 
Court  holds  that  sufficient  material  is  not  available  on  the  record  to  establish 
relationship of wife and husband between the parties. 

15.  While considering the above referred findings of the learned Trial Court, I have also 
gone through the judgment of the first Appellate Court, wherein the judgment of the learned 
Trial Court has been appreciated in clear terms and concluded that the petitioner has failed t o 
prove  the  factum  of  marriage  As  per  Article  268  of  Muhammadan  Law,  marriage  can  be 
presumed in absence of any direct proof in prolonged and continual cohabitation as husband 
and wife, however in this case the petitioner neither brought any evidence to th at effect nor 
any witness has been produced, even there was not a single stance brought on record through 
which  it  could  be  presumed  that  petitioner  and  Respondent  No.  1  ever  lived  together  as 
husband  and  wife,  whereas  Respondent  No.  1  denied  the  factum  of  marriage  in  categorical 
terms, hence the requirements of Muslim, marriage under Islamic law have to be given wide 
importance in such type of cases which are: 

a.  Nikah should be performed publically in presence and hearing of two (02) males or one 
(01) male and two (02) females witnesses, who must be sane and adult Muslims. 

b.  The proposal and acceptance must be expressed by both the parties in one meeting. 

c.  The  ( 

)  offer  and  acceptance,  has  to  be  ascertained  and  determined  by  Nikah 

Khwan and other witnesses. 

d.  The girl/bride, whose hand is to be given in marriage, should be major and ordinarily 

her marriage is to be conducted by her guardian or Wali. 

16.  In addition to the above referred requirements of Muhammadan Law, I have also gone 
through  the  requirements  of  Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961,  which  provides  the 
requirements of registration of marriage in terms of sections 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 and a complete 
mechanism has been provided in order to avoid any complication. 

17.  It is trite law that the onus, in such type of cases, is upon a person who intends to prove 
the relationship and all such relationships could be proved by way of documentary evidence 
or through witnesses, which lacks in this case. At this stage; I am not inclined to accept the 
arguments of the petitioner side, who has heavily relied upon the text messages, as the same 
has  different  reference  and  connotation  and  even  could  not  be  replaced  with  legal, 
requirements,  although  the  modern  devices/technologies  like  mobile  phones,  WhatsApp, 

 
 
 
Facebook,  e-mail,  etc.,  can  be  used  as  part  of  evidence.  However,  the  message  referred  by 
petitioner in Para-9 of her affidavit of evidence, in which the sender acknowledged himself as 
an old husband, if presumed to be true on behalf of Respondent No. 1, even then this admission 
could not be considered as a whole truth as it lacks a specific subject matter with respect to 
relationship of petitioner and Respondent No. 1 as of being husband and wife, even otherwise, 
Respondent No. 1 has denied all such messages in totality. Similarly, another message sent on 
19.12.2012,  which  reads  that,  "Shohar  se  jaan  ban  gae  hain",  does  not  reflect  any 
acknowledgment. 

18.  In the same way, the controversy involved in the case in hand discloses the miseries of 
the  society,  in  which  people  by  adopting  rebellious  attitude  towards  the  social  norms  are 
entering  into  obscured  relationships/marriages  for  their  own  motivated  reasons,  but  in  my 
humble view, such kind of bond could not be called as marriage for the reason that it lacks 
public  acknowledgment,  which  is  the  key  factor  of  an  Islamic  society  for  the  sacred 
relationship of marriage, and as such the key factor of any society is family unit, which starts 
from the factum of Nikah/marriage and in case when people concealed such important element, 
they could not be given benefit subsequently for their claims arising out of such relationship, 
unless the same was acknowledged publically, voluntarily or by some written document . 

19. 
Keeping in view the above facts of the case and law on the subject, I am of the opinion 
that petitioner has failed to discharge the onus to prove the factum of Nikah and the concurrent 
findings  of  the  both  the  Courts  below  are  correct  to  that  extent,  therefore,  the  instant  writ 
petition is misconceived and the same is hereby DISMISSED. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
