JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE ISLATABAD  HI

GOURT. ISLAMABAD

JUDIGIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P.No.2888  of 2O1O

Mst. Mirrat Manzoor Bajwa
VERSUS
Additional District Judge, and another.

Date of Decision: 30.05.2012.

Petitioner by: 
Respondents by:  sh. Khizar-ur-Rasheed, Advocate.

Hifza Bukhari, Advocate.

MU}IATIMAD AZTM K}IAiI  AFR!D!- J:. MSt.  MiTTAt

Manzoor Bajwa D/o Manzoor  Bajwa hereinafter referred

to  as the petitioner has preferred the instant
constitutional  petition with a prayer to set aside

judgment and decree dated 28.L.2010 passed in appeal

and that her claim in respect of dowry articles may be

decreed  according  to the list annexed with the plaint.

2.  Brief facts giving rise to the instant constitutional

petition  are that the petitioner  instituted  a suit against

Mudassar Saleem  hereinafter referred to as respondent

claiming therein  maintenance, dower and articles of

dowry. The learned Judge Family Court,  Islamabad,

vide judgment  and decree  dated 26.L0.20O4, granted

the decree in respect of maintenance, dower and

2

W.P.1{o.2888  of 2O'lO

articles of dowry as per list Exh.D.2.

3.  The said judgment  and decree  was impugned in

appeal before the Court of learned  Additional  District

Judge,  Islamabad.  After hearing  of arguments  of learned

counsel  for the parties and considering  the material

placed on record, learned Additional District Judge,

Islamabad, dismissed the appeal to the extent of dower

and maintenance  allowance, while the same was

partially  allowed to the extent of dowry articles

mentioned  in the list of respondent (Mudassar Saleem),

while the claim  of the petitioner in respect  of remaining

articles of dowry as per list annexed  with the plaint was

dismissed  vide judgment  and decree in appeal  dated

28.r.20I0.

4.  Dissatisfied with the findings of the learned

Additional  District Judge, Islamabad, the petitioner has

impugned the said judgment and decree passed in

appeal through instant constitutional petition.

5.  Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued  that

the petitioner was given articles of dowry by her

parents as per prevailing  customs  and traditions  of the

society. That rule of thumb  is applicable in proceedings

before the Family  Court and that provisions of Qanoon-

3

W.P.1{o.2888  of 2O{O

e-Shahadat Order, 1984 or its stringent principles  would

not apply to proceedings before Family  Court. That the

petitioner  has produced  even receipts of articles of

dowry and as such the learned Judge Family Court as

well as Additional District Judge, Islamabad, had failed

to correctly  appreciate the legal position and erred in

refusing the claim of the petitioner in respect of the

articles of dowry.

6.  Reliance was placed on case of Muhammad

Yaqoob  reported  as 2008 CtJ 580.

7.  Learned  counsel for the respondent  has argued

that the petitioner had instituted her suit on 28.2.2OO3,

while the nikah was performed on 06.1 .2002. That the

articles of dowry given to the petitioner were admitted

by the respondent and the same were handed over to

her under the orders of the Court in execution of

decree. That the articles of dowry claimed in the list

were neither given to the petitioner by her parents  nor

the said list was proved  as genuine.

8.  Reliance  was placed on case of Mst. Allah Rakhi

reported as 2OO4 SCMR 1739.

9.  I have heard arguments of learned counsel for the

parties and perused the record.

4

W.P.1{o.28E8  of 2O{O

10. Record of the case suggests that the said list of

dowry articles was not produced  in evidence  and,

according to the version of petitioner  (PW.l),  the said

list was prepared  at the time of institution  of the suit. She

has also admitted  that no list of dowry articles  was

prepared at the time of marriage.  Contrary  to the above

stance, father of petitioner Manzoor Ahmad (PW.z) had

deposed  in the cross examination  that the said list was

prepared by him at the time of marriage.

I 1. It may not be disputable  that stringent principles  of

Qanoon-e-shahadat  Order, 1984 may not be applicable

to proceedings before Family Court, however, the rule

of  thumb would neither  absolve a  party from

establishing  a claim nor, on the basis of the said tenet, a

party denying such liability can be burdened  to

shoulder such claim without  proof of the same. Since no

evidence to corroborate  the alleged authenticity of the

list was forthcoming from the side of petitioner as such

the learned Judge Family Court as well as learned

Additional District Judge, Islamabad,  while appreciating

the stance of the parties, correctly disallowed the claim

of the petitioner to the articles of dowry on the basis of

the said list.

5

W.P.t{o.2888  of 2O{O

12. It is added that "dowr1r" has been defined in

Section  2(b) of the Dowry and Bridal Gifts (Restriction)

Act, 1976 hereinafter referred to as the said Act as any

property given before, at or after the marriagre,  either

directly or indirectly,  to the bride by her parents in

connection with the marriage.  The Federal  Government

in respect of the Islamabad Capital Territory,

IN

exercise of power conferred by Section I0 of the said

Act, has framed  the dowry and Bridal Gifts (Restriction)

Rules, 1976 hereinafter referred to as the said Rules.

Apart from other related matters, Rule 4(l) of the said

Rules prescribes and provides for list of dowry in the

shape of Form D-l which, according to Sub Rule 4 is to

be furnished  by the parents to the Registrar of the area

of which the bride is ordinarily  resident and such Form

is to be indexed and presenred by the Deputy

Commissioner for two years as laid down in Sub Rules 7

and 8 of Rule 4. The list of articles of dowry furnished

and relied upon by the petitioner  is also not a list

prepared in the prescribed  form and as such the said

list cannot be given any weight for the purpose  of cliam

and recovery of the articles mentioned therein.

13. Petitioner has produced receipts Exh.P.2  to

{

6

W.P.No.2888  of 2O{O

Exh.P.9S in respect  of purchase of house hold articles

etc. Items mentioned in the said receipts include such

articles  which may be given to a bride by her parents in

dowry but the said receipts, even on the rule of thumb,

do not qualify and meet the essential  requirement  of

proof of purchase  of the said articles by the parents of

the bride and given to the petitioner before,  at or after

marrrage

14. In view of the above, I  find no force in the

constitutional petition  preferred by the petitioner

against  the impugned  judgment and decree  dated

28.1.2010, passed  by learned Additional  District Judge,

and as such, while maintaining the impugned judgment

and decree,  I would  dismiss  the same with no orders as

to costs.

IVIED  .EZrM KII

TIDGE

*Qamar lGran*

.trpproved  for reporting.

