ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Appeal No.  110  / 2016 
Rao Fahad  Ali  Khan 
VS
Afzal  Moeen  Marwat,  etc. 

Appellant by: 

Mr. Shahid  Shabbir,  Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Ali,  Advocate 

Mr.  Usman 
respondent  No.1  to 4. 
Khadija  Ali, State  Counsel. 
Shafqat  Inspector,  P.S. Tarnol. 
Muhammad  Nawaz,  S.1.  P.S Margallah. 

for 

Date  of Hearing: 

06.09.2022 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this  criminal 

appeal, 

the  appellant  Rao  Fahad  Ali  Khan  has  assailed 

the 

judgment  dated  26.04.2016  passed  by  learned  Judge  Special  Court 

No.l,  Anti-Terrorism, 

Islamabad,  whereby 

the  respondents  have 

been  acquitted  form  the  charge  in  case  FIR  No.302  /  2012  dated 

10.06.2012,  under  Section  337-F(i)  /  337-H(ii)  /  148  /  109  /  149  / 

365-A PPC,  registered  at  Police  Station  Margallah,  Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred 

in 

the 

instant  FIR 

lodged  on 

the 

complaint  of  appellant  /  Rao  Fahad  Ali  Khan  PW-9  through  his 

complaint  Ex.PW-9/1 

converted 

into  FIR  Ex.PA  are 

that,  his 

younger  brother  Rao  Saad  Ali  Khan  alongwith  his  friends  Faisal 

Ejaz  PW-10  and  Asad  Abbasi  went  to  McDonald  F-9  Park, 

Islamabad 

for  refreshment 

in  the  Motor  Car  of  Asad  Abbasi.  At 

about  10  p.m.  on  10.06.2012.  Accused  Afzal  Marwat,  Anwar 

Marwat,  Waleed  and  Nosherwan  appeared 

in  three  different 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  2 

vehicles,  among  them  two  were  Vigo  Double  Cabin,  while  third 

one  was  Honda  Accord,  alongwith  15  /  20 armed  body  guards. 

Afzal  Marwat  was  having  Kalashnikov  in  his  hand.  They  all 

started  beating  his brother  with  rifle buts  in presence  of Faisal Ejaz 

and  Asad  Abbasi  and  kidnapped  his  brother  Rao  Saad  Ali  Khan 

and  also  made  firing  at  the  time  of  departure.  The  incident  was 

narrated  by  Faisal  Ejaz  and  Asad  Abbasi  to  the  complainant. 

Motive  behind  the  occurrence  was  that  the  accused  Afzal Marwat 

attempted  to snatch  BMW X-5 series motor  car bearing  registration 

No.BD-8222 from  his  brother  Rao Saad  Ali Khan  and  matter  was 

reported  to  local  police.  PW-9  filed  a  written  application  for 

registration  of FIR in  police station  Margallah,  after  registration  of 

FIR the  abductee  contacted  the  complainant  and  he  was  taken  to 

hospital  by the complainant,  where  his medical was  conducted.  On 

his  further  information  police  has  arrested  the  accused  persons  / 

respondents 

in  this  case,  even  recovered  the  vehicle  used  in 

abduction  and  also recovered  white  color blood  stained  bed  sheet, 

black  color  blood  stained  torn  shalwar,  pieces  of  blood  stained 

tissue  paper,  razor,  shaved  hair,  one  bottle  of  piodene,  mobile  l  

Phone,  cotton  blood  stained  (Ex.P-2 to  Ex.P-9), respectively  from 

the place of abduction  i.e. farm house,  situated  at Malot Road, Bara 

Kahu,  identified  by  the  victim.  The  Trial  Court  after  recording  of 

evidence  of 11  prosecution  witnesses  and  statement  under  Section 

342 Cr.P.C. of the  accused  persons,  acquitted  the respondents  from 

the charges.  Hence, this appeal. 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110 /  2016 

Page  I  3 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for the  appellant  contends  that  Trial Court 

has  not  appreciated  the  over  whelming  evidence  in  this  case, 

where  abduction  has  been  proved  from the place of occurrence  i.e. 

McDonald  F-9  Park,  Islamabad,  even  subsequent  recoveries  of 

blood  stained  tissue  paper,  shaved  hair,  light  black  color  blood 

stained  bed  sheet,  torn  shalwar,  etc are the  corroborative  pieces of 

evidence,  which  were  recovered  from  farm  house,  situated  at 

Malot  Road,  Bhara  Kahu,  also  confirms  the  abduction  and 

detention  of the  victim  by  the  respondent  accused  persons.  It  has 

further  been  argued  that  the ransom  demand  was  also claimed  by 

the accused  persons  from the victim, but that was not materialized, 

however,  offence of abduction  has been proved  otherwise  from the 

entire  evidence,  even  non  production  of Magistrate  who  recorded 

statement  under  Section 164 Cr.P.C. of the victim and non recovery 

of Kalashnikov  from  the accused person  is not  a ground  to discard 

entire  testimony  of the prosecution,  whereas  offence has  otherwise 

proved  in  this  case. It  is lastly  contended  that  the  Trial  Court  has 

acquitted  one  of  the  respondent  accused  in  this  case  in  absentia, 

which  is not permissible  under  the law and  to that extent  the order 

is perverse,  illegal and fanciful. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  accused 

contends  that  the  ingredients  of  abduction  qua  the  purpose  of 

ransom  has  not  been  demonstrated  in  the  entire  trial,  even  the 

independent  witnesses  from  a public  place were  not  associated  to 

justi~y the  abduction  from  McDonald  F-9 Park,  Islamabad,  nor  the 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  4 

taxi  driver  was  brought  on  record  who  had  given  a  ride  to  the 

victim  from place of abduction  till the place where  he was  dropped 

to  complete  the  chain  of  evidence.  The  verified  CDR  was  not 

produced  which  corroborates  the  allegation,  even  the  farm  house 

owner  was  not  associated  in  this  case  to  prove  the  chain  of 

evidence  against  the  respondents.  No  DNA has been  conducted  to 

the  extent  of recovered  hairs  and  blood  stained  shawlar  to justify 

the  story  of the victim.  All these facts create  a  serious  doubt  in this 

case which  seems  to be  a counter  blast  to a civil dispute  of vehicle 

BMW  X-5  series  non  paid  custom,  even  that  motive  was  not 

proved  independently. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  appellant 

is  mainly 

aggrieved  with 

the  acquittal  of  respondents 

in 

the  above 

mentioned  criminal  case,  which  revolves  around 

the  alleged 

incident  of abduction  on  10.06.2012 at  10 p.m.  from  McDonald  F-9 

Park,  Islamabad,  where  alleged  abductee  PW-8 Rao Saad  Ali Khan 

alongwith  his  friends  Faisal  Ejaz  PW-10  and  Asad  Abbasi  were 

present  in  the  parking  area  of McDonald,  F-9 Park,  Islamabad,  in 

the  meanwhile,  two  black  color  Vehicle  Vigo,  one  silver  color 

Honda  Accord  appeared  on  spot.  Accused  Afzal  Marwat,  Anwar 

Marwat,  Raja  Waleed,  Imran  Khattak,  Nosherwan  and  10  /  12 

body  guards  armed  with  Kalashnikov  de-boarded 

from  the 

vehicles  and  tried  to abduct  Rao Saad  Ali Khan PW-8, who  during 

the  said  attempt  tried  to  rescue  himself  and  started  running 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  5 

towards  entrance  gate  of McDonald,  but  he  was  overpowered  by 

the  accused  persons,  who  started  beating  him  with  riffle buts,  stick 

and  some  other  tools. All of the accused  persons  put  him  in Honda 

Accord  car,  he  also  heard  two  fire shots.  The  other  witness  of the 

incident  Faisal Ejaz PW-10 also narrated  the similar  occurrence  and 

confirms  that he fled  away  from  the scene alongwith  Asad  Abbasi, 

informed  the  abductees'  brother  Rao  Fahad  Ali  Khan  about  the 

incident,  whereafter,  FIR has been lodged. 

7. 

The  abductee  PW-8  has  taken  a  specific  stance  that  Afzal 

Marwat  asked  him  to contact  his  father  telephonically  to pay  sum 

of  rupees  five  millions  to  him  and  when  he  refused,  he  was 

tortured. 

8. 

The  initial  prosecution  case  was  setup  with  reference  to 

abduction  for  purpose  of ransom  in  terms  of Section  365-A PPC, 

but  entire  evidence  is  silent  to  that  affect, as  no  call was  made  to 

the  complainant  or  victim's  family  for  ransom,  nor  such  case  was 

taken  up  before  the  court,  therefore,  the  primary  ingredient  to 

exercise  the  jurisdiction  under  the  Anti  Terrorism  Act,  1997, is 

missing,  as  a  result  whereof,  Anti  Terrorism  Court  lacks  the 

jurisdiction  to proceed  with  the matter.  We have  also gone  through 

the  charge  sheet  dated  19.06.2014 to  the  extent  of  Raja  Waleed 

Shahid,  Imran  Khattak  and  Afzal  Moeen  Marwat,  where  the 

ingredient  of Section  365-A PPC has  not  been  adhered  to  nor  any 

special  reference  has  been  made,  even  the  Investigation  Officer 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  6 

Shafqat  Mehmood  SJ/  PW-11 has  not  setup  this  case  in  terms  of 

Section 365-A PPC in his final report under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. 

9.  We  have  also  gone  through  the  report  under  Section  173 

Cr.P.C.  submitted  by 

the  Investigation  Officer,  which  also 

highlights 

the  investigation  conducted 

in  the  supervision  of  a 

senior  police  officer  namely  Sultan  Azam  Taimoori  A.LG 

Operations,  who  confirms  that  offence  under  Section  365-A PPC 

was  not  made  out  rather  it  is prima  facie  an  offence under  Section 

365  i.e.  simple  abduction,  however,  despite  that  Trial  Court  has 

proceeded  with  the  trial  knowingly  that  Anti Terrorism  Court  has 

no  jurisdiction  in  this  regard,  such  conduct  of a Judicial  Officer is 

not  aboveboard  who  despite  having  knowledge  of  all  the  laws 

including  the  mandate  of  Section  23  of  the  Anti  Terrorism  Act, 

1997, took cognizance  of the offence. 

10. 

The  Court  is  under  obligation  to  consider  the  allegation 

referred  in  the  FIR,  statement  of  witnesses  under  Section  161 

Cr.P.C.  and challan  under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. to confer jurisdiction 

at pre-trial  stage,  however,  if Court  comes  to opinion  that  it has no 

jurisdiction  to try  such  offence, then  transfer  of the  case for trial of 

such  offence  to  any  court  having  jurisdiction  under  the  Code  is 

required  under  the  law,  as  such  law  has  not  been  considered  in 

letter  and  spirit  by  the  Trial  Court,  which  is  an  illegality  on  the 

touchstone  of  principles  set  out  in  PLO  2005  [SC[  530  (Mirza 

Shaukat  Baig  VS  Shahid  Tamil),  2003  SCMR  472  (Nasir  Abdul 

Qadir  VS  The  State),  2016 PCRLJ  [Peshawar]  879  (Muhammad 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  7 

Faizan  alia  Faizi  VS  State),  2018 PCRLJ  (N)  [Karachi]  22  (25) 

(Afaq  Sha(qat  VS  State),  PLO  2016 [SC]  1  (Shahbaz  Khan  alia 

Tippu  VS  Special  Tudge Anti  Terrorism  Court  No.3,  Lahore),  2017 

PCRLJ  [Karachi]  1280  (Muhammad  Akbar  Khan  VS  SHO,  P.S. 

Garhi  Khairo,  District  lacobabad),  2017 PCRLJ  [Peshawar]  527 

(Ahmad  Ali  VS State). 

11. 

The most  glaring  element noted  by this Court is the acquittal 

of  respondent  No.4  Anwar  Moeen  Marwat,  who  has  been 

acquitted  in absentia,  who  never  appeared  before  the Trial Court, 

even  a  charge  was  not  framed  to  his  extent,  which  is  a  glaring 

illegality  committed  by  the  Trial  Court.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant  has  drawn  attention  of  this  Court  towards  the  glaring 

mistake  of the  Trial Court  with  reference  to Section 265-H Cr.P.C, 

where  order  of  acquittal  or  conviction  could  only  be  passed  if 

charge  has been framed,  therefore, the court has not adhered  to the 

procedures  of the  trial, such, illegality is not  curable  in light  of the 

judgment  reported  as  2010 SCMR  755  (Arbab  Khan  VS  State), 

PLO 2006 [SC] 343 (Manzar  Qayyum  VS State). 

12. 

There  is no  denial  on  record  that  application  has  been  filed 

by  the  appellant  side  before  the  Trial  Court  on  26.11.2015 for 

summoning  of Anwar  Moeen  Marwat,  who  is nominated  accused 

in this case, however,  despite  pendency  of the said  application,  no 

order  was  passed  and case has been decided  in slipshod  manner  in 

complete  disregard  to  the law  and  rules  of procedure  provided  in 

the criminal  procedure  code. 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  8 

13.  While  considering  the  above  illegalities  committed  by  the 

Trial  Court  from  the  very  inception  qua  the  assumption  of 

jurisdiction  under  Anti  Terrorism  Act,  1997, despite  the  fact  that 

the  offence under  Section 365-A i.e. kidnapping  for  the  purpose  of 

ransom  is not  demonstrated  from  any  angle  and  then  proceeding 

with  the  Trial  Court  without  framing  of  charge  to  the  extent  of 

Anwar  Moeen Marwat  /  respondent  No.4, who has been  acquitted 

in  absentia,  such  aspects  are  glaring  illegalities  which  are  not 

curable  in these proceedings,  rather  de novo  trial is required. 

14. 

The  above  mentioned  criminal  case  should  have  been 

proceeded  with  the  ordinary  court  and  after  framing  the complete 

charge  on  the  basis  of  allegation  mentioned  in  the  final  report 

under  Section  173 Cr.P.C.,  hence,  in  such  eventuality,  this  is  a  fit 

case  to  be  remanded 

to  the  ordinary  court  in  terms  of  the 

principles  set  out  in  2020  SCMR  293  (Naseer  Khan  VS  Said 

Qadeem),  2019 SCMR  1079 (Abdullah  [an  VS  State),  2018 SCMR 

511 (Shakeel  Ahmad  Siddiqui  VS  Muhammad  Nauman  Siddiqui), 

2018 SCMR 141 (Muhammad  Ajmal  VS  State),  PLO 2018 [SC] 837 

(State  VS  Haji  Nabi  Bux),  PLO 2018 [SC] 351 (Muhammad  [ibran 

Nasir  VS  State),  2017 SCMR 1946 (Tahir  laved  @  Tara  VS  State), 

2017 YLR [Peshawar]  1376 (Zuhrab  Gui  VS State). 

15. 

In  view  of  the  above  guiding  principles  set  out  by  the 

superior  Courts,  instant  appeal  is  ALLOWED.  The  judgment  of 

acquittal  dated  26.04.2016, passed  by  learned  Judge  Special  Court 

No.l,  Anti-Terrorism,  Islamabad  is  hereby  SET-ASIDE  without 

Criminal  Appeal  No.110  /  2016 

Page  I  9 

touching  the  merits  of  the  case  and  the  matter  is  remanded  to 

learned  Sessions  Judge  (West), who  shall  entrust  the  same  to  the 

competent  Court  having  jurisdiction 

in  this  regard  and 

the 

transferee  Court  shall  proceed  with  the  trial  to  the  extent  of 

respondent  No.04/ Anwar  Moeen  Marwat  after  framing  the  fresh 

charge  and  thereafter  decide  the  matter  jointly  with  other  three 

respondents  accused  namely  Afzal Moeen  Marwat,  Imran  Khattak, 

Raja  Waleed  Shahid  and  shall  pass  the  judgment  in  accordance 

with  the law  within  the period  of six  months.  The evidence  earlier 

recorded  in  the  trial  of  three  respondents  namely  Afzal  Moeen 

Marwat,  Raja Waleed  Shahid, Imran  Khattak,  shall remain  intact. 

16. 

All the  respondents  accused  shall.submit  fresh  bail bonds  in 

the  sum  of  Rs. 30,000 (Thirty  Thousand  Rupees  Only)  each  with 

one surety  each in the like amount  to the satisfaction  of the learned 

Trial  Court  for  their  appearance  in  the  Trial  Court  till  the  final 

judgment. 

(BAB AR  SATT AR) 
JUDGE 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced.ia  the open  Court  on :  _l_i_lK __ ~ __ -_:W_.J.4.- · 

JUDGE 

JUDGE 

A.Waheed. 

