ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT  PETITION  NO. 3882 OF 2021. 

SADIA SARWAR and another 
VS
THE  ADDITIONAL DISTRICT  AND SESSIONS JUDGE, 
ISLAMABAD and others 

Petitioner by 

Respondent by 

Date of Decision 

: 

: 

: 

Mr.  Muhammad 
Advocate. 

Aslam 

Chishti, 

Ex-parte. 
(Respondent  No.3) 

20-02-2023. 

SAMAN  RAFAT  IMTIAZ,  J.:-  Through  the  instant  writ  petition  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  the 

Petitioners  have  assailed 

the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  14-12-2020 

(“Impugned Judgment and Decree I”) passed by the Respondent No.2 [The 

Family  Judge,  Islamabad  (West), Islamabad  (“Family Court”)] and Judgment 

and Decree dated 28-09-2021 (“Impugned Judgment and Decree II”) passed 

by  the  Respondent  No.1  [The  Additional  District  and  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad  (West)  (“Appellate  Court”)]  in  appeal  filed  by  the  Petitioners 

against  the Impugned Judgment and Decree I.  

2. 

The  brief  facts  as  per  the  Memo  of  Petition are that the Petitioners [(i) 

Sadia  Sarwar  and  (ii)  Muhammad  Taaeb Khan] filed Suit  for the Recovery of 

Dower  Amount,  Dowry  Articles  and  Maintenance  Allowance  before  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad  (West)  (“Family  Court”).    The 

Respondent  No.3  [Muhammad  Nadeem  Khan]  contested  the  Suit  by  filing 

written  statement.  Thereafter  issues  were  framed  by the learned Family Court 

and  after  recording  of  evidence,  the  learned  Family  Court  decreed  the Suit of 

the  Petitioners  vide  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  14-12-2020, 

whereby inter alia, the Petitioner No.2 was held entitled to maintenance at the 

rate  of  Rs.6000/-  per  month  from  the  date of his birth till his legal entitlement 

with 5% annual increase from the date of the Impugned Judgment and Decree I. 

3. 

Aggrieved  with  the  Impugned  Judgment  I  only  to  the  extent  of  amount 

of  maintenance,  the  Petitioners  filed  an  appeal  before  the  learned  Appellate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P. No.3882/2021 

Court who vide Impugned Judgment II dated 28-02-2021 upheld the Impugned 

Judgment I passed by the learned Family Court.  

4. 

Being  aggrieved  and  dissatisfied  by  the  Impugned  Judgment  I  and  II 

dated  14-12-2020  and  28-09-2021  to  the  extent  of  refusing  enhancement  of 

maintenance  of  Petitioner  No.2/Minor  and  past  maintenance  of  the  Petitioner 

No.1, the Petitioners have preferred the instant writ petition for setting aside the 

same. 

5. 

The  learned  counsel  for the Petitioner  did not press the instant writ to 

the  extent  of  the  past  maintenance  of  the  Petitioner  No.  1.    With  regard  to 

enhancement  of  maintenance  of  Petitioner  No.2/Minor,  he  relied  upon  the 

affidavit-in-evidence  of  the  Petitioner  whereby  she  alleged  that  Respondent 

No.3 earns handsome salary and can pay maintenance at the rate of Rs.25,000/- 

to  the  Petitioner  No.2/Minor  and  submitted  that  no  cross-examination  was 

conducted  on  behalf  of  Respondent  No.3  in  this  regard  and  no  independent 

evidence was submitted by him to substantiate his financial  strength.   

6.  Mr.  Muhammad  Asif  Khan,  Advocate  filed  his  power  of  attorney  on 

behalf  of  Respondent  No.3  and  appeared  before  the  Court  on  09-12-2021.  

However, no one has appeared on behalf of Respondent No.3 today i.e. 20-02-

2023, therefore, the Respondent No.3 was proceeded against ex-parte. 

7. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the Petitioner and have also perused 

the available  record.  

8. 

 According  to  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees,  Petitioner  No. 

2/Minor  was  held  entitled  to  Rs.  6000/-  per  month  from  the  time  of  his  birth 

which amount would be subject to 5% annual enhancement from the date of the 

Impugned Judgment and Decree I.  From the contents of the plaint filed by the 

Petitioners  in  their  suit,  it  appears  that the Petitioner No. 2/Minor was born in 

February, 2018.  Therefore, he was entitled to Rs.6,000/- from February, 2018 

till  December,  2020  and  thereafter  such  amount  was  subject  to  annual 

increment of 5%.  It is contended that this amount requires enhancement.  

9. 

First and foremost, it has to be borne in mind that this Court in exercise 

of  Constitutional  jurisdiction  does not act like a Court of appeal.  As such, the 

Court  cannot  embark  upon  a  reappraisal  of  evidence.  It  is  settled  law  that  a 

High  Court  in such jurisdiction cannot substitute the concurrent findings of the 

3 

W.P. No.3882/2021 

courts  below  with  its own findings solely on the ground that another view was 

possible  on  the  same  evidence.  A  party  approaching  the  High  Court  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  has  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  a  gross 

misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  or  jurisdictional  error  or  such  legal 

infirmity  that has caused miscarriage of justice.  

10.  No  misreading/non-reading  of  evidence  or  illegality  or  any  other 

infirmity  has  been  pointed out by the learned counsel for the Petitioners in the 

Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees.    The  Petitioner  No.  2/Minor  was  almost 

three years old at the time of passage of the Impugned Judgment and Decree I 

and as such not of school going age.   No evidence regarding the Minor Child’s 

monthly  expenditure  has  been  highlighted  which  exceeds 

the  monthly 

maintenance  granted  by  the  Impugned  Judgments  and  Decrees.    Even 

otherwise,  as  and  when  the  circumstances  change,  an  alternate,  adequate 

remedy  is available in terms of enhancement of maintenance application which 

may be filed before the Family Court as held by the Honorable Supreme Court 

in the case of Lt. Col. Nasir Malik VS Additional District Judge, Lahore, 2016 

SCMR  1821.    Therefore,  I  am  not  compelled  to  exercise  the  discretionary 

jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan, 1973 to disturb the concurrent findings.   

11. 

In view of the foregoing, no reasonable grounds have been made out for 

interference  with  the  findings  of  the  learned  courts  below  in  exercise  of  writ 

jurisdiction.    As  such,  the  instant  petition  is hereby dismissed as being devoid 

of merits.   

J U NAID 

       (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
      JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
