ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION N0.3378  OF 2019 

RUQIYA KHATOON. 
VS 
MST. ZAKEEDA AND ANOTHER. 

Petitioner by 

Mr. lftikhar Hussain Satti, Advocate. 

Respondents by 

Mr. Muzammil Hussain Shad, Advocate. 

Date of hearing 

10.09.2020. 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ, J. 

Petitioner  has  invoked  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction  of this  Court by way of filing instant petition under Article  I 99 of the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan,  1973,  with the following prayer:- 

"It  is,  therefore,  respectfully prayed  that  the  instant writ petition  may  kindly  be 
accepted  and  the  impugned  order  dated  I5.05.20I9  passed  by  the  Learned 
respondent No. 2 may kindly be set-aside and the respondent No. I  (who is disable) 
be directed to come back with minor and reside at separate room specified for the 
respondent No. I  and minor at house of petitioner  or otherwise she be directed to 
hand over the custody of minor to the petitioner  because the future  and education 
Jo minor is being risked at the house of father  of respondent no. I, the respondent 
No. I  will  always  be  allowed  to see  and  meet  the  minor  whenever  and  wherever 
she wants. 

Any other relief, which this Honourable Court deems just and proper,  may 

also be granted. ". 

2. 

Facts  related  to  the  present  petition  are that  Respondent  No. I  (who  is deaf 

and  dumb),  is  widow  of late  Muhammad  Ismail,  the  real  son  of petitioner,  who 

died  on  I0.02.20I9,  after  almost  9  months  from the  death  of petitioner's  son on 

02.I0.20I9,  Respondent No.I  filed petition u/s 491 Cr.P.C. against petitioner and 

others on the grounds that  family of her late husband Muhammad Ismail was very 

rude  &  harsh  from very  first  day and  after  death  of her  husband,  she was  ousted 

from the  house  by  snatching  the  minor  daughter  by  present  petitioner  and  other 

family  members.  Her  Petition  was  allowed  vide  order  dated  I5.05.2019,  by  the 

2 

W.P.No.  3378/2019 

learned Additional  District Judge and custody of minor daughter was handed over 

to  the  Respondent  No. I  and  petitioner  were  directed  to  approach  the  learned 

Guardian Judge  for  custody  of the  minor,  if so  advised.  Now,  the  petitioner,  the 

paternal grandmother  of the minor has filed instant petition  for setting aside order 

dated  I5.05.20I9,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  allegedly 

stating  therein  that  after  the  death  of  petitioner's  son,  Respondent  No.I  on  the 

instigation  of  her  father  tried  to  take  the  minor  to  her  father's  house  but  the 

petitioner  restrained  her  due  to  the  reason  that  the  minor  was  studying  in  Unity 

School System at Alipur, Islamabad and there was apprehension of discontinuation 

of  her  studies.  Respondent  No.I  on  instigation  of her  father  filed  a  petition  for 

custody of the minor u/s 49I  Cr.P.C. which was accepted by the learned Additional 

Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad  vide  order  dated  I5.05.20I9.  However,  Respondent 

No. I  after a long time  came back to the house of petitioner  and started residing in 

her  separate  room  along  with  minor  and  the  petitioner's 

family  properly 

maintained  them.  But,  once  again  on  I6.09.20I9,  Respondent  no.I  along  with 

minor daughter shifted to her parents'  house and did not come back. Hence, instant 

petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  petitioner  is  paternal 

grandmother  of the  minor  has  nourished/  and  took  care  of  the  minor  since,  her 

birth;  that  the  petitioner  is  residing  in  a  7  Marlas  house  at  Islamabad;  that 

Respondent No. I  by removing the minor from Islamabad has risked the studies of 

minor;  that  Respondent  No. I  is  deaf  and  dumb  and  cannot  properly  take  care  of 

minor; that at the house  of petitioner, the minor  and Respondent No. I  were given 

separate room;  that  house  of parents  of Respondent  No.2  is  situated  within  hard 

rock  mountains  in  Murree  three  kilometer  from  the  cemented  road  which  is  a 

deprived  area  even  from  basic  necessities  of  life  and  is  not  conducive 

for  the 

3 

W.P.No.  3378/2019 

welfare  of minor;  that  minor  was  admitted  in  Unity  School  System  Alipur  by 

petitioner,  whereas,  currently  minor  is  not  going  to  school;  that  father  of 

Respondent No.I  has six daughters and two sons residing jointly,  whereas, he does 

the work of constructing  stone walls who off and on get work; that  one brother of 

Respondent No. I  is also disabled and often caught beating the minor; that  learned 

Additional  District  Court  has  failed  to  appreciate  the  real  facts  and  apply  his 

judicial  mind while  passing the  impugned order dated  I5.05.20I9,  which  as such, 

is against the relevant  law; that  while  living with Respondent no. I  at her parent's 

house, minor  has  been  deprived  from  fundamental rights  and healthy  atmosphere 

and education which is against the welfare of minor. Learned counsel in support of 

his contentions placed reliance  on the  case law reported  as Shah Bano  VS  Station 

House  Officer,  P.S.  Tandlianwala  and  another  (2007 PCrLJ  1928),  Mst.  Nadia 

Perveen  VS  Mst. Almas Noreen  and others  (PLD 2012 SC  758),  Mst.Laiba Sultan 

VS  Muhammad Nawaz  and  others  (PLD 2018 SC  79),  Naziha  Ali  Mirza  VS  The 

State and another (2001SCMR1782). 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No. I  controverted  the 

contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  petitioner  and  while  supporting  the 

impugned order passed  by the  learned Additional Judge, inter-alia, contended that 

the impugned order is well reasoned, just  and proper and is in line with the relevant 

law; that the Respondent  No.I  is real mother of the minor  and no  one else except 

mother can take care of the minor; that welfare of the minor as per law lies with the 

Respondent No. I.  Learned  counsel while  referring  the  case  law reported  as Asifa 

Bahar  VS  Mumtaz Ali Khan  2 others  (2005 YLR 2414) and Mst. Khalida Perveen 

VS  Muhammad  Sultan  Mehmood  and  another  (PLJ 2004  SC  45)  and  prayed  for 

dismissal of present petition. 

4 

W.P.No.  3378/2019 

5. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for the  parties  and  have  also perused  the 

available record as well as the impugned order. 

6. 

Through  the  impugned  order  dated  15.05.2019,  the  learned  Additional 

District Judge has granted custody of the minor girl child to minor's  real mother I 

Respondent No.I  while  deciding the petition  u/s 491  Cr.P.C with the  observation 

that  the  respondent  {petitioner  in  the  present  case)  may  file  application  for 

obtaining custody of the minor. 

7. 

The order dated  15.05.2019, which is impugned through  instant petition has 

been  passed  in  petitioner  u/s  491  Cr.P.C.  through  which,  for  the  time  being, 

custody  of  the  minor  has  been  handed  over  to  her  real  mother,  holding  that  for 

custody of the minor the petitioner,  if so desire, can approach the  Guardian Judge 

under Sections  12  & 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act,  1890 by taking the same 

grounds as alleged through this petition. 

8. 

Suffice to  say  that  it  is  settled  law  that  mother  of  a  minor  girl  enjoys  the 

right  of  "Hazanat"  till  attaining  the  age  of  puberty  until  and  unless  she  is 

disqualified  due  to  second  marriage  or  otherwise.  Except  in  absence  of  minor 

daughter's  father  and  disqualification  of the  real  mother,  paternal  grandparent  of 

the minor have no  right to  custody of minor granddaughter.  As  far as the ground 

taken by the petitioner,  that Respondent No. I  is deaf and dumb,  is concerned it is 

admitted  fact  that  minor  daughter  is  living  with  her  mother  since,  her  birth  and 

there  is no denial to the  fact that  emotional attachment  of the minor  with her real 

parents/mother is natural which cannot be substituted by any other relation. Hence, 

there  is no  legal  infirmity  in  the  order  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge calling for interference by this Court. 

5 

W.P.No.  3378/2019 

9. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  in  his  pleadings  has  contended  that 

Respondent No. I  on the instigation of her father has left the house of the petitioner 

with the minor daughter, however, facts suggest otherwise as if the minor daughter 

was with the respondent,  she did not have to proceed u/s 49I  Cr.P.C for custody of 

her minor daughter. Moreover, the disability of mother does not disentitle her from 

the custody of her  minor  child. In the present  case the  father of minor/husband  of 

Respondent No. I  has expired and according to para 352 of the Muhammadan Law 

the first right of custody of the minor child is with mother and as per para 353 ibid 

failing the mother the mother's  mother has the preferential  right of custody of the 

minor female child. 

I 0. 

For the foregoing reasons, instant writ petition, being devoid of any merit, is 

hereby dismissed. 

(LUBNA SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCER  IN OPEN COURT ON THIS  14 DAY OF SEPTEMBER. 2020. 

Ad nan/- 

JUl>GE 

