ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.2053/2021 
Mrs. Ramna Rafique 
VS 
Learned Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad & 02 others 

Petitioner by: 

Syed Mujtaba Haider Sherazi, Advocate. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Rizwan Faiz Muhammad and Barrister 
Afzal Khan Shinwari, Advocate for 
respondent No.2 

Ch. Shafiq Ahmed Ramay, Advocate for 
respondent No.3. 

Date of Decision: 

16.11.2021. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner has called in question judgment and decree of the learned Additional 

District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  14.04.2021,  whereby  appeal  filed  by 

respondent  No.2  against  judgment  and  decree  dated  19.04.2019,  passed  by 

learned Family Court, has been allowed.   

2. 

Succinctly,  Mrs.  Ramna  Rafique  (petitioner)  entered  into  marriage  with 

son  of  Muhammad  Nawaz  (Respondent  No.2)  on  28.09.1989  (since  died), 

whereby Plot No.386, Sector F-11/1, Islamabad (suit plot) was given as dower by 

groom’s father i.e. Respondent No.2 as evidently mentioned in Column No.15 of 

the Nikahnama, as such, on 01.01.2018, the petitioner filed a suit for recovery of 

dower in shape of the aforesaid plot or alternatively its current market value, per 

se, after recording of pro and contra evidence, the  learned Judge  Family  Court, 

vide impugned judgment and decree dated 19.04.2019, decreed the suit. Feeling 

aggrieved  thereof,  Respondent  No.2  preferred  an  appeal,  whereby  the  learned 

Additional District Judge has accepted the appeal vide the impugned judgment 

and decree, dated 14.04.2021. Hence, instant writ petition.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2053/2021 

Page | 2 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court  has  rightly  appreciated  the  evidence  while  decreeing  the  suit,  but  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge  while  adjudicating  upon  the  appeal  filed 

thereto has misread and misinterpreted the evidence available on record and non 

suited the petitioner; that the petitioner successfully made out her case in terms 

of discharging the onus to prove her case; that the learned first Appellate Court 

has non-suited the petitioner purely on technical grounds and in hasty manner.  

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondents No.2 & 3 opposed the filing 

of instant writ petition on the grounds that  the learned Judge Family Court has 

failed  to  record  findings  on  all  the  issues  framed  and  committed  gross 

procedural irregularity; that the learned Judge Family Court has failed to realize 

that  the  petitioner  has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in  contending  that 

respondent  No.2  had  given  the  suit  plot  to  the  petitioner  as  dower  through  an 

attorney,  even  otherwise,  the  petitioner  never  produced  the  so-called  attorney 

nor was any evidence has been led on its veracity or existence.   

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.  

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  married  with  Khalid  Nawaz 

(since  died)  on  28.09.1989  vide  Nikahnama  (Exh.P5)  solemnized  in  Islamabad 

against  Haq  Mehar  of  Rs.1000/-,  as  referred  in  Column  No.12,  however  at  the 

time of Nikah, a specific entry was made in Column No.15 of Nikahnama, which 

is as under:  

 یعہرذ

 ب دا

 یآ مسلاا 

F-11/1

 سیکٹر 

386

 نمبر ٹپلا ضعو کے قمر کل

 ئیکو میں ضعو کے حصہ کسی کے سا ا

 ی مہر ےرپو ا

 یآ

(۱۵) 

 بد زانو لدخا لہاود لداو زانو محمد 
 یذ
 ۔ہے گیا ا

نمنجا نیرا

 ی
یآ فآ روا

 روا 

حاصر کی دائدجا سا تو ہے گئی ید گرا ہے گئی ید دائدجا

  ۔ہے ئیا

 ی طے بینما کے یقینر

ف جو قیمت کی سا

7. 

On  29.03.1997,  the  husband  of  the  petitioner  was  murdered,  whereafter 

petitioner  married  the  second  brother  of  his  deceased  husband  namely  Tahir 

Nawaz  Khan  on  19.07.1998,  which  was  arranged  by  the  father-in-law  / 

 
 
 
ت
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2053/2021 

Page | 3 

respondent No.2 Muhammad Nawaz Khan. The petitioner claims to be owner in 

possession of the property i.e. Plot No.386, Sector F-11/1, Islamabad, referred in 

Column  No.15  of  Nikahnama  and  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  Haq  Mehar  on 

01.01.2018 or alternatively the current market value of the property. The suit was 

decreed  by  learned  Judge  Family  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 

19.04.2019,  but  the  same  were  set  aside  by  learned  first  Appellate  Court  vide 

impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated  14.04.2021  primarily  on  the  ground  that 

Muhammad Nawaz Khan / respondent No.2 being the father in law of petitioner 

never signed the Nikahnama, nor agreed to transfer the suit property as dower in 

the name of petitioner.  

8.  While  dealing  with  the  reverse  findings  recorded  by  both  the  courts 

below, I have gone through the evidence with able assistance of learned counsel 

for  the  parties  and  observed  that  the  primary  onus  in  this  case  is  upon  the 

petitioner  to  prove  as  to  whether  the  suit  plot  was  validly  entered  into 

Nikahnama  in  favour  of  petitioner  as  dower.  However,  in  order  to  discharge 

such  onus  the  petitioner  produced  three  (03)  witnesses  namely  PW-2 

Muhammad Rafique i.e. real father of petitioner, PW-3 Faisal Rafique Malik  i.e. 

real  brother  of  petitioner  and  PW-4  Rabnawaz,  as  such,  the  petitioner  herself 

appeared  as  PW-1  and  reiterated  her  stance,  which  is  supported  by  aforesaid 

three  witnesses.  On  the  other  hand,  the  father-in-law  of  petitioner  (respondent 

No.2)  appeared  as  DW-1  and  produced  his  testimony  in  shape  of  affidavit  as 

Exh.D1.  

9.  While  considering  the  contentious  claim  of  rival  parties,  this  Court  is 

convinced  that  the  entry  made  in  Nikahnama  in  terms  of  Muslim  Family  Laws 

Ordinance,  1961  could  not  be  disputed  in  any  manner  as  the  Nikahnama  is 

compulsory  registered  document  registered  in  terms  of  Section  5  of  the  said 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2053/2021 

Page | 4 

Ordinance. There is no cavil to proposition that Respondent No.2 participated in 

marriage ceremony of petitioner with his late son and as per his own version, he 

participated  in  marriage  along  with  other  15/20  people  of  the  family,  even  he 

acknowledged the marriage in unequivocal terms in the cross examination that: 

 "

۔تھا دجومو میں کہ ںہو نتاما میں کہ کہا دخوزا ۔ںہو نتاما کو 

-09-28

1989

 مہا

ی حنکا میں

"

10. 

The above referred aspect left nothing to dispute the Nikahnama. Now the 

only question  confined is whether the entry made  in  Column No.15 is with  the 

consent  of  DW-1  Muhammad  Nawaz,  who  is  the  owner  of  the  property  in 

question.  In  order  to  prove  this  aspect,  the  Nikah  Registrar  has  neither  been 

produced  before  the Court  nor the  witnesses  of  Nikah  namely  Dr.  Muhammad 

Jahangir  Alam  and  Abdul  Rehman  have  ever  been  produced  before  the  Court, 

who  are  the  key  witnesses  to  prove  the  contents  or  terms  and  conditions  of 

Nikah, whereas the petitioner was obliged to discharge this onus in unequivocal 

term  where  a  particular  entry  is  disputed  in  Nikahnama  and  rest  of  the  event 

was  acknowledged  by  the  defendant  /  respondent  No.2,  as  such,  when 

confronted, no justiciable reason has been brought on record as to why the most 

suitable  witnesses  were  not  produced,  even  the  record  is  silent  to  that  effect. 

Such  aspect  creates  mysterious  circumstance  lurking  in  the  entire  case  and 

adverse to the cause of petitioner.  

11.  Now  comes  to  specific  entry  in  Column  No.15,  where  the  following 

specific phrase has been written: 

 روا

 ی یعہرذ

 ب دا

 یآ مسلاا 

F-11/1

 سیکٹر 

386

 نمبر ٹپلا ضعو کے قمر کل

 ئیکو میں ضعو کے حصہ کسی کے سا ا

 ی مہر ےرپو ا

 یآ

(۱۵) 

 بد زانو لدخا لہاود لداو زانو محمد 
 یذ
 ۔ہے گیا ا

نمنجا نیرا

یآ فآ

 روا 

حاصر کی دائدجا سا تو ہے گئی ید گرا ہے گئی ید دائدجا

  ۔ہے ئیا

 ی طے بینما کے یقینر

ف جو قیمت کی سا

The  above  referred  entry  in  Column  No.15  reveals  that  power  of  attorney  was 

presumed  to  be  executed  by  defendant  /  respondent  No.2  Muhammad  Nawaz 

 
 
 
 
ت
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2053/2021 

Page | 5 

qua the suit plot, but surprisingly no effort was put forward on record to bring 

that  power  of  attorney  on  record  nor  any  attorney  holder  has  been  produced  to 

record his evidence to prove that the father-in-law has ever executed such power of 

attorney, otherwise the very entry in above terms in Column No.15 has no meaning.  

12. 

The  last  important  aspect  of  this  case  is  regarding  the  custody  of  title 

document  of  the  suit  plot,  though  the  petitioner  claims  herself  being  owner  in 

possession  of  the  property,  but  title  document  has  never  been  produced  by  the 

petitioner in evidence, which is against the presumption that  owner must be in 

position to bring on record the title document to justify his or her claim, which is 

a missing part, especially when the petitioner claims that she was given property 

by  her  father-in-law  through  late  Khalid  Nawaz  at  the  time  of  Nikah  i.e.  on 

28.09.1989, but till filing of suit in the year 2018 the title document has never been 

in possession of petitioner nor she was in possession of the property, though the 

possession might be a symbolic issue.  

13. 

The above referred discussion leads this Court to opine that the property 

in  question  was  never  agreed  to  be  given  as  a  dower  to  the  petitioner  in  the 

Nikahnama Exh.P5 as no probability has been surfaced on record to believe such 

aspect.  In  this  background,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  has  made  certain 

reliance on cases reported as 2003 YLR 250 Peshawar (Hassana v. Ghufrana) and 

PLD  2016  SC  613  (Mst.  Yasmeen  Bibi  v.  Muhammad  Ghazanfar  Khan)  while 

passing  the  decree  in  favour  of  petitioner,  though  the  said  judgments  are  not 

related  to  factual  aspect  of  this  case,  but  the  principle  settled  in  those  cases  are 

admittedly  applicable,  especially  where  it  has  been  referred  that  any  property 

given  as  part  of  dower  to  wife  in  consideration  of  marriage  is  to  be  treated  as 

property of the wife, even it is admitted position of law that formal registration 

or  transfer  is  not  required  in  the  land  registry  office,  but  the  case  in  hand  is 

entirely  different  where  the  property  in  question  belongs  to  the  father  of  late 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2053/2021 

Page | 6 

husband  of  petitioner,  who  has  never  signed  the  Nikahnama,  though  he  was 

present at the time of Nikah and denied such entry, hence the basic principle of 

onus  to  prove  is  upon  the  petitioner,  who  is  beneficiary  of  such  document,  but 

she failed to prove the consent of her father-in-law qua the handing over of the 

suit property as dower. It is also pertinent to mention here that how the property 

of another person, except of groom, can be mentioned as consideration of dower 

and if by any stretch of imagination the property of the father was mentioned in 

the  Nikahnama  as  dower  consideration,  the  said  property  was  required  to  be 

transferred in the name of bride, which is the missing link in this case.  

14. 

I have gone through the judgment rendered by the learned first Appellate 

Court, whereby the petitioner was also non suited on the question of limitation 

as the suit was filed after 17 years and nine months of the period of limitation i.e. 

three years in terms of Article 103 of the Limitation Act, 1908, which is admitted 

position on record as the petitioner never claimed her Haq Mehar during lifetime 

of  her  husband  or  at  the  time  of  death  of  her  husband  nor  even  at  the  time  of 

contracting  second marriage with  another son  of respondent No.2 i.e. father-in-

law  of  petitioner.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2015  YLR  2375  Peshawar  (Mst. 

Kulsoom Bibi v. Muhammad Waseem) and 2019 CLC 1008 Lahore (Muhammad 

Saeed v. Additional District Judge). Hence, the suit is barred by limitation. 

15. 

In  view  of  above  detailed  reasons,  the  findings  recorded  by  the  learned 

first  Appellate  Court  in  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree,  dated  14.04.2021, 

are legally justified and found to be within four corners of law, therefore, instant 

writ petition is misconceived and same is hereby DISMISSED.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Khalid Z. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
