ORDER SHEET 

IN THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P. N0.4059/2019 

Mst. Rafina Bibi. 
VS 
Learned Additional District Judge-I/Judge MACA (East), 
Islamabad and 2  others. 

Petitioner by 

Mr. Sajid Mehmood Ch., Advocate. 

Respondents by  : 

Ms. Rabia Habib, Advocate. 

Date of hearing 

24.09.2020 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ. J. 

Petitioner  invoked  the  constitutional 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  by  way  of  filing  instant  Writ  Petition  under 

Article  199  of the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  assailing 

judgment  dated  01.10.2019,  passed  by  the  learned  District  &  Sessions 

Judge, East-Islamabad, whereby, her appeal was dismissed and the findings 

dated 03.07.2020 of the learned family Court were upheld. 

2. 

Admitted  facts,  of  the  case  are  that  the  petitioner  filed  suit  before 

Judge  Family  Court,  East-Islamabad  on  19.05.2017,  for  dissolution  of 

marriage on the basis of Khula and recovery of maintenance, dowry articles 

and  gold  ornaments,  which  was  decreed  to  the  extent  of  dissolution  of 

marriage by way of khula vide order dated  10.01.2018. The dowry articles 

were also handed over to the plaintiff through bailiff, vide his report dated 

03.02.2018. Learned family Judge, vide judgment  dated 03.07.2019, on the 

issues of maintenance  and recovery of gold ornaments from defendant held 

that  the  claim  of plaintiff to  recover  maintenance  and  gold  ornaments 

weighing  three  tolas  has  dismissed,  however,  the  plaintiff  is  bound  to 

return  three  tola gold  ornament  as zar-e-khula  to defendants.  The  appeal 

against  the judgment  &  decree  dated  03.07.2019,  filed  before  Additional 

District Judge-I/Judge  MCAC (East)-Islamabad was also dismissed, hence, 

present writ petition. 

W.P.  No.4059/2019 

2 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  Petitioner  submitted  that  the  petitioner  was 

deserted from the house by the defendant by snatching the gold ornaments 

in March  2016;  that  the  learned  Family  Judge  as  well  as  leaned  ADJ  has 

misread  the  evidence  and  passed  the  impugned  order  which,  as  such, 

suffers from illegalities  and irregularities; that  learned Courts  below  failed 

to  apply their judicial  mind  while  passing  the  impugned judgments/order. 

He relied  on the  case titled  "Bushra  Bibi  VS  Judge  Family  Court"  (PLD 

2000 Lahore  95) and  prayed for setting aside of both the judgments  of the 

Court below. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  Respondent  on  the  other  hand  submitted  that 

during the trial proceedings  it was proved that the plaintiff was not deserted 

from the  house  rather  she  left the  house  on  her  own  free  will;  that  it was 

proved that  in  March  2016, the defendant was not  in Pakistan  but abroad; 

that she has admitted of having received a ring and a pair of gold ear rings 

in lieu of dower, which admittedly is in her possession, however, she could 

not prove the snatching of three tolas gold given to her as dower; that she is 

not entitled for maintenance being a disobedient wife who left the house of 

the  defendant  without  any  genuine  reason;  that  there  is  no  illegality  or 

irregularity in the judgments  of the learned courts below.  She relied on the 

judgments  of "Mst.  Samiya  Iqbal  Butt  VS  Rehan  Zafar,  etc"  (NLR  2013 

Civil 369,  "Mst. Sakina  Bibi  VS  Muhammad  Latif''  (2003  YLR  1006) and 

"Mohammad  Sajjad  VS  Neel um Shaheen"  (2017 YLR 2481). 

5. 

Arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of learned  Counsel  for  the  parties 

have  been  heard  and  the  documents  placed  on  record  have  also  been 

examined with their able assistance. 

6. 

Perusal of the record shows that the suit was filed for grant of khula, 

recovery  of  maintenance,  dowry  articles  and  gold  ornaments.  The  khula 

was  granted  after  failure  of reconciliation  proceedings  on  10.01.2018 and 

thereafter  the  dowry  articles  were  also  returned  through  bailiff  on  the 

orders  of  the  learned  Family  Judge.  Thereafter,  the  issues  in  respect  of 

maintenance and return of gold ornaments remained with the learned Judge 

for  decision.  In  respect  of  maintenance  since,  March  2016  up  to  iddat 

W.P. No.4059/2019 

3 

period, the contention of the plaintiff that she was being treated cruelly and 

harshly by the defendant  who deserted her from his house on the behest of 

his parents was proved to be wrong as she herself admitted in March 2016, 

the  defendant  (  her  ex-husband)  was  abroad  in  conf.ection  with  his  job 

further it has  been  observed  from the  contents  of document  at page  81  of 

the record, which is  a statement of the petitioner signed by her before Jirga, 

wherein she admitted that  she was living with her parents  on her own will 

while  her husband  was  abroad, therefore,  deserting her  from house  by the 

defendant and snatching of gold ornaments appears to be a false statement, 

therefore, the  learned trial  Judge has rightly decided this  issue  against her. 

In  the judgment  of "Mst.  Sakina  Bibi  VS  Muhammad  Latif'  (2003  YLR 

1006)  it  has  been  observed  that  it  is  well  settled  that  if  a  wife  refuses, 

without  lawful justification  to  live  with  his  husband  she  is  not  entitled  to 

her maintenance).  In another judgment  of "Muhammad  Sajjad VS Neel um 

Shaheeen" (2017 YLR 2841) the Hon'ble  Shariat Court, AJK has observed 
that If wife  is not willing to live with her husband, she was not entitled for 

maintenance allowance, husband was bound to pay  maintenance to wife till 

she was faithful  and lived with him and she voluntarily left the house of her 

husband  then  she  was  not  entitled for  maintenance,  wife  was  entitled for 

maintenance allowance  only when she was forced  to leave the house of her 

husband  due  to  cruelty  or  violence  but when  she  abandoned  the  house of 

the  husband  with  her  free  consent  and  willfully  to  perform  marital 

obligations she  would  not  be entitled for  any maintenance  allowance.  So 

far  as  the  issue,  relating  to  recovery/claim  of three  tolas  gold,  fixed  as 

dower in possession of the defendant is  concerned, it has been categorically 

admitted  by  the  plaintiff  that  she  has  received  a  gold  ring  at  the  time  of 

Nikkah  and  the  remaining  dower  amount  has  been  received  by  her  on 

08.07.2014  in  front  of witnesses  and  also  admits  of having  a pair  of gold 

ear  rings.  Moreover,  she  could  not  bring  on  record  any  evidence  for 

snatching the  gold  ornaments  by the  defendant  during trial.  Therefore, the 

issue  of  possession  of  gold  ornaments  with  defendant,  being  remained 

unproved, has been rightly decided against the plaintiff. 

7. 

In view  of the  discussion made hereinabove,  I  am of the  considered 

opinion  that  the  judgment  passed  by  the  learned  Family  Judge  has  been 

W.P. No.4059/2019 

4 

passed  after  thorough  scrutiny  of  evidence  and  record  and  thereafter 

learned  ADJ  while  concurring  with  the  findings  of  learned  Family  Judge 

has  considered  all  the  relevant  documents  and  evidence  of the  case.  The 

learned  counsel  for the  petitioner  is not  able to  point  out  any  irregularity, 

illegality  or  any  misreading  or  non-reading  of  the  evidence/record, 

therefore,  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  03.07.2019,  passed  by  learned 

Family  Judge  as  well  as judgment  dated  ()j.~(D.2019, passed  by  learned 

ADJ  are  upheld.  Consequently,  the  instant  writ  petition,  being  devoid  of 

any merit, is dismissed. 

¥· 

(LUBNA SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in open  Court on 

ol-/o-  k:oU> 

~· 
JUDGE 

