FORM NO: HCJD/C

ORDER.SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT,
ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

Crl.Misc No.233-8 of 2O13

Naseem alias Fahim
VS
The State etc

S.No.  of
proceedings

Date of
orderl
proceedinqs

Order with signature of judge and that of
parties or counsel where necessary.

15.05.2013 Raja M u ha m mad Nadeem  Kia ni,

Advocate  for the petitioner.
Raja M u ha m mad Shakil  Abbasi,
Standing Counsel assisted by Raja
Rizwan Abbasi, Advocate  for the
complainant.
Muhammad  Akbar S.I. with record.

Petitioner Naseem  alias Fahim s/o  Raja

Hukamdad  seeks bail after arrest in case F.I.R. No.22

dated 13.01 .20L3, registered u/s 302, 324, L4BlL49  P.P.C,

The prosecution  story as enunciated in the

with Police  Station  Shahzad  Town, Islamabad.
2. 
F.I.R. are that complainant Muhammad Qasim Zafar
reported to the police that on the fateful day i.e
13.01.2013  at about 7:1517:30 p.m he alongwith his

aternal uncles namely Muhammad  Asghar and

Cr!.Misc No.233-8 of 2O13

2

Muhammad Najeeb sons of Nizam-ud-Din  and Qaisar

Rehman was present at their land situated at Mouza  Sohan.

In the meanwhile  accused persons namely Allah Ditta,

Wasim  and Saqib while equipped  with machetes  and Fahim

(present  petitioner) armed with pistol and Imran s/o

Mashooq Hussain alongwith  two unknown  persons  carrying

batons, who were already  present over there suddenly

emerged. While raising Lalkara that they would be taught

a lesson  regarding filing  of a case of land, Allah Ditta while
brandishing  his  dagger  proceeded  towards his uncle

Asghar, who in order  to save his life turned  back, but Allah

Ditta gave his dagger blow on his back side which  landed

on right side of belly,  therefore, Asghar  fell on the ground.

Other  uncle of the complainant  Najeeb  proceeded to save

his brother, but accused Wasim gave dagger blow, which
landed on lower side of his left ribs. Saqib accused  gave

dagger blow on Qaiser which  landed  on lower side of his
back. In the meanwhile  Faheem shot fire on the
complainant  but luckily he was saved &  turne hit Allah

Ditta (co-accused) on his feet. Due to firing of Faheem

Imran (co-accused) also received  fire arm injuries.  Injured

Asghar and Najeeb were removed to the Hospital  and

subsequently Asghar  succumbed  to the injuries. On the

written application  of the complainant  the instant F.I.R.

was registered.
3. 

Learned  counsel  for the petitioner  contends

t the allegations  levelled against the petitioner are false

Crl.Misc  No.233-8 of 2O13

J

and frivolous;  that nothing has been recovered  from the

possession of the petitioner;  that the case of the petitioner

falls within the ambit of further inquiry; that in fact the

complainant party was aggressor,  who had launched

murderous assault  upon the petitioner and his family, in

which the petitioner's brothers  received fire arm injuries

and the petitioner received injuries on his head and the

petitioner's  brother lodged  cross version  in this respect

against the complainant  party; that despite prior arrival of

the petitioner to the Police Station and thereafter to the
Hospital, the police did not register a case; that the

investigation  has been completed, therefore,  petitioner

Conversely,  learned Standing counsel  assisted

may be enlarged on bail.
4. 
by learned  counsel  for the complainant vehemently
opposed the bail. It is contended that the offence  falls

within the prohibitory clause  of Section 497 Cr.P.C;  that

F.I.R. was lodged promptly and the petitioner is specifically
nominated in the F.I.R.; that the complainant  has

specifically  mentioned  that the accused party was already
present over at the scene of occurrence; that the
petitioner  facilitated  the co-accused in commission of
offence; that due to  mere non-recovery,  the petitioner
cannot be enlarged on bail. It is further  contended that

counter version was got lodged as a counter blast with an

inordinate  delay of 15 long days; that the accused party

s grudge and motive for the commission  of offence,

Crl.Misc  No.233-8 of 2O13

4

therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the concession of

bail.
5. 

Heard arguments anxiously and studied the

record minutely.
6. 

Record shows that the name of petitioner

specifically figures  in the F.I.R. with a specific role, which

was promptly  lodged. As regards  counter version  is

concerned,  it may be pertinently  held that the same was

got lodged after a considerable  delay, which prima facie

casts serious doubts. Under the law at the bail stage, it is

not permissible  to dive deep into the merits of the case,

but only cursory perusal  of the prosecution  evidence  and

material collected by the Investigating  Agency has to be

taken into consideration,  which prima facie proves the

involvement of petitioner  in the commission of heinous
offence. The petitioner  has actively participate in the

commission of offence. The present petitioner  alongwith

co-accused pre-planned  a scheme and in execution  of

such plan participated  in the commission  of the offence,

therefore,  the question of vicarious  liability  is applied with

full force. The petitioner  is involved in a heinous  offence,

which otherwise falls within the prohibitory  clause of

section 497 Cr.P.C. The presence of petitioner at the place

of occurrence  has not been specifically  denied by the
learned  counsel for the petitioner. At present,  the

prosecution  poSSeSSes  sufficient  incriminating  evidence

the petitioner and co-accused

inst 

Crl.Misc  No.233-8 of 2O13

5

7. 

To put in a nutshell, the petitioner  is not

entitled to the concession of bail, consequently the instant

bail petition is dismissed.

It will be relevant to observe  that the view
B. 
expressed  in the instant bail petition is purely for the

purpose of bail and it shall not prejudice  the case of either

party at the trial.

-&o,

hi

