ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl. Misc. No.253-B/2021 
Muhammad Naseer 
VS
The State & another 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel 
where necessary.  

22.04.2021 

Syed Khawar Ameer Bukhari, Advocate for petitioner. 

Syed Naeem Shah Bukhari, Advocate for Respondent No.2. 

Mr. Sadaqat Ali Jahangir, State Counsel.  

Asif Khan, S.I., P.S. Ramna, Islamabad  

        MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this 

criminal  miscellaneous  petition,  the  petitioner  has 

prayed  for  his  post  arrest  bail  in  case  FIR  No.25,  dated 

21.01.2019, under Section 302/324/34 PPC, P.S. Ramna, 

Islamabad.     

2. 

Succinctly,  on  21.01.2019,  when  Zahoor  Ahmed 

(Respondent  No.2  /  complainant)  along  with  his  wife 

Mst.  Raheela  Bibi  (deceased)  were  heading  towards 

residence,  Naseer  Khan 

(petitioner)  along  with 

Muhammad Rehman and Fazal Rehman intercepted the 

complainant  and  deceased  near  Abu  Huraira  Masjid, 

Dhok  Kashmirian,  Sector  G-12,  Islamabad  and  opened 

fire upon them hitting the complainant on his chest and 

left  arm,  while  Mst.  Raheela  Bibi  (deceased)  received 

fire-arm  injury  on  her  head.  The  motive  behind  the 

crime was allegedly  the contracting of love marriage of 

complainant  with  Mst.  Raheela  Bibi  (deceased).  After 

registration  of  FIR,  the  petitioner  has  been  arrested 

 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
       
 
Crl. Misc.No.253-B/2021   

                           [2] 

while the other two co-accused persons are still at large. 

The petitioner applied for his post arrest bail before the 

learned Additional Sessions Judge-IV (West), Islamabad, 

which  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  13.01.2021. 

Hence, instant post arrest bail application.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  on 

the  alleged  day  of  occurrence,  the  petitioner  was  not 

present  in  Islamabad,  rather  he  was  in  Peshawar,  as 

such,  the  petitioner  being  a  poor  laborer  never  moved 

outside Peshawar; that the petitioner is innocent and has 

falsely  been  involved  in  the  instant  case  by  the 

complainant  with  malafide 

intention  and  ulterior 

motives;  that  the  prosecution  story  is  highly  doubtful 

and does not support the version of the complainant, as 

such, 

there 

is  no 

likelihood  of 

the  petitioner’s 

abscondance or influencing the prosecution evidence, if 

enlarged on bail.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as 

learned counsel for respondent  No.2 opposed the filing 

of  instant  post  arrest  bail  application  on  the  grounds 

that  petitioner  is  directly  nominated  in  the  FIR,  who 

made fatal firing upon the complainant and deceased, as 

such, the weapon of offence has also been recovered on 

the  pointation  of  petitioner,  per  se,  challan  under 

Section  173  Cr.P.C.  has  been  submitted  against  the 

petitioner,  even  otherwise,  the  offence  with  which 

petitioner has been charged falls within the prohibitory 

 
 
 
Crl. Misc.No.253-B/2021   

                           [3] 

clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C., therefore, he is not entitled 

for concession of post arrest bail.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Tentative  assessment  of  the  record  reveals  that 

petitioner  has  been  nominated  as  accused  in  case  FIR 

No.25, dated 21.01.2019, under Section 302/324/34 PPC, 

P.S. Ramna, Islamabad with specific role of committing 

murder of Mst. Raheela and also causing  grievous hurt 

to her husband Zahoor Ahmad i.e. the complainant, on 

21.01.2019, at about 12:20 p.m. in the area of Sector G-12, 

Islamabad. 

7. 

It  has  been  observed  that  due  to  contracting  of 

love  marriage  of  complainant  with  the  deceased  lady, 

the  real  brother  of  deceased  lady  made  a  murderous 

attack  upon  the  complainant’s  family  members,  as  a 

result whereof, case FIR No.594, dated 22.12.2015, under 

Sections  302/324/34  PPC,  P.S.  East  Cantt.,  Peshawar 

was registered and the real brother of deceased lady was 

convicted by the learned trial Court at Peshawar.  

8. 

As  per  stance  of  the  complainant,  the  petitioner 

along  with  other  co-accused  persons  Siyab  Khan, 

Muhammad  Rehman  and  Fazal  Rehman  chased  both 

the  husband  and  wife  i.e.  complainant  and  deceased 

lady from Peshawar to Islamabad and resorted to firing 

in the  broad  daylight  near  Abu Huraira Mosque, Dhok 

Kashmirian,  Sector  G-12,  Islamabad,  whereby  the 

complainant’s  wife  succumbed  to  injuries  while  the 

 
 
 
Crl. Misc.No.253-B/2021   

                           [4] 

complainant  survived  from  the  fire-arm  injuries  in  the 

alleged incident. 

9. 

The  entire  record  discloses  the  prima  facie 

involvement  of  the  petitioner  in  the  hideous  crime  of 

murder having been committed in a callous, brutal and 

sensational  manner,  as  such,  the  offence  with  which 

petitioner has been charged falls within  the prohibitory 

clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C., even otherwise, there is no 

ground  of  further  inquiry  argued  by  the  petitioner  in 

this case nor any legal ground to grant post arrest bail is 

reflected  from  record.  In  such  circumstances,  when 

challan  has  already  been  submitted  in  the  Court  on 

13.07.2020, charge was framed and  even the  weapon of 

offence  was  recovered  on 

the  pointation  of 

the 

petitioner, he is not entitled for concession of post arrest 

bail,  per  se,  the  other  three  co-accused  persons  have 

been declared proclaimed offenders by the learned Trial 

Court. 

10. 

In  such  circumstances,  instant  post  arrest  bail 

application  is  not  made  out  and  same  is  hereby 

DISMISSED. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
 JUDGE 

Khalid Z. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
