)

JUDGMENT  SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.
ISLAMABAD

Writ Petition No. 265612015

Muhammad Dildar etc
VS
C.D.A. etc.

PetlUoners  by:

Respondents  by:

Raja Shafqat  Khan Abbasi, Advocate.
Mr. Ghulam Shabbir Akbar, Advocate

Date of Hearing:

10.03.2020.

FIAZ AHMAD  ANJUM JANDRAN.  J:-  Through  the
instant writ petition, petitioners (Legal heirs of one Ali
Muhammad  who died in the year of 1964)  sought  direction
against the respondents-CDA  for allotment of residential
plots in lieu of their acquired land.
2.  Facts, relevant for the disposal of instant writ petition
are that land measuring  28 Kanal 3 Marla owned by Ali
Muhammad (predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners)
situated in mouza Ojri Kalan, presently  Sector l-8, was
acquired by the respondents-CDA  through Award dated
07.06.'1963.  The compensation regarding acquisition  of
said land was paid to the petitioners. Thereafter a scheme
with the title "Rehabilitation of Effectees  of the lslamabad"
was introduced  by the respondents,  firstly in the year 1984
and then in 1996. The petitioners being eligible for
residential plots in the developed  sectors,  as per policy,
submitted their  representations/  applications on
11.12.1982 & 12.12.1982, available at page 37 of the file.
The respondents processed the applications  submitted by
the petitioners as per law and finally the Allotment Scrutiny
Committee,  constituted  by the respondents,  submitted
proposal alongwith a certificate that land owned by the
predecessor  in interest of the petitioners  measuring  28
Kanal 3 Marla  was acquired by the respondents  and till that
day no rehabilitation  benefits had been extended to the

W.P.  No.265&2015.

2-

petitioners. The report of the respondents  is available  in
case file. Thereafter  in the year 2015 the respondents
offered a prescribed form which, too, was filled and
submitted by the petitioners. On somehow or the other,  the
case of the petitioners  remained pending  with the
respondents  but they could not get the benefit  which
constrained them to file the instant  writ petition  in the year
2015. The reporUpara-wise  comments were submitted  by
the respondents alleging  certain defects in the present
petition.
3.  Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that
petitioners  have been meted with discrimination; that all
inhabitants/effectees  of mouza Ojri Kalan, presently  Sector
l-8, had been given residential  plots as per their
entitlement;  that petitioners  are entitled to seven  plots
measuring  30x60 sq.ft each in lieu of their acquired land as
per policy of 1984; that similarly  placed  individual namely
Shamir  Ahmad  son of Saeed Khan had been allotted  plots
No.1248  to 1251 and the benefit was extended to many
others; that petitioners have legal entitlemenUright to be
allotted  residential plots as per policy but the respondents
are acting illegally by not performing  their duty which,
under the law, they are required to perform.  Learned
counsel placed reliance upon case laws reported as
Mlskeen Sultan vs CDA through Chairman (2012 YLR 2OB9).
Syed All Shah vs Government of Paklstan  through  frrlnletq/ of
Defence  and 2 otherc (1994  CLC 369). Federatlon of Paklstan
through Secretary  lllnlstry of Housing and Works lslamabad  vs
filst. lsmat  Qayyum Mallk  (PLD  1994  Lahore 360). Professor Rtd.
llasood  ul Hassan vs Muhammad  lqbal (PLD lgg0 Lahore 177).
vs Works
The Karechl Develooment  Authoiltu
cooperatlve  Houslng socleU. Karachl  and another  (rg7? scilR
307). SutleJ cotton filills Llmlted okara vs lndustrtat court west
Pakistan Lahore and otherc (PLD  1966 sc 472) and iltan Rafi ud
Dln and 6 otherc vs The chief settlement and Rehabilrbtton
Commlssloner  and 2 otherc (PLD t97l SC 252).

-3-

Heard the learned counsel for the parties and

W.P.No.265&2015. 
4. 
Learned  counsel for respondents-CDA  submits that
as per report  submitted  by the respondents there are
certain deficiencies  in the claim of the petitioners  qua the
family unit; learned counsel reiterated the averments
submitted  through  the report, however lastly submits  that
as per paragraph No.14 of the report  available at page 3 of
the written comments,  petitioners  are entitled to only one
plot.
5. 
examined  the record  with their able assistance.
6.  The record available  on file shows that admittedly
land of the petitioners was acquired by the respondents
and procedural  formalities in this respect were also
conducted  by the respondents.  The Scrutiny Committee of
the respondents submitted  report to the respondent No.1
wherein  acquisition  of land of the predecessor in interest of
the petitioners was admitted  and not a single plot under the
scheme  of rehabilitation  of the effectees of lslamabad  has
been offered  to the petitioners.  The record is also evident
that petitioners  are wondering/pursuing their cause/
request from pillar to post since 1999 but even no
justifiable  response/reply has been given by  the
respondents.
7. 
Needless to mention  that all public functionaries
including the respondents  are required  to act stricfly in
accordance with law and not otherwise. lf the respondents
had made a policy with the title "Rehabilitation  Policy for
Effectees of  lslamabad" then when record of  the
respondents  themselves  speaks  genuineness  of claim
submitted  by the petitioners, by not offering them benefit
as per their entitlement amounts  to refrain from doing  an
act which the law requires  them to do. lf there is any
controversy  that whether number of plots, as per said
policy, are one or more, as per claim of the petitioners, but
none had been offered  to the petitioners.  Even no plausible

W.P.  No.2656-2015.

-4-

reason has been extended by the respondents  regarding
allegation  of discrimination, put forth by the petitioners.
8. 
Keeping in view the report submitted  by the
respondents, minutes  of the Scrutiny Committee,  the case
law submitted  by the learned counsel for the petitioners
and its application  to the facts of case in hand and other
documents  regarding claim of the petitioners,  respondents
are directed to act strictly in accordance with law and
issue allotment letter in favour of the petitioners as per
their entitlement. The matter is  pending with the
respondents  since 1999, therefore, three months'  time is
granted  for compliance  of the above direction.
9. 
terms.

The instant writ petition is disposed of in above

Suhall

Announced in open Court on 19 -oh-Loz,

(F' AZ AHMAD  ANJUM JANDRAN)
JUDGE

