t

Form  No:  HCJD/C-121
JUDGMENT SHEET.

rN THE rSI-AMABAD HIGH COURTT
ISLAMABAD.

Writ Petition  No.3442 of 2019

Ms. Faiza Mir and 03 others.

VS

Civil Judge/Family  Judge,  East Islamabad  and another.

Petitioners  By

Mir Aurangzaib,  Advocate.

Respondents By

Syed Adil Safdar  Gardezi,  Advocate for
respondent  No.2.

Date of Decision

L7.t2.2019

x***x

AAMER  FAROOQ. J. - This petition calls in question  orders dated

25.05.2019  and 29.05.2019, whereby  permission  was granted to respondent

No.2 to pay the interim  maintenance

2. 

The facts, leading to filing of the instant  petition,  are that the

petitioners  filed a suit for recovery  of maintenance  allowance  against  respondent

No.2. In the said suit, an order for interim nraintenance  was  passed,  whereby

the amount of maintenance  was to be deposited by or before 14th of every

month. It seems  that respondent  No.2 did not make the payments  timely  and on

the said basis has been  making  applications  for permission to deposit  the

maintenance after the expiry of prescribed  time and the petitioners are

aggrieved  of the same and seek setting aside of the said orders and also striking

off of the defence  of respondent  No.2.

-2-

lUrit Petition  No.3442 of 2019

3

Learned  counsel  for the petitioners,  inter-alia,  contended that under

Section t7A, af the order regarding  deposit of the interim maintenance is not

complied  with the natural  corollary of the same is striking  off of the defence. It

was contended  that the orders passed  by the learned Trial Court  granting time to

respondent  No.2 for deposit  of the interim maintenance  are without  jurisdiction.

4

Learned counsel for respondent  No.2, inter-alia, contended  that all

the receipts have been  appended  with the reply indicating that respondent  No.2

has been following the orders  and paying interim  maintenance  to the petitioners.

5. 

Arguments  advanced by learned counsel for the parties have  been

heard and the documents placed  on record  examined  with their able assistance.

6

The facts, leading to filing of the instant  petition, have been

mentioned  hereinabove,  therefore,  need not be reproduced.

7. 

The learned  Tria!  Court  passed  order under Section t7A of the Family

Courts Act, 1964  against  respondent  No.2,  whereby,  he was directed to pay the

interim  maintenance by or before  14th  of every month. Respondent  No.2 though

had been making the payments  in compliance of the order but belatedly.  In

order to resolve the controversy  whether,  under the facts and circumstances,  the

defence of respondent No.2, who is defendant in the suit filed by the petitioners,

is to be struck  off; the examination of Section  L7A, the Family  Coutts  Act, 1964

is essential.  For ease of convenience,  the said provision  is reproduced  below:-

ul7A.  Suit for maintenance.-  (1)  In a suit for maintenance,  the Family
Court  shall, on the date of the first appearance  of the defendant, Jix
interim monthly maintenance  for wde or a child and d the defendant fails
to pay the maintenance  by fourteen  day oJ'each  month, the defence of the
defendant shall stand  struck  off and the Family Court  shall decree  the suit
for maintenance  on the busis of uverments in the plaint and other
supporting  documents  on recorcl of the  case.

(2) In a decreefor maintenance, the I'amily Court  may:

-3-

lYrit Petition  No.3442 of 2019

(a) -ftx an amount  of maintenance  higher than the amount prayed
for in the plaint due to afflux oJ' time or any other relevant
circumstances;  and

(b) prescribe  the annual increase  in the maintenance.

(3) If the Family  Court does not prescribe  the annual increase  in the
maintenance,  the maintenance  Jixecl  by the Court shall automatically
stand increased  at the rate often percent  each year.

(4) For purposes  of fixing the maintenance,  the Family Court may
summon  the relevant  documentary  evidence  from any organization, body
or authority  to determine  the estate and  resources  of the defendant."

The bare perusal of Section 17A ibid shows that where order is passed for

interim  maintenance, the payment  has to be made by fourteenth  day of each

month. The word used in Section  17A is 'shall',  however,  the consequence  of

failure to pay the requisite  amount  of interim  maintenance attracts striking off

the defence  and the word used  is 'may'for the said purpose.  The striking off of

the defence is not mandatory but rather discretionary. Interpreting the said

provision  in case repofted as "Muhammad  Khalid Javeed VS Mst. Shahida

Parueen and 4 others.'(2007 YLR 7366),  it was observed that striking  off of

the defence  of the defendant in all suits is illegal and un-lawful.  However,  where

default  is continuing  the learned  Trial Couft  may keeping in view the conduct  of

the defendant  and strike off the defence  at any stage.

8.

In the instant  case, the learned  Trial Court so far has not struck off

the defence of the defendant/respondent  No.2 but has been granting time for

deposit of the maintenance. The case is at stage of evidence and it would be

appropriate  to conclude the trial. However, if respondent  No.2  persist with the

defaults, his conduct may be kept in view by respondent  No.l and the penal

effect of Section t7A of the Family  Coufts Act,  1964 be attracted.

-4-

Wril Petition  No.3442 of 2019

9

In view of the above, the instant petition  is dismissed  as the orders

impugned do not warrant  interference.  Respondent  No.l is also directed to

conclude the trial within a period of two (02) months  from  the date of this order.

*M.  Zaheer Janjua*

ER FAROOQ)
JUDGE

