ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT,
ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

1. Crl.Misc No. 184'B I 2OL7

Imtiaz Ali Khokhar alias Taji Khokhar
VS
The State and another

2. Crl.Misc No. 185 -B I 2OL7

Imtiaz Ali Khokhar alias Taji Khokhar
VS
The State and another

S.No.  of
proceedings

Date of
orderl
p roceedinqs

Order  with signature of judge and that of
parties or counsel where necessary.

2L.04.20L7 Syed Zahid Hussain Bokhari, Advocate

for the petitioner.
Mr. Muhammad  Fakhar  HaYat Awan,
Advocate  for the comPlainant.
Complainant in person.
Mr. M. Akram Gondal,  State Counsel.
Mr. Nauman Munir Peracha, Advocate
for SZABIST.
Shaukat Hussain, InsPector/I.O.
Munir Ahmed  S.I.

Through this  single order, the  above
mentioned two bail petitions are being  decided, which  have
arisen out of same controversy/occurrence.
Petitioner  Imtiaz Ali Khokhar alias Taji
2. 
Khokhar s/o Allah Ditta seeks bail after arrest in case
F.I.R. No.41 dated L9.02.2013  registered  u/ss 302,34,109
P.P.C, with Police  Station Koral, Islamabad  and in private
complaint  filed by complainant  Anees-ul-Afreen  in the said

Crl.Misc No. 184-B/2017  &
L85-B/2077

2

occurrence, in which,  in addition to above  offences, offence

u/s 201 P.P.C was also included.
3. 
Pithily,  the facts of the case as presented by
the complainant  are that he is owner of a house situated in
Dhoke Gangal East. Some time ogo, Rashid s/o Abdur
Razzaq,  Tanveer  s/o Khan Muhammad Mistri and Imran
s/o Allah Ditta tried to take illegal possession, therefore,
they got injunctive order and also moved application to the
Police Station  Koral.  On the fateful day i.e. 19.02.2013 at
about 12:00  noon he alongwith  his brother  Ishtiaq-ul-
Salkeen  and Shamas-ul-Arfeen was constructing  the
house,  when Imran s/o Allah Ditta, Sajid s/o name not
known and Tanveer  s/o Khan Muhammad  Mistri all armed
with Kalashnikovs  came over there and restrained  them
from raising  construction.  The assailants threatened them,
therefore, they went inside the house due to fear. Then the
assailants came over the roof of adjacent house.  Imran
made burst of Kalashnikov  which hit Khalid Farooq slo
Ishtiaq-ul-  Sallkeen  inside of his left shoulder, who fell on
the ground and succumbed  to the injuries. The trio
decamped from the place of occurrence.  Complainant
further added that the offence  was committed at the
instigation of Imtiaz Ali Khokhar  alias Taji Khokhar/present
petitioner.
4. 
In Crl. Misc No. LB5-Bl20t7 it is disclosed  that
during investigation  of above F.I.R, it proved that the
petitioner  was falsely  involved in this case and there was
no evidence of abetment,  therefore, a private  complaint
was filed. After issua nce of  process, the petitioner
submitted an application under Section 91 Cr. P'C in
private complaint  before the learned  ASJ, Islamabad in
which the petitioner  was directed to submit bail bonds to
the tune of Rs.one lac with one surety. However,  the
complainant challenged the order dated 22.6.2013  before
this court in Crl, Revision,  which was disposed of with the

Crl.Misc No. 184-B/2OL7  &
785-B/20t7

J

observations  that the fate of the case is to be decided  by
the court concerned  i.e trial court on submitting the bail
application. In pursuance whereof, bail applications  of the
petitioner in  both the matters have been dismissed
through consolidated  order dated  t8.3.20t7.
5. 
In support of petitions, learned counsel  for the
petitioner contended  that the petitioner is an old man of 64
years, who is suffering  from multiple diseases. The
petitioner  was under treatment in Jail Hospital, but the
functioning  of kidneys was failed, therefore, h€  was
immediately shifted to Holy Family Hospital, Rawalpindi in
a critical condition where he was admitted on 01.03.20t7.
It is added  that in Holy Family  Hospital due to heart attack
the petitioner  was shifted in a critical condition to the
Rawalpindi  Institute of Cardiology.  Thereafter, he was
shifted back to Holy Family  Hospital,  where the petitioner
is going through the process  of dialysis. The petitioner
requires specialized  treatment for the curement  of diseases.
It  is vigorously contended that the  petitioner is in
incarceration  for the last more than 3Vz years. The
petitioner  was not present at the place  of occurrence and
the only allegation  against the petitioner is of abetment.
There is no detail of witnesses  in the police record.  The
allegation of abetment levelled against the petitioner  is ex
ante. The petitioner  being old, weak and seriously sick and
infirm person  is entitled to the concession of bail. To
supplement  his submissions,  learned counsel relied upon
Fidous Paul v. The State (2004 SCMR 15), Mumtaz Ali
Khan v. The State (2001 P Cr. L J t406 [Lahore]) and
Zar Muhammad  v. Mian Jafar shah and another  (PLD
2009 Supreme Court 707).
6. 
Conversely,  learned  State Counsel assisted  by
learned counsel  for the complainant vehemently  opposed
the bail. It  is contended that the petitioner is habitual
criminal with stinking  reputation,  who is involved in

Crl.Misc No. 184-Bl20L7  &
Lgs-B/2Ot7

4

number  of criminal cases;  that the offence  was committed
at the behest of the petitioner; that for arrest of the
petitioner, the Hon'ble  Supreme  Court of Pakistan took suo
motu notice and then he was arrested; that the case is at
evidence  stage; that statements of some witnesses have
been recorded; that the required treatment of the
petitioner can be provided at the Hospital of his choice  and
presently the petitioner is being medically  treated  by
highly qualified doctors  and professors;  that the offence
falls within the prohibitory  clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C;
that the deceased was done to death  in a cruel and chilling
manner; that there is  strong evidence  against  the
petitioner;  therefore, he is not entitled to the concession
of bail. To orchestrate  their arguments they have relied
upon Mamaras v.  The State &  others (2009 CrlJ
543);Ghulam  Qammber  Shah v.  Mukhtiar Hussain
and others  (PLD 2015 Supreme Court 66);Malik Javaid
Iqbal v. The State and others (PLD 2015 Supreme  Court
250), Babar  Hussain v. The State and others (2016
SCMR 1538); Naseem Malik v. The State (2004 SCMR
283)i Wazir Gul v.  The State (2016 YLR Note 27
IPeshawar];  Muhammad Imran v.  The State and
others (2016 SCMR 1401); The State v. Haji Kabeer
Khan (PLD 2005 Supreme  Court 364) and Ghulam
Ahmed  Chishti v. The State and another (2013  SCMR
38s).
7. 
submissions  made and perused the record minutely.
Perusal  of  record reveals that statements
8. 
about abetment were recorded  on 25.07.20t3  with a delay
of  almost 5  months and one week. Interestingly,
particulars  of witnesses i.e parentage, caste, age and
addresses examined by the police u/s 161 Cr. P.C have
not been mentioned. Private complaint  was filed on
03.5.2013 but even in that complaint no reference  of

I  gave anxious  consideration to  the

Crl.Misc No. 184-Bl2017  &
LBS-Bl20L7

5

witnesses mentioned  above is provided.  Ailment  of
petitioner  is admitted. In compliance with order of this
court, Medial Officer, Central lail  Adiala Rawalpindi
observed as under:-

"As per order of the Honourable  Islamabad High Court,

Islamabad  vides No.11698/criminal  dated 29.03.2017  '
It is stated that under trial prisoner lmtiaz  Ali Khokhr  @ Taii
Khokhar  S/O Allah Ditta aged about 64 years is suffering from:-

o  Hypertension
o  Diabetes Mellitus with  its  complications  like

Retinopathy,  Nephropathy  and Neuropathy

.  Left Maxillary Sino-Nasal  Polyposys with  super added

fungal sinusitis.
o  Chronic Renal Failure.

Under Trial prisoner  presented

28.02.2017  with following  complaints.

jail  hospital

1n

on

--+

---+

---+

---)
--)

Cough 
02 days
Unable to sleep straight
Shortness  of breath on sitting
Decrease  appetite
Vomiting

Investigations  carried out on advice of medical  specialists

Dr. Arshad Iqbbal  Satti DHQ  Hospital Rawalpindi  which  showed:

Serum  Creatinine
Serum  Urea
Serum  Potassium
Haemologlobin

./
{
!
Urgent consultation  done with nephrologist  Dr. Naveed

7.54mgldl
48 mg/dl
5.9 mmol/I
6.29m/dl

Sarwar, AP Nephrology  Holy Family  Hospital,  Rawalpindi.

Who  diagnosed  him as a case of RENAL  F-AILURE and

advised urgent  DIALYSIS.

Under trial prisoner shifted to Holy Family  Hospital  on

01.03.2017 for dialysis on emergency basis.

Till date under trial prisoner admitted in CCU at Holy
Family Hospital,  Rawalpindi.  Latest  health  condition  of under trial
prisoner  received vide No.MODIT  dated 30.3.2017 which showed"-

"Mr. Imtiaz Ali 66 yrs old gentleman  presented in Medical
Emergency  Holy  Family  Hospital, on l't March 2017 at 08.46 PM'
He is known  diabetic for last 16 years on insulin  thcrapy,
hypertensive  for last 4 years.  He has got end stage renal disease
and peripheral  vascular disease  with left big toe amputated. Ile was
admitted in ccU  under care of Medical  unirl  0n list Match2017
with Dyspnoea NYI{A class  III. He was anaemic  with B.P 110/60

Crl.Misc No. 184-812017  &
L85-B/20L7

6

mmHg,  crepts upto mid zone, Chest X-ray  shows  cardiomegaly &
left lobar opacity.  His Hb was 6.5 TLC was 14.6, Urea 193,
Creatinine  7.0 K 6.8 LFT'S normal.  Ist session of Haemodialysis
was done  on 2nd March 2017  and was given  02 RCC's  with
Haemodialysis. After 72 fus patient was markedly  improved with
Dyspnoea  a NYHA class-I. HB was 8.8, TLC was 15.1,K 4.7.
During  hospital stay he was given broad  spectrum IV antibiotics
(inj) Moxifloxacin,  inj Meropenam,  Asprin, Rosuvastatin,  and
Heparin  500 ru B.D. His blood  Culture was negative.  Then he
developed Apprehension with no history of chest  pain ECG
showed  ST segment  elevations in lead VI, Y2 and V3. His
Echocardiography  was done  on 4th March  2017, which  showed
normal sized LV with antero  apical, distal  septal  & distal lateral
wall hypokinesia with EF 30 Yo and trace pericardial  effusion with
no evidence  of thrombus.  He was immediately  shifted  to RIC,
Rawalpindi  on 04th  March,  2017,  where  Professor,  Brig Qaiser and
Assistant Prof. Dr. Hamid Shreef reviewed  the patient. He was
treated according to ACS protocol, Coronary  intervention  and
thrombolytic therapy  was not offered because of his co morbidities
and advised conservative  treatment.  Then  he was  shifted  back to
Holy Family  Hospital, Rawalpindi  on 5th March 2Ol7 for
nephrology consultation  and  management.  Once he was shifted
back to  Holy Family Hospital,  Rawalpindi  he developed
intermittent  Atrial Fibrillation,  started  with Tab Cordarone  200 mg
OD. After 72 hrs he regained  sinus  rhythm. He was  reviewed  by
Dr. Imran Saeed Ali, Assistant  profession,  visiting Cardiologist
Benazir Bhutto  Hospital and Head of Department Cardiology,
Rawalpindi Medical College who agreed with the present
management  Plan. Later on he developed  Hematuria  with drop in
Hb from l1 to 6  gldl with prolonged PT/APT'|.  Then his
Rivaroxaban  and heparin  was  stopped.  He was given vitamin K
and FFPs for 03 days. ECG  shows left axis deviation  and
generalized  I'wave inversion in Vl to V6. During  Hospital  stay he
developed  UTI and given antibiotics  according to culture and
sensitivity.  He is on insulin R 06 IU TDS. His blood sugar levels
are within optimal range.  His l5 sessions  of Haemodialysis  done
almost  on altemate days and 06 units of blood transfused  during
Haemodialysis. Last investigations done  on29th march 2017,'|LC
3.4,Hb 10.3, Platelets 279,  PT, APTT normal,  urea 46, Creatinine
2.5 K 3.7 LFT'S  normal.  He requires Haemodialysis  on ahernate
days."

It is obvious from report that above said under trial require
specialized tertiary  care treatment and  dialysis  on alternate days
which is not possible  in jail hospital."

9. 
For further satisfaction vide order dated
31.03.20L7 this court directed  Vice Chancellor, Shaheed
Zulfiqar  Ali Bhutto University to constitute a medical board
and in compliance  with the same a Medial Board was
constituted and report was submitted, which is reproduced
herein below in verbatim:-

Crl.Misc No. 184-B/2017 &
785-8/2017

7

"The medical board met on 15.04.2017  and examined  above
patient. Also his previous  record  was reviewed in detail  by the
board members.
He is a long standing  diabetic  with multiple complications
including ischemic  heart  disease with congestive  failure,
retinopathy with visual impairment, nephropathy  leading to end
stage  renal disease  and requiring  renal replacement  therapy in the
form of hemodialoysis  thrice  weekly  and he has evidence  of
peripheral  vasculopathy  with Lt. Big toe already  amputated.
His latest  clinical  status is of marked  debilitation  and he is bed
bound.  There  is fluctuation  in his symptoms  severity as recently he
stayed  in Rawalpindi Institute of Cardiology for Acute  coronary
syndrome. He has generalized  changes  of ischaemia  on ECG  and
echocardiography  shows  moderate left ventricular  dysfunction
(EF3s %).
The board is of the opinion  that with all his comorbidities  he
should stay hospitalized  with multi disciplinary  management
approach.  With his clinical  status such a management  is not
possible  in jail hospital.  "

10. 
Above  reports clearly show that the petitioner
is suffering from serious  ailments and complainant  side
could not deny this fact, perhaps this was the reason that
no challenge was put to the reports. The petitioner was
arrested on 05.08.2013  when he was brought from Dubai
in compliance  with order of apex court. The role ascribed
to the petitioner,  evidence available  on record and the
allegation of abetment, prima  facie are not of much value
and significance as persons examined  by the police with
the names  of Muhammad Rizwan and Abdul Qadir have no
identity on record. The Inspector/I.O  of the case in so
many  words  admitted in the court that both the persons
were brought by the complainant,  but he did not bother  to
take details about the persons produced and incorporated
in statements  u/s 161 Cr, P.C. I have no doubt that this
approach of the I.O/Inspector is not only dishonest but
speaks  volume of incompetence and lack of understanding
about the requirement  of law, The way he proceeded  in
the matter, I  am fully satisfied that this official is not
competent  to handle  investigation of even a minor  case

Crl.Misc No. 184-B/2OL7  &.
78s-B/2077

8

what to talk of case involving  capital punishment. Copy of
this order  be communicated to the IG , ICT, Islamabad  for
holding an inquiry and if found guilty to take action against
him in accordance  with law.
11. 
From the available  evidence  and allegations, I
am convinced  that the petitioner  has made out a case of
further inquiry under Section 497 (2) Cr.P.C.  The petitioner
admittedly suffering  from serious illneis which requires
treatment of  choice, special  diet and conducive
atmosphere.  Reliance in this regard is placed on L997 P Crl
L J 348. Moreover,  allegations  of abetment cannot be
found sufficient to deprive  any accused of his fundamental
right guaranteed  by Article 9 of the Constitution  of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan,  t973.
L2. 
Although, trial has commenced  and normally
courts do not interfere to grant or refuse  bail at this stage
of proceedings. But this rule is not absolute  and when any
accused successfully makes  out his case of further  inquiry,
bail is granted. Guidance  on this is sought from PLD 1989
Supreme  Court 585, 1997 P Cr L J 847, PLD 1989 Lahore
233 and 1991 SCMR  322, on point of absence. As far
judgments relied upon by learned  counsel for  the
complainant  are concerned,  the same  are not applicable  to

the facts and circumstances  of this case.
13. 
The net result that flows from the above
discussion  is that the petitioner is entitled to concession of
bail in both the matters.  Consequently,  both the petitions
are allowed and the petitioner is admitted to bail, subject
to furnishing  bail bonds in the sum of Rs.25-lacs  with two
sureties  each in the like amount to the satisfaction  of the
learned  trial Court.
14. 
The learned  trial court is directed to conclude
the trial within a period  of three months without granting
un-necessary  adjournments and submit compliance  report
till 29th July, 20t7.

Crl.Misc No. 184-8/2017  &.
LB'-B/2OL7

9

15. 
The name of the petitioner  shall be placed on
ECL. Office is directed  to do the needful in this regard.
However, the petitioner will be at liberty for his treatment
at the hospital of his choice within the country.

DGE

Sabir

Approved for reporting

