ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.  

: 

W.P. NO.1968-2016 

Muhammad Azam Khan Hoti (deceased) through Mst. Humaira Azam Hoti 
VS    
Mst. Shamim Akhtar Kiyani etc. 

CASE NO.  

: 

W.P. NO.1969-2016 

Muhammad Azam Khan Hoti (deceased) through Mst. Humaira Azam Hoti 

VS    
Mst. Shamim Akhtar Kiyani etc. 

Petitioner by             : 
Respondents by       : 
Date of hearing       : 

In person    
Mr. MNA Rehan, Advocate  
21.06.2023 

AAMER FAROOQ C.J.   The  present  judgment  shall  decide  instant  writ 

petition as well as W.P. No.1969-2016, as common questions are involved.  

2. 

The  predecessor-in-interest  of  the  petitioner  namely  Muhammad  Azam  Khan 

Hoti filed a suit for jactitation of marriage against respondent No.1 Respondent No.1 

also  filed  a  suit  against  the  deceased  seeking  recovery  of  maintenance  with  costs. 

Another  suit  was  also  filed  by  one  Shah  Nawaz  against  respondent  No.1  on  the 

ground that she is his lawful wedded wife hence conjugal rights be restored. The suit 

for jactitation of marriage was filed by the deceased on the premise that Mst. Shamim 

Akhtar is not his wife, as he never contracted marriage with her; whereas respondent 

No.1 filed a suit on the basis that she and deceased were married and she instituted a 

suit for maintenance by way of settlement deed, in which, certain amount was to be 

paid to her, however, despite the same, amount has not been paid, therefore, the suit. 

Three  suits  were  consolidated  and  were  decided  through  a  consolidated  judgment 

dated 29.10.2015 by the Judge, Family Court, West-Islamabad, whereby the suit titled 

‘Shah Nawaz VS Mst. Shamim Akhtar’, was dismissed; likewise, the suit filed by the 

deceased  for  jactitation  of  marriage,  was  also  dismissed,  whereas  suit  filed  by 

respondent  No.1  against  the  deceased,  was  decreed  in  her  favour.  Appeals  were 

preferred before the District Judge against the impugned judgment dated 29.10.2015. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. Nos.1968 & 1969-2016 

2 

During pendency of the appeals, Shah Nawaz withdrew his appeal, however, appeals 

filed by the deceased, were also dismissed by the appellate court vide judgment dated 

26.02.2016.  It  is  pertinent  to  state  here  that  during  pendency  of  the  proceedings, 

Muhammad Azam Khan Hoti passed away and was succeeded by Mst. Humaira Afzal 

Hoti  (the  present  petitioner)  as  well  as  respondents  No.2  to  5.  The  dismissal  of  the 

appeals  was  challenged  by  the  petitioner  by  way  above  mentioned  writ  petitions  for 

decree  of  the  suit  in  favour  of  respondent  No.1  and  dismissal  of  the  claim  of  the 

deceased regarding jactitiation of marriage. Other legal heirs of the deceased namely 

respondents  No.2  to  5  filed  a  separate  writ  petition  (W.P.  No.2040-2016),  which 

subsequently, was withdrawn and was dismissed as not pressed.  

3. 

The  petitioner,  in  person,  contended  inter  alia  that  the  deceased  was  never 

married  to  respondent  No.1  and  that  dismissal  of  the  suit  of  the  deceased  and 

acceptance  of  the  suit  filed  by  respondent  No.1  is  based  on  misreading  and  non-

reading  of  evidence.  It  was  submitted  that  both  the  courts  i.e.  trial  court  as  well  as 

appellate court have dealt with the Issues No. 2 & 4 incorrectly and the findings are 

based  on  conjectures  and  surmises.  It  was  submitted  that  respondent  No.1,  during 

course of proceedings, contradicted her version and also had no proof of divorce by 

one  Muhammad  Ayub,  hence  her  marriage  with  him,  was  still  intact  when  allegedly 

she  married  the  deceased.  It  was  further  contended  that  respondent  No.1  has  not 

denied  the  claim  of  Shah  Nawaz  with  respect  to  his  Nikah  with  which  was  duly 

exhibited  as  Exh.DW-5/1  on  16.09.2014;  moreover,  in  her  affidavit  Exh.P1,  she  has 

suggested  that  her  Nikah  was  registered  with  Union  Council-23  on  13.02.2022,  but 

said fact has not been corroborated and negated the statement of Muhammad Saeed 

(PW-1),  who  is  Secretary,  Union  Council-23.  It  was  contended  that  the  impugned 

judgments are against the facts and law; that Dr. Naseem Ashraf (PW-8) has admitted 

that  Exh.P-3  has  not  been  prepared  by  him.  It  was  submitted  that  photographs 

exhibited  do  not  show  that  respondent  No.1  contracted  Nikah  with  the  deceased.  It 

was submitted that this is the sole reason that deceased, during his life time, instituted 

proceedings  for  jactitation  of  marriage  denying  the  factum  of  marriage  between  him 

and  respondent  No.1.  It  was  submitted  that  there  are  many  contradictions  in  the 

statements of the witnesses led by respondent No.1. It was contended that trial court 

 
W.P. Nos.1968 & 1969-2016 

3 

has wrongly relied upon the statement of Tasleem Akhtar, allegedly stated to be the 

sister of Muhammad Ayub. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submits  that  instant 

writ  petitions  are  not  maintainable  inasmuch  as  some  of  the  legal  heirs  of  the 

deceased  have  already  withdrawn  their  claim  against  respondent  No.1.  It  was 

contended that even-otherwise, the judgments and decrees passed by trial court and 

appellate court do not suffer from any error of law or fact warranting interference; that 

the  claim  has  been  duly  proved  by  respondent  No.1  through  cogent  evidence  and 

there is no contradiction as far as the witnesses are concerned.  

5. 

Submissions made by the parties have been heard and the documents, placed 

on record, examined with their able assistance.  

6. 

The controversy, raised in the above writ petitions, has been mentioned here-

in-above.  

7. 

As noted, the petitioner is aggrieved of dismissal of the suit by the deceased 

for jactitation of marriage and decree of the claim in favour of respondent No.1. 

8. 

The concept of ‘suit for jactitation of marriage’ was explained by the Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  reported  as  Muhammad  Azam  VS  Muhammad  Iqbal  and 

others (PLD 1984 Supreme Court 95), wherein it was observed as follows:- 

“The term 'jactitation' mentioned at item No. 7 of the Schedule was added thereto by 
an amendment made in 1969. It came up for interpretation and consideration before 
superior  Courts  in  several  cases.  In  Mst.  Arnina  Begum  v.  Ghulam  Nabi  and  2 
others (PLD 1974 Lah 78), jactitation of marriage was held to mean literally "false 
pretence" of being married. It was further held that the suit in regard thereto could 
not be confined to a declaration that there was no marriage. There can be different 
types of suit in the field of jactitation and it would include also a suit for declaration 
that a person posing himself to be a spouse (husband or wife), was doing so falsely. 
In  other  words  any  assertion  by  a  patty  regarding  marriage  and  its  denial  can  be 
brought before the Family Court through a suit for jactitation of marriage. It was also 
held  that  such  suits  which  are  based  on  the  denial  of  the  defendant  regarding 
marriage  are  not  now  cognizable  by  a  civil  Court  on  account  of  section  5  of  the 
Family Courts Act. Similarly in Tajoo v. Mst. Sattaran (PLD 1974 Lah 105), it was 
observed that a suit for declaration that the defendant is not the husband or wife of 
the plaintiff but the defendant alleges so is a suit for jactitation of marriage and was 
entertainable in a Family Court. In Mst. Zohran Bibi v. Manzoor Ahmad and 2 others 
(PLD  1975  Lah.  318),  it  was  held  theft  the  Family  Courts  Act  laid  stress  on 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. Nos.1968 & 1969-2016 

4 

expeditious settlement in disposal of matrimonial disputes. Regarding jactitation of 
marriage  it  was  observed  that  in  a  suit  where  it  was  asserted  that  the  defendant 
(plaintiff's wife) had been divorced through an effective Talaq and that she could no 
more  claim  to  be  married  to  the  plaintiff  in  an  existing  wedlock,  was  a  suit  for 
jactitation of marriage and was exclusively triable by a Family Court. The judgments 
in  that  case  of  the  Civil  Court  and  its  appellate  Court  (on  the  civil  side  although 
presided over by the same person who was empowered to act as Family Court but) 
without the consciousness of the law contained in the Family Courts Act, were set 
aside  as  without  jurisdiction.  In  Mst.  Sakina  and  2  others  v.  Nasir  Ali  (4),  a 
somewhat contrary view was expressed namely that although a suit for jactitation of 
marriage could be filed in a Family Court and it could grant a declaration whether 
matrimonial  relationship  existed  between  contestants  but  when  the  parties  other 
than husband and wife raise such a claim, the suit will have to be filed before a civil 
Court under section 54 of the Specific Relief Act ; mainly because, the prohibitory 
decree  would  be  claimed  under  the  said  law  and  that  the  Family  Court  was  not 
competent to grant the same. In that case in a suit before a civil Court the persons 
who  Were  alleging  themselves  spouses  inter  se  and  also  others  who  supported 
them were jointly sued for a relief in the nature of jactitation of marriage. The civil 
Court  held  that  it  was  not  competent  and  that  it  fell  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Family  Court.  The  first  appellate  Court  upheld  the  decision  and  the  High  Court 
notwithstanding the expression of the aforenoted opinion upheld the decision of the 
two  lower Courts.  It  was not  clarified  as to  whether two  different forums would be 
able  to  decide  the  same  subject-matter  involving  same  issues  although  the  main 
defendant would be the same. A more clear enunciation of law in this behalf can be 
found  in  Nazar  Qasim  v.  Mst.  Shaista  Parveen  (1979  C  L  C  462).  A  suit  for 
jactitation  of  marriage  was  held  to  imply  the  object  to  perpetually  silence  a  false 
allegation  or  claim  of  marriage.  In  this  case  in  a  suit  for  jactitation  of  marriage 
consequential relief was sought for the cancellation of a Nikahnama as forged one. 
It  was  held  that  it  did  not  change  the  character of  the  suit  which  remained  as  for 
jactitation of marriage and its trial by- a civil Court was barred. Reliance in this case 
was placed on Mst. Fahmida Bib! v. Mukhtar Ahmad and another (P L D 1972 Lah 
694)  wherein  it  was  held  that  it  is  a  well-settled  law  that  though  a  Court  may  not 
have jurisdiction to entertain a suit in respect of certain matter yet it is competent for 
the Court to entertain a plea based on that, in defence when the determination of 
that  question  is  necessary  for  the  decision  of  the  suit  itself  which  is  within  its 
exclusive  jurisdiction.  Accordingly a  Family  Court could  not  refuse  the  decision on 
similar questions if raised before it by any party. Thus an issue regarding jactitation 
of  marriage,  could  be  competently  raised  before  the  Family  Court  even  by  a 
defendant, when it is not the subject-matter of the suit filed by the plaintiff. It is in this 
wide context that in the case of Manzoor Ahmed v. Muhammad Nawaz Siddiqui and 
5  others  (PLD  1975  Lah.  739),  Karam  Elahee  Chauhan,  J.  as  he  then  was, 
observed  and  held  that  the  existence  of  a  wedlock  at  the  time  of  suit  is  not 
necessary  for  claiming  the  dower  because  an  ex-wife  who  is  divorced  having 
contracted a second marriage and children from that wedlock, cannot be estopped 
for a Waiving her dower money from her ex-husband if she files a suit before Judge 
Family Court. In that respect she cannot be told that "since your wedlock with the 
ex-husband at the time of the suit is no longer subsisting, therefore, your claim has 
ceased to be a dower-claim and cannot be gone into by Judge, Family Court". The 
nature of the claim is one thing but the time at which it is being claimed is another 
thing. Since the nature of the claim both in the case of an ex-wife or heirs of an ex-

W.P. Nos.1968 & 1969-2016 

5 

wife is essentially the recovery of "dower" that remains so always and the mere fact 
that it is being claimed by the heirs of the deceased wife does not detract anything 
from its real character. The various items of the Schedule referred to the true nature 
of the subject-matter of a suit and not the persons who may file or institute it. 

From these weighty observations it can safely be concluded that a suit, regardless 
of  its  timings  can  be  filed  by  a  person  other  than  the  spouses  involved  in  the 
jactitation of marriage. And so can a suit be filed by the spouses, against third party, 
with a view to prevent them from denying their marriage” 

9. 

The question pertinent in the above position of law and facts is that whether the 

petitioner  has  the  locus  standi  to  initiate  writ  petitions  and  pursue  the  same,  finds 

support  from  the  judgment  reported  as  Irshad  Ahmad  VS  Muhammad  Sharif  and 

another  (2003  YLR  2290),  in  which,  it  was  observed  that  the  matter  could  only  be 

brought  by  the  spouse  before  the  Family  Court,  otherwise  the  court  of  plenary 

jurisdiction, has the jurisdiction in the matter.  Similar observations were made in case 

reported as Liaqat Ali VS Additional District Judge, Chunian, District Kasur and others 

(2008 SCMR 519). 

10. 

The findings of trial court and the appellate court are concurrent in nature and 

generally no interference is to be made in the same unless it is based on misreading 

or non-reading of evidence. Reference is made to  Muhammad Habib VS Mst. Safia 

Bibi (2008 SCMR 1584). The examination of the judgments by trial court as well as 

appellate court shows that they have passed the same after discussing evidence led 

by the parties and no substantial contradiction exists in this regard, hence it cannot be 

taken  that  there  is  any  misreading  or  non-reading  of  the  evidence.  The  judgments 

handed down are well-reasoned and do not suffer from any error of law or fact. This 

Court,  in  its  jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  cannot  reappraise  the 

evidence  and  only  has  to  see,  if  there  is  any  misreading  or  non-reading  of  the 

evidence. As already observed, there is no misreading or non-reading of the evidence 

either by the trial court or the Appellate Court warranting interference. Moreover, the 

impugned judgments do not suffer from any error of law or of jurisdiction.   

11. 

The fact that with respect to the claim of maintenance, some other legal heirs 

have  withdrawn  their  claim  does  not  per  se  jeopardize  locus  standi  of  petitioner  to 

agitate the matter, as it is trite law that every legal heir is a co-sharer hence, in her 

  
 
 
 
 
W.P. Nos.1968 & 1969-2016 

6 

capacity as co-sharer, the petitioner was well within rights to institute proceedings and 

press  the  same.  Reference  is  made  to  cases  reported  as  Faiz  Ullah  VS  Dilawar 

Hussain  (2022  SCMR  1647)  and  Mst.  Raj  Begum  (Deceased)  VS  Mst.  Ajaib  Jan 

(Deceased) (2022 SCMR 1394). 

12. 

For  what  has  been  stated  above,  instant  petitions  are  without  merit  and  are 

accordingly dismissed.  

Announced in Open Court on 29.01.2024 

Zawar 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
