ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P  No. 1734 of 2021 
Nazakat Ali 
VS
Neelam Akhlaq, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of 
parties or counsel where necessary. 

   25.11.2022  Mr. G. Shabbir Akbar Advocate for petitioner, 

Mian  M.  Zafar  Iqbal  Advocate  for  respondent 
No.1. 

ARBAB  MUHAMMAD  TAHIR  J:  Through  the  instant  writ  petition, 

petitioner  namely  Nazakat  Ali  impugns  Judgments  and  Decrees  dated 

13.01.2020 & 16-01-2021 passed by the learned Judge Family Court and 

the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  West-Islamabad  respectively, 

whereby  respondent  No.  1  namely  Neelam  Akhlaq  was  held  entitled  to 

recover  dower  and  dowry  articles  except  a  gold  ring  gifted  to  the 

petitioner at the time of wedding, in case of default, the petitioner shall 

pay its market value prevailing at the time of execution, the respondent 

No.  1  also  held  entitled  to  get  Rs.  5000/-  per  month  as  maintenance 

allowance till the completion of her Iddat period whereas the minor son 

was held entitled to get maintenance allowance @ Rs. 6000/- per month 

since March, 2017 till his legal entitlement with 10% annual increase. In-

appeal, the judgment and decree of the learned trial Court was modified 

to the extent that period of maintenance for minor was fixed from July, 

2017  instead  of  March,  2017  with    10%  annual  increase  till  his  legal 

entitlement.  

2- 

The  learned  counsel  argued  that  the  quantum  of  maintenance 

determined  and  fixed  for  the  minor  does  not  commensurate  with  the 

financial position of the petitioner whose monthly income is Rs. 16193/- 

and in such meager amount, has to maintain his other wife and mother as 

well;  that  both  the  learned  Courts  failed  to  appreciate  the  affidavit  Ex. 

D/4  sworn  by  the  respondent  No.1  in  its  true  perspective  and  that  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WP  No. 1734-2021 

- 2- 

impugned  judgments  and  decrees  being  against  the  law  and  facts  are 

liable to be set aside.  

3. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  No.1 

repelled  the  above  submissions  by  contending  that  there  are  concurrent 

findings on facts by the two learned Courts, that the claim of respondent 

No.1  for  the  recovery  of  dower,  dowry  articles  and  maintenance 

allowance  has  been  established  through  un-rebutted  evidence  therefore, 

petition is liable to be dismissed.    

4. 

Heard, record examined.  

5. 

Perusal of record reveals that the marriage between the petitioner 

and  respondent  No.  1  was  solemnized  in  October,  2009.  It  lasted  for 

about  seven  years (2009-2016) and  ultimately  led to separation by  way 

of  divorce  on  03.10.2016.  Rehan  Ali,  the  minor  is  son  of  ex-spouses. 

Nikah Nama Ex. P/2 is an admitted document and as per its column No. 

13,  gold  ornaments  weighing  three  Tola  were  given  to  the  respondent 

No.1 in lieu of dower amount.  

6. 

As per version of the respondent No.1 in her suit for declaration 

cancellation  of  affidavit  dated  26.06.2015,  permanent  injunction,  under 

paragraph No. 7 she maintained that she filed suit for recovery of dowry 

articles,  dower  three  Tola  in  the  shape  of  gold  ornament  which  is  in 

possession  of  the  defendant,  maintenance  allowance  to  the  plaintiff  till 

Iddat period and past and future maintenance to her minor son which is 

pending  before  the  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad  and  the  defendant 

misused  the  same  alleged  affidavit  against  the  plaintiff  which  is 

absolutely wrong and illegal.  On the contrary, the petitioner pressed his 

stance  on  the  basis  of  affidavit  dated  26.06.2015  Ex.  D/4  whereby  the 

respondent No.1, statedly had forgiven claim of dower of three Tola gold 

ornaments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WP  No. 1734-2021 

- 3- 

7. 

It is significant to note that the learned trial Court had specifically 

framed issue No. 1, to the effect that whether affidavit dated 26.06.2015 

is a product of fraud and the onus to prove the said issue had been upon 

the  plaintiff/respondent  No.  1.  Issue  No.1  along  with  issue  No.  7 

disposed  of  being  not  pressed.  It  is  thus  obvious  that  the  question  of 

validity or otherwise of the affidavit Ex. D/4 remained undecided as the 

respondent No.1 opted not to press the said issue, might be for the reason 

that she had already filed a separate suit for declaration in respect of the 

said affidavit Ex. D/4 as it being product of fraud. The petitioner, on the 

other hand, in order to substantiate Ex. D/4 got examined one Shaukat as 

DW-2,  who  asserted  regarding  execution  of  Ex.  D/4  by  the  respondent 

No. 1 in affirmation. In such state of affairs when the respondent No. 1 

herself opted not to discharge onus to prove issue No. 1 and herself filed 

the suit questioning the Ex. D/4, there was no justification to render any 

observation on the validity of Ex. D/4, as was done in paragraph No. 11 

of  the  judgment  by  the  learned  trial  Court  to  the  effect  that  “that 

production of Ex. D/4 by the defendant is sufficient to show that dower in 

question  is  not  in  possession  of  the  plaintiff  No.  1”  Likewise,  tentative 

observation to the effect that Ex. D/4, if executed then it was on account 

of undue influence.  

8. 

For  reasons  mentioned  above,  the  findings  of  the  two  learned 

Courts  on  the  issue  of  recovery  of  dower  amount  are  not  legally 

sustainable  as  the  question  of  validity  or  otherwise  of  Ex.  D/4  is  the 

subject matter of the Suit, subjudice before the learned Civil Court which 

action, the respondent No1 herself initiated and in the family suit opted 

not to press the relevant issue.   

9. 

However, the concurrent findings of the two learned Courts on the 

aspect of recovery of dowry articles, maintenance of Iddat period and the 

maintenance  for  the  minor  at  the  rate  of  6000/-  per  month  from  July, 

2017 with 10% annual increase appear to be in accordance with evidence 

on record.  

 
 
 
 
 
WP  No. 1734-2021 

- 4- 

10. 

In view of above, impugned judgments and decrees to the extent 

of dowry articles, maintenance of the minor and for the Iddat period as 

well are not open to any exception and are accordingly upheld while the 

judgment  and  decree  to  the  extent  of  dower  amount  are  not  legally 

sustainable and are accordingly set aside.  The suit to that extent shall be 

deemed pending, to be decided afresh, after the decision of the suit of the 

respondent  No.  1  for  declaration,  cancellation  of  Ex.  D/4  permanent 

injunction.  The  suit  bearing  No.  200  titled  “Neelam  Akhlaq  v.  Nizakat 

Ali”  pertains  to  the  years  2019,  therefore,  the  learned  trial  Court  shall 

make every  endeavor to conclude the trial within shortest possible time 

preferably within a period of one month from the receipt of this order. 

11. 

The instant writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.  

(ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR)  

      JUDGE 

**//Kamran//** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
