Judgment  Sheet 
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

W.P.  No. 3662/2013 

Irfan Ullah. 
VS 
Ministry  of Petroleum  and  Natural  Resources,  etc. 

Petitioner by: - 

Mr.  Sohail  Chaudhry,  Advocate  and 
Ms.  Fakhra  Sultan,  Advocate  alongwith 
petitioner  in person 

Respondent No. I by:-  Mr.  Nazar  Hussain  Shah,  A.A.G. 

Respondents No.2-4 by: -Mr.  Abdul  Wali  Irfan, Advocate 

Date of hearing: - 

14.01.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Oambrani. 

J:  -  Through  the  instant 

constitutional  petition,  the  petitioner  seeks  a  direction  to  the 

respondents  to  act  in  accordance  with  law  and  further  to  fulfill 

their  part  of obligation  and  the  petitioner  be  considered  for the 

post  of  Senior  Administrative  Officer  in  the  respondents' 

company. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of the  case  are  that  the  Mari  Gas  Company 

started  survey  for  exploration  of  Oil  and  Gas  in  the  area 

belonging to the petitioner  and major portion of petitioner's  land 

has  been  used  during  this  survey;  that  the  petitioner  fully 

supported  the  company with  the  hope  that  petitioner's  area will 

be developed through this exploration; that the petitioner  and his 

W.P.  No. 3662/2013 

2 

family is well known in the area and they also advised other land 

owners of the area not to create any hurdle in the survey process; 

that  while  acquiring  the  land  of  the  petitioner  and  other  land 

owners  of the  area,  the  respondents  promised  that  the  petitioner 

and  other  youth  of the  area  will  be  given  employment  in  the 

respondents'  company on preferential basis being affectees of the 

area;  that  the  petitioner  and others  applied  for  different  posts  in 

the respondents'  company (respondents No.2 to 4), as a result of 

which  the  petitioner  and  others  were  called  for  interview  on 

11.04.2012, whereupon  the petitioner  was directed to  wait while 

the other six candidates were selected by the respondents; that the 

petitioner  had  applied  for  the  post  of  Senior  Administration 

Officer  but  he  has not  been  appointed  till  date  whereas  the  said 

post is still lying vacant. 

3. 

Petitioner  submitted  that  the  petitioner  is  MBA  and  is 

qualified  for  the  post  of  Senior  Administration  Officer;  that 

during  the  survey the  respondents'  company  not  only  destroyed 

the  land,  crops,  which  were  cultivated  and  were  ready  to  pick; 

that the  respondents  have  also cut down countless trees  over the 

land  of  the  petitioner  and  also  took  away  same  trees  without 

permission  of  the  petitioner  for  which  no  damages  have  been 

paid; 

that 

the  petitioner 

time  and  again  approached 

the 

respondents  but  they  did not  pay  any  heed  to  the  request  of the 

W.P.  'lo. 3662/2013 

3 

petitioner  and  did  not  appoint  him  on  the  post  of  Senior 

Administration Officer, which is  still lying vacant. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents 

assisted  by  the  learned  Assistant  Advocate  General  submitted 

that  the  petition 

in  hand  is  not  maintainable  because  the 

grievance of the petitioner is not against a person but the same is 

against respondent No.3 which is a listed public limited company 

incorporated  under  the  laws  of  Pakistan  and  is  admittedly  not 

controlled by the Federal or any Provincial  Government;  that the 

petitioner  was  admittedly  interviewed  and  his  credentials  were 

duly  considered  but the  petitioner  was  not  found  fit  for the  said 

post of Senior Administration Officer; that it is the prerogative of 

the  employer  to  adjudge  as  to  whether  a  candidate  is  fit  for  a 

particular  post or not, as such the petitioner has no right to  insist 

for  his  appointment  against  the  post  of  Senior  Administration 

Officer.  Further  submitted  that  the  fact  that  the  petitioner  was 

called for interview by the management of respondent No.3 does 

not  give  rise  to  any  right,  contractual  or  otherwise,  enforceable 

under  Article  199 of the  Constitution  of the  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan,  1973  and  that  in  absence  of  violation  of  any  right, 

petitioner cannot be termed as an aggrieved person. Lastly argued 

that the instant petition is liable to be dismissed on account that it 

W.P.  No. 3662/2013 

4 

does  not  fulfill  any  conditions  provided  for  invoking  the  extra  

ordinary jurisdiction  under Article 199 of the Constitution. 

5. 

I  have heard  learned counsel  for the parties  and have  also 

perused the record. 

6. 

Admitted facts of the case can well be ascertained from the 

written  comments tendered  by respondent No.3.  In reply to para 

( d)  of  preliminary  objections/  submissions,  respondent  No.3 

averred that  "admittedly the candidates whose  names  have  been 

cited by the petitioner  in Para 6 of the petition  were selected for 

different positions/jobs  after due evaluation  and  not for  the post 

for  which  the  petitioner  was  interviewed  and  considered, 

therefore, no case of discrimination is even made out". 

7. 

Likewise  under  para  6  of  reply  to  merits,  it  was  asserted 

that  "the petitioner  was  invited for  interview and  his  credentials 

were  thoroughly  evaluated  by  the  Management  of  respondent 

No. 3  and petitioner  was found  not fit/suitable  for  the position  of 

Senior Administration  Officer and he was not selected." 

8. 

Not  only this  but  in reply  to  para  No.9  to  13,  respondent 

No.3 asserted that the Company had been involved in exploration 

operation  from the  area of the petitioner. The claim  of petitioner 

respecting  exploration  operation  from  their  land;  selection  of 

various  persons  of  the  same  vicinity  for  the  job  and  their 

interview,  is  admitted  fact  as  highlighted  above,  therefore,  it 

W.P.  No. 3662/2013 

5 

cannot  be  said  that  the  petitioner  retains  no  right  even  to  be 

considered for a suitable post. 

9. 

Keeping  in  view  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case, 

instant  petition  stands  disposed  of  with  direction  to  respondent 

No.3  to  consider  the petitioner  as per  his  qualification  against  a 

suitable  post  at  par  with  other  inmates  of  the  locality.  Needful 

shall be done  within a period of two months  from receipt  of this 

order. 

~ZAMQ~ 

JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON  /]-- 

) 

12020. 

"Imtiaz" 

