ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No. 323 of 2020 

 Mst. Sobia Shaheen 

VS

Muhammad Usman. 

Date of Hearing: 

:  15.04.2022 

Petitioner by: 

:  Rana Liaqat Hayat, Advocate.  

Respondent by:  

:  Javed Iqbal Mangral, Advocate. 

____________________________________________________________ 

ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR, J. The instant writ petition is arising out 

of  Judgment  and  decree  dated  13.11.2019,  passed  by  the  Additional 

District  Judge,  Islamabad-West  whereby  appeal  of  respondent  No.  1 

against  the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated  23.05.2019  of  the  Judge 

Family Court, Islamabad-West, was partly allowed.  

2. 

Facts,  relevant  for  adjudication  of  instant  writ  petition,  are  that 

petitioner filed suit for recovery of dower in the shape of gold ornaments 

and  maintenance  for  the  period  of  Iddat,  which  was  duly  contested  by 

the  respondent  No.1  by  filing  written  statement.  The  learned  Trial 

Court  after  framing  issues  and  recording  evidence  of  the  parties 

decreed the suit vide Judgment and Decree dated 23.05.2019, in terms 

that  petitioner  was  held  entitled  to  recover  maintenance  allowance  for 

the  period  of  Iddat  at  the  rate  of  Rs.  10,000/-  per  month  besides  Rs. 

350,000/- as dower amount or gold ornaments given to her at the time 

of marriage in lieu of dower amount, and also two Tola gold ornaments. 

The  respondent  No.  1  against  the  said  Judgment  and  Decree  dated 

23.05.2019,  preferred  an  appeal  which  was  allowed  vide  impugned 

Judgment and Decree dated 13.11.2019, whereby suit of the petitioner 

to the extent of recovery of gold ornaments, in-total 9 Tolas (7 Tolas as 

Haq  Mahar  and  2  Tolas  given  by  her  parents  at  the  time  of  her 

marriage), was dismissed while decree to the extent of maintenance for 

the Iddat period was upheld. Hence, this writ petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  there  are  glaring 

contradictions  in  the  pleadings  and  evidence  of  the  respondent  No.  1; 

that  the  sole  witness  of  the  Jirga  denied  payment  of  dower  amount  in 

the shape of gold ornaments while the stance of the petitioner had been 

 
2                                                        W.P. No.323 of 2020 

consistent throughout, which was duly appreciated by the learned Trial 

Court; that the learned Appellate Court upheld the verdict of trial Court 

by exclusively placing reliance upon the affidavit i.e. Jirga proceedings 

which  were  not  proved  by  the  respondent  No.  1  by  producing  the 

members  of  the  said  Jirga,  therefore,  impugned  judgment  is  liable  to 

set aside.  

4. 

5. 

Heard, record examined.  

In  the  instant  case,  the  marriage  of  petitioner  and  respondent 

No.  1  was  solemnized  through  Nikah  Nama  Mark-A,  which  is  an 

admitted  document.  Unfortunately,  the  marriage  lasted  for  just  two 

and a half month. It is also an admitted position that the petitioner has 

since  been  divorced  by  the  respondent  No.  1,  while  the  Jirga 

proceedings  Mark-B/Ex.D1  is  the  bone  of  contention  between  the 

parties.  The  petitioner  alleges  that  no  gold  ornaments  in  lieu  of  dower 

amount  as  mentioned  in  affidavit  Ex.D-1  were  given  to  her  while,  on 

the contrary, as per the stance of the respondent No. 1 contained in the 

written  statement,  all  the  issues  pertaining  to  dower,  maintenance 

allowance  and  dowry  articles  were  settled  in  the  Jirga  and  the 

petitioner  in  token  of  its  correctness  affixed  her  signatures  and  had 

also taken away entire dowry articles.  

6. 

The  other  aspect  of  the  matter  is  that  as  per  stance  of  the 

petitioner,  the  gold  ornaments,  9  Tolas  in-total,  were  taken  by  the 

respondent  No.  1  on  the  night  of  28th-29th  June,  2017  together  with 

certain  amounts,  as  reveals  through  Para  5  of  the  plaint  and  on  her 

demand,  the  respondent  flatly  refused,  for  the  reason  that  the  same 

belonged to him. In-addition, she also asserted that the respondent No. 

1 blamed her that she left all the gold ornaments at her parents’ house. 

7. 

In  order  to  substantiate  her  claim,  the  petitioner  got  herself 

examined  as  PW-1,  besides  her  brother  Tanveer  Akhter  and  one 

Muhammad  Ayub  Bhatti,  a  witness  of  the  Jirga  proceedings.  The 

crucial  documents  in  this  case  are  affidavit  of  divorce  (Talaq  Nama) 

Ex.P-2  and  affidavit  Ex.D-1/Mark-B  (‘Ex.D-1’)  while  copy  of  Nikah 

Nama  is  Mark-A.  The  learned  trial  court  after  evaluating  the  evidence 

came to the following conclusion:- 

“That though defendant tried to establish stance 
through Ex.D-1 but once the contents of Exh. D-1 
are disputed by the plaintiff, he was burdened to 
prove  the  correctness  of  Ex.D-1  by  producing  to 
attesting  witnesses  of  the  document,  which  he 

 
3                                                        W.P. No.323 of 2020 

fails to do in the instant case. On the other hand, 
plaintiff  by  producing  one  attesting  witness  of 
Ex.D-1, who denied the contents of Ex.D-1 created 
doubt in the authenticity of Ex.D-1”. 

8. 

On the above aspect, the findings of the learned Appellate Court 

are  to  the  effect  that  as  the  petitioner  and  her  witness  admitted 

execution of Ex.D-1 and her signatures upon the same, she therefore, 

cannot  retract  from  the  same  as  a  man  can  tell  lie  but  the  document 

cannot.  

9. 

As the findings on the issue are at variance, the entire record of 

the proceedings in suit have been gone through carefully.  

10. 

It is noticed that the dispute between the spouses cropped up on 

the  night  between  28th-29th  June,  2017,  which  immediately  led  to  the 

filing  of  a  suit  by  the  respondent  No.  1  for  permanent  injunction 

against the petitioner and his brothers. In Para No. 3 of the said suit, it 

is  mentioned  that  “on  hearing  this  incident  several  persons  of  the 

locality gathered  and the plaintiff divorced the defendant No. 1 on 

her demand (copy of divorced deed is attached herewith).”  

11. 

In  the  said  suit,  there  is  no  mention  about  the  reconciliation 

proceedings  through  any  Jirga,  which  means  by  that  time  no 

reconciliation  proceedings  were  there,  and  it  is  also  clear  that  before 

the Jirga proceedings respondent No. 1 has divorced the petitioner.  

12.  The  marginal  witnesses  of  Ex.D-1  are  Muhammad  Ayub  PW-3, 

Tanvir  Akhter,  Haji  Malik  Bashir  and  Saqib  Mehmood.  The  petitioner 

had been consistent on the point that the gold ornaments given to her 

in lieu of dower together with those given by her parents were snatched 

by the respondent No. 1, and that no such ornaments were returned to 

her  pursuant  to  Ex.D-1.  One  of  the  attesting  witnesses  of  Ex.D-1 

supported  her  stance  that  no  ornaments  were  given  to  the  petitioner 

pursuant  to  said  Jirga  proceedings  rather  only  an  amount  of  Rs.1  lac 

had  been  paid  to  her.  It  is  significant  to  note  that  when  the  petitioner 

has  unequivocally  denied  the  receipt  of  gold  ornaments  pursuant  to 

Jirga  proceedings  contained  in  Ex.D-1,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the 

respondent  No.  1  to  prove  the  contents  of  said  affidavit,  by  producing 

at least two marginal witnesses of the said document but no such effort 

was made.  

13.   Another  important  aspect  of  the  matter  is  that  Ex.D-1  was  a 

settlement through the intervention of members of the locality and was 

 
 
4                                                        W.P. No.323 of 2020 

not approved by any court of law and, therefore, it cannot be said that 

the petitioner was bound by its terms and conditions as a force of law 

nor she was compelled to do so. Even otherwise, matters referred to a 

Jirga  to  settle  the  dispute  or  effect  a  compromise  between  the  parties 

without  the  permission  of  the  Court,  such  proceedings  will  not  be 

having  blessing  or  backing  of  the  Court,  therefore,  action  will  not  be 

protected by the law. Reliance is placed  upon case of “Shazia Bibi v. 

State” 2004 P.Cr.L.J. 1523.  

14. 

In  addition  it  is  also  observed  that  in  Nikah-Nama  Mark-A,  it  is 

mentioned  that  dower  amount  of  Rs.3,50,000/-  in  the  shape  of  seven 

tola gold ornaments has been paid to the petitioner who subsequently 

alleged that respondent No.1 had taken away the same which also led 

to a skirmish on the night between 28th-29th of June, 2017 where after 

respondent  No.1  fled  away  from  the  house  and  then  filed  a  suit  for 

permanent  injunction,  referred  above.    Unlike  specific  entry  in  Nikah-

Nama Mark-A, Ex.D-1 affidavit did not specifically state anything about 

the  said  gold  ornaments  rather  it  is  mentioned  in  clause  3  of  Ex.D-1 

that  the  petitioner  in  presence  of  Jirgah  has  received  dowry  articles 

maintenance  and  no  dispute  is  left  between  the  parties.  The  petitioner 

was  bound  by  the  said  document  that  she  could  not  sue  the 

respondent  No.  1  in  terms  of  maintenance,  dower  and  dowry  articles. 

In  clause  4,  it  is  stipulated  that  the  petitioner  has  got  written  this 

affidavit  as  an  acknowledgement  of  receipt  of  dower  amount, 

maintenance  and  dowry  articles.  Had  it  been  the  case  that  petitioner 

had received dower in the shape of gold ornaments it should have been 

mentioned in Ex.D-1.  

15.  Averting  to  the  contents  of  Ex.P-2  (Divorce  deed)  it  is  mentioned 

in Clause 3 of Ex.P2 that petitioner has received dowry  articles, dower 

etc,  before  the  members  of  the  Jirgah.  When  the  petitioner  denied  to 

have received any gold ornaments pursuant to Jirgah proceedings, and 

the  fact  that  one  of  its  witnesses  namely  Muhammad  Ayub  PW-3 

corroborated  her  version  by  further  stating  that  only  Rs.  100,000/- 

were  given  to  her,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  respondent  No.  1  to 

produce marginal witnesses of divorce deed Ex.P-2 and affidavit  Ex.D-1. It 

was  also  for  the  reason  that  it  had  been  the  stance  of  the  respondent 

No.  1,  either  in  his  first  suit  or  in  the  written  statement  that  the 

petitioner  had  taken  away  the  gold  ornaments  to  her  parents’  house. 

 
5                                                        W.P. No.323 of 2020 

When  the  petitioner  was  already  in  possession  of  the  ornaments  then 

there is no explanation as to why she was again paid any consideration 

in lieu of dower amount to Clause 3 of Ex.P-2 (Divorce Deed). 

16.  To  sum  up,  it  is  established  from  the  evidence  on  record  that 

marriage  of  the  petitioner  was  solemnized  with  respondent  No.1 

through Nikah Nama Mark-A wherein its column No.13 dower amount 

of Rs.3,00,000/- was mentioned, which has been paid to the petitioner 

in the shape of 7-tola gold ornaments. In addition, she was given gold 

ornaments  weighing  2-tola  from  her  parents  at  the  time  of  marriage, 

receipt  whereof  had  been  tendered  as  Ex.P-4  while  she  remained  firm 

on  this  aspect  during  cross-examination  which  is  corroborated  by  the 

testimony of her witness PW-2.  On the aspect of taking back the gold 

ornaments,  her  stance  was  consistent  as  reveals  through  plaint,  her 

statement  that  remained  unshaken  despite  cross  examination,  duly 

corroborated by the statement of her brother while to refute the same, 

the  respondent  No.1  opted  not  to  contest  the  suit  himself  and 

appointed  his  brother  as  Special  Attorney.  The  eagerness  to  counter 

the  claim  of  the  petitioner  for  the  recovery  of  gold  ornaments,  quite 

visible  from  the  contents  of  first  suit  filed  by  the  respondent  No.1, 

wherein  he  had  taken  the  stance  in  para-3  that  the  petitioner  had 

taken  away  the  ornaments  from  the  house  of  her  parents,  lends 

support  to  the  stance  of  the  petitioner  regarding  taking  back  the 

ornaments  by  respondent  No.1.  Significantly  by  that  time,  the 

respondent  No.1  has  since  divorced  the  petitioner  as  reveals  through 

para-3 of the said suit. It is also established that after the rift cropped 

up between the spouses, the very first action had been from the side of 

respondent  No.1  by  way  of  filing  suit  for  permanent  injunction  on  the 

next  day  i.e.  30.06.2019  and  then  a  day  thereafter,  the  two  writings 

Ex.P-2 and Ex.D-1 were made, which are short of details with regards to 

the  delivery  of  gold  ornaments.  By  the  time  Jirga  proceedings  were 

held,  respondent  No.1  had  already  divorced  the  petitioner  and  thus 

before  the  said  proceedings,  had  been  under  obligation  to  pay  dower 

amount  or  gold  ornaments  stipulated  in  Nikah-Nama,  and  it  not  so 

happened  even  during  Jirga  proceedings,  reduced  into  writing  as  Ex. 

D1  or  Ex.  P2  because  no  specific  entry  in  this  regard  is  mentioned 

therein.  

 
6                                                        W.P. No.323 of 2020 

17.  Having  gone  through  the  record  of  the  case,  it  appears  that  the 

findings  of  the  learned  Appellate  Court  are  not  legally  sustainable  for 

reasons  mentioned  above  while  that  of  the  learned  Trial  Court  appear 

to be correct appreciation of evidence on record. Consequently, instant 

writ  petition  is  allowed,  impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  dated 

13.11.2019 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Islamabad 

(West) is set-aside while judgment and decree of the learned Trial Court 

dated 23.05.2019 is restored. Parties are left to bear their own costs.   

(ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR) 

JUDGE   

Announced in open court on   ____.05.2022. 

JUDGE.  

A.R.Ansari 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
