Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

       IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Murder Reference No. 80 of 2009. 

                                                   The State. 
                                          VS 

Shahid Azeem.   

      APPELLANT BY:        Mr Jan Muhammad Khan, Advocate. 

RESPONDENT BY:    Mr Muhammad Ishaq Shah, Advocate. 

Malik Awais Haider Awan, State Counsel.  

  DATE OF HEARING:  11.04.2018.         

ATHAR MINALLAH, J.-  Through this judgment 

we  shall  answer  Murder  Reference  no.  80  of  2009  and  decide 

Criminal Appeal no. 506 of 2009 (Shahid Azeem VS The State). 

Shahid Azeem son of Muhammad Shafi (hereinafter referred to 

as the “Appellant”) was tried and consequently convicted and 

sentenced  vide  judgment,  dated  05.12.2009,  rendered  by  the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad  in  the  following 

terms;- 

“Hence, the accused Shahid Azeem son of 

Muhammad Shafi, is convicted under Section 302-

B of PPC for committing murder of Sadia Hussain, 

minor 07 years old girl and is sentenced to capital 

punishment of death. He be hanged by neck till 

his death. He is also fined to tune of Rs.1,00,000/. 

He is further directed to pay compensation under 

Section  544-A  of  Cr.P.C.,  to  the  tune  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
     
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

Rs.1,00,000/- to the legal heirs of the deceased. 

The accused will undergo six months SI if he fails 

to pay the fine. The accused Shahid Azeem, is also 

convicted  under  Section  376  of  PPC  for 

commission of rape with the minor girl and is 

sentenced to capital punishment of death. He be 

hanged  by  neck  till  his  death.  He  is  further 

convicted under Section 364 of PPC and sentenced 

for kidnapping minor Sadia with the intention to 

commit rape and with the knowledge that rape 

may result in her death and is sentenced to 10 

years RI alongwith fine of Rs.50,000/-. It is also 

proved from the record that the accused threw 

away the dead body of deceased Sadia over the 

Mumty in order to conceal evidence of his act and 

is punished under section 201 PPC to the extent of 

07 years RI alongwith fine of Rs.50,000/- failing 

which he shall also undergo SI for 6 months.”      

2.   

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  the  Appellant  is  a  dual 

national.  He  holds  nationality  of  the  Kingdom  of  Norway  in 

addition to that of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. As an owner 

of House no. 1312, Street no. 12, Sector I-10/2, Islamabad, the 

Appellant had rented out the ground portion to Akhtar Hussain 

son  of  Nawab  Khan  PW.14  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

“Complainant”).  The  latter,  at  the  time  when  the  occurrence 

had  taken  place,  was  living  on  the  ground  floor  as  a  tenant 

along  with  his  family  which  included  his  07  year  old  daughter, 

 
 
3 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

namely  Sadia  Hassan 

(hereinafter 

referred 

to  as 

the 

“Deceased”). The Appellant was living in the upper portion of 

the  same  house.  The  Complainant  informed 15  on  15.10.2007 

that the Deceased had not returned home after she had gone to 

play  in  the  park  in  the  afternoon.  On  receiving  information 

Shams-ul-Akbar,  SI  visited  the  house  of  the  Complainant  and 

communicated  the  information  to  the  concerned  Police  Station. 

The  Complainant 

filed  an  application  at  Police  Station, 

Sabzimandi, stating therein that the Deceased was missing. The 

said  application  was  filed  on  29.10.2007,  Ex.P.M.  /  P.M.1. 

Another  application  Ex.P.N.  was  filed  by  the  Complainant  on 

04.11.2007, stating therein that he apprehended that someone 

had  abducted/kidnapped  his  daughter  probably  for  demanding 

ransom.  Pursuant  to  the  said  written  complaint  Criminal  Case 

i.e.  FIR  no.  249,  dated  04.11.2007,  was  registered  under 

section  364-A  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860  (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  “FIR”).  On  24.11.2007,  the  occupant  of 

House  no.  1313,  Street  no.  12,  Sector  I-10/2,  Islamabad, 

namely  Rafique  Ahmed  PW.2,  noticed  a  body  lying  on the  roof 

of the head room above the stair case well (hereinafter referred 

to  as  "Mumty")  of  the  adjacent  house  i.e.  House  no.  1314. 

Rafique  Ahmed  PW.2,  therefore,  informed  his  neighbours 

including  the  Complainant.  The  Police  Station,  Sabzimandi  was 

also  informed  and  pursuant  thereto  Shams-ul-Akbar/SI  PW.15, 

reached the crime scene. He prepared a memo of identification 

of  the  dead  body  Ex.P.P.  and  a  rough  site  plan  Ex.P.AA.  Two 

bricks,  local  tobacco  in  the  form  of  a  pill  of  'Naswar'  and  two 

 
4 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

crushed left over cigarette butts were also taken into possession 

vide  respective  recovery  memos.  The  dead  body  was  sent  for 

conducting  an  autopsy.  Dr.  Sadia  Zia,  PW.10  conducted  the 

postmortem  Ex.P.H/P.H-1.  She  entered  the  witness  box  as 

PW.10  and  confirmed  a  mark  having  been  found  around  the 

neck  and  also  that  the  Deceased  had  been  raped.  She  was  of 

the  opinion  that  death  was  caused  due  to  strangulation  and 

having been raped. Dr. Farrukh Kamal, PW.11 was also present 

when  the  autopsy  was  conducted  and  confirmed  preparing  the 

postmortem 

report  Ex.P.H  and  Ex.P.H-1,  pursuant 

to 

instructions  given  by  Dr.  Sadia  Zia,  PW.10.  The  last  worn 

clothes  were  handed  over  to  the  Investigating  Officer  and  the 

same  were  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo  Ex.P.V. 

On  25.11.2007,  Muhammad  Akram  prepared  a  scaled  site  plan 

Ex.P.K.  On  26.11.2007, 

the  Complainant 

recorded  his 

supplementary  statement,  wherein  he  nominated  the  Appellant 

as  the  accused  alleged  to  have  committed  the  crime.  The 

Appellant  had  proceeded  for  Hajj  on  14.11.2007  and  returned 

on 25.12.2007. He was put on the ‘Exit Control List’ pursuant to 

a written request made on 01.12.2007. On his arrival at Benazir 

Bhutto  International  Airport  on  25.12.2007,  the  Appellant  was 

arrested  and  his  passport  P.7,  ticket  P.8,  membership  card  P.9 

and cash amount of Rs.1600/- were taken into possession vide 

recovery  memo  Ex.P.Z.  During  investigations  the  Appellant 

narrated  events  which  had  led  to the  murder  of the  Deceased. 

The  disclosures  made  by  the  Appellant  led  the  Investigating 

Officer  to the recovery of a ‘Shawl’ P.1 (a piece of fabric worn 

 
5 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

usually by women), a piece of cloth, said to have been stained 

with  semen  P.2,  Chapal  P.3  (slippers)  and  these  items  were 

taken into possession by the Investigating Officer vide recovery 

memos  which  were  duly  witnessed.  The  place  where  the  dead 

body had been kept by the Appellant was also indentified by the 

Appellant  to  Shams-ul-Akbar,  SI  PW.15  and,  therefore,  the 

latter prepared the memo of pointation where the dead body of 

the  Deceased  had  been  kept,  Ex.P.D.  On  27.12.2007,  section 

376 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as 

the “PPC”)  was  added  and  the  investigations  were  transferred 

to Khalid Masood Akram, Inspector PW.16. On 02.01.2008, the 

Appellant  was  produced  before  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate 

who ordered sending him to the judicial lockup. After passing of 

the  said  order  regarding  sending  the  Appellant  to  the  judicial 

lockup, the latter was produced before Malik Muhammad Afsar, 

Assistant  Commissioner,  PW.13,  for  recording  his  statement 

under  section  164  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  Cr.P.C.”).  The  said  statement 

was  recorded  pursuant  to  application  dated  29.12.2009  Ex.P.L. 

After 

fulfilling 

the 

legal 

requirements, 

the  confessional 

statement  of  the  Appellant  was  recorded  under  section  164  of 

the Cr.P.C. wherein he narrated the events which had led to the 

death  of  the  Deceased,  Ex.P.L-1  and  Ex.P.L-2.  It  is  also 

pertinent to mention that the counsel engaged by the Appellant 

had  filed  an  application  on  29.12.2007,  wherein  it  was  prayed 

that  the  Appellant  be  ordered  to  be  medically  examined, 

alleging  that  he  had  been  tortured.  Notice  was  also  issued  to 

 
6 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

the State for 01.01.2008.  The Appellant, vide application dated 

06.08.2008  Ex.D.E.,  retracted  his  confessional  statement, 

stating  therein  that  it  was  not  given  by  him  voluntarily.  On 

completion  of  the  investigations,  the  charge  was  framed  on 

14.07.2009. The charge to the extent of the addition of section 

376 of the PPC was amended vide order, dated 05.12.2009. The 

Appellant  preferred  not  to  be  examined  under  oath  and, 

therefore,  he  recorded  his  statement  under  section  342  of  the 

Cr.P.C,  denying  having  committed  the  offences.  The  learned 

trial  Court,  after  recording  of  evidence  and  affording  an 

opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  parties,  convicted  the  Appellant 

and  sentenced  him  to  death  in  the  terms  which  have  been 

reproduced  above.  Reference  was  made  to  this  Court  bearing 

no. 80 of 2009 and the Appellant has preferred Criminal Appeal 

no. 506 of 2009.         

3.   

Mr  Jan  Muhammad  Khan,  ASC  has  contended  that; 

the Appellant was not provided the relevant documents and that 

too  within  the  prescribed  period  and,  therefore,  provisions  of 

section 265-D of the Cr.P.C. have been violated;  charges were 

framed  on  14.07.2008  in  respect  of  sections 364,  302  and  201 

of  the  PPC,  in  addition  to  section  10  of  Zina  (Enforcement  of 

Hudood)  Ordinance,  1979;  later  due  to  the  repeal  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1979,  the  charge  was  reframed  vide  order  dated 

05.12.2009 by adding section 376 of the PPC and on the same 

date  the  judgment  was  rendered;  the  reframing  of  the  charge 

required  re-examination  of  the  witnesses  and  giving  an 

opportunity  to  the  Appellant  to  cross  examine  them;  sections 

 
 
7 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

231 and 232 of the Cr.P.C. makes it mandatory that whenever a 

charge  is  altered,  then  an  opportunity  has  to  be  given  to  the 

accused  as  contemplated  therein;  the  confessional  statement 

purportedly  recorded  under  section  164  of  the  Cr.P.C.  was  not 

given voluntarily; an application was filed wherein it was alleged 

that  the  Appellant  had  been  severely  tortured;  the  latter  was 

arrested on 25.12.2007 and he remained on physical remand till 

02.01.2008;  the  application  for  recording  of  the  confessional 

statement  reflects  that  it  was  dated  29.12.2007;  the  delay  in 

the  recording  of  the  confessional  statement  is  fatal;  at  the 

relevant 

time  Shams-ul-Akbar  SI,  P.W.15  was  not 

the 

Investigating  Officer  and  was,  therefore,  not  authorized  to 

produce  the  Appellant  for  the  recording  of  his  confessional 

statement;  requirements  were  not  fulfilled  by  the  learned 

Magistrate;  after  recording  of  the  statement  under  section  164 

of the Cr.P.C., the Appellant remained incarcerated at the Police 

Station; the Appellant could not have been kept in the lockup of 

the  Police  Station  after  the  recording  of  his  confessional 

statement; 

the 

learned 

trial  Court  did  not 

take 

into 

consideration  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  retracted  his 

confessional  statement  and  the  same  was  recorded  in  writing 

vide  application,  dated  06.08.2008,  Ex.D.E;  the  Appellant  had 

also  stated  in  his  statement,  recorded  under  section  342  of 

Cr.P.C,  that  he  had  been  tortured  while  he  was  incarcerated; 

the retracted confessional statement could not have been relied 

upon; the statement of Roshmeen Khan PW.3 was recorded by 

the Investigating Officer after a considerable delay; no one had 

 
8 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

witnessed  the  offence;  statements  under  section  161  of  the 

Cr.P.C were recorded after considerable delay and the same has 

not  been  explained;  the  Appellant,  before  leaving  for  Hajj,  had 

been  searching  for  the  Deceased  along  with  the  Complainant; 

circumstantial  evidence  brought  on  record  is  not  sufficient  to 

complete the chain; some other items were also recovered from 

the  Mumty,  where  the  dead  body  of  the  Deceased  was  found; 

the  brand  of  cigarette  recovered  from  the  portion  where  the 

Appellant  lived  and  recovered  from  the  Mumty  were  different; 

the  recoveries  made  purportedly  at  the  instance  of  the 

Appellant  are  fake  and  planted;  medical  evidence  does  not 

support  the  prosecution  case;  the  recovered  Shawl  could  not 

have left the marks on the neck as reported in the postmortem 

report; the investigations were not honest and were carried out 

to protect others; in the facts and circumstances of the instant 

case  a  sentence  of  death  could  not  have  been  awarded.  The 

learned counsel has placed reliance on the cases titled “Hakam 

Deen VS The State through Advocate General and 15 others” 

[PLD 2006 S.C. (AJ&K) 43], “Muhammad Baqa alias Baqir VS 

The State” [2000 P.Cr.L.J. 465], “Khuda Bux and another VS 

The Crown” [1969 SCMR 390], “Muhammad Hashim Raza VS 

The State” [PLJ 1997 Cr.C. (Lahore) 237], “Muhammad Ali VS 

The State” [2008 P.Cr.L.J. 87], “Muhammad Pervez and others 

VS The State and others” [2007 SCMR 670], “Manjeet Singh VS 

The State” [PLD 2006 S.C. 30], “Aala Muhammad and another 

VS The State” [2008 SCMR 649],  “Muhammad Ismail VS The 

State” [2011 MLD 967], “Sh. Muhammad Amjad VS The State” 

 
9 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

[2004 SCJ 33], “Akbar Ali VS The State and 03 others” [2007 

MLD 1004], “Hakam Deen VS The State through Advocate 

General and 15 others” [2005 YLR 2032], “Muhammad Asif VS 

The State” [2017 SCMR 486], “Nisar VS The State” [PLD 2008 

S.C. 343], “Rahat Ali VS The State” [2010 SCMR 584], “Imran 

alias Dully and another VS The State and others” [2015 SCMR 

155], “Mst. Askar Jan and others VS Muhammad Daud and 

others” [2010 SCMR 1604], “Azeem Khan and another VS 

Mujahid Khan and others” [2016 SCMR 274], “Hashim Qasim 

and another VS The State” [2017 SCMR 986] and “Fayyaz 

Ahmad VS The State” [2017 SCMR 2026].    

4.   

Mr  Muhammad  Ishaq  Shah,  ASC  appeared  on  behalf 

of  the  Complainant  and  argued  that;  all  the  documents  were 

provided to the Appellant and, therefore, there was no violation 

of  the  provisions  of  the  Cr.P.C,  inter  alia,  section  265-C;  no 

complaint was filed by the Appellant regarding not having been 

provided  the  relevant  documents;  no  prejudice  was  caused  by 

altering  the  charge;  the  addition  of  section  376  of  the  PPC  did 

not  require  a  retrial  or  reexamination  of  the  witnesses;  the 

confessional  statement  was  recorded  under  section  164  of  the 

Cr.P.C and an application was filed after a considerable delay on 

06.08.2008,  alleging  that  the  same  was  not  made  voluntarily; 

the  learned  trial  Court  has  dealt  with  this  aspect  in  detail  and 

has  rightly  observed  that  despite  having  several  opportunities 

the Appellant had not complained before any judicial forum that 

he  had  been  tortured;  the  confessional  statement  is  duly 

corroborated  by  the  recoveries,  the  statement  of  Roshmeen 

 
 
10 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

Khan  PW.3  and  the  other  evidence;  it  is  evident  from  the 

evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  alone  in  his  portion  of  the 

house on the day of occurrence since other family members had 

gone  to  visit  their  ancestral  village  in  Gujrat;  this  part  of  the 

deposition  of  Shams-ul-Akbar,  SI  PW.15  was  not  challenged; 

the  prosecution  has  established  its  case  beyond  a  reasonable 

doubt;  the  Appellant  had  committed  a  heinous  crime  and  no 

mitigating circumstances exist so as to justify awarding a lesser 

sentence  than  death.  The  learned  counsel  has  placed  reliance 

on  the  cases  titled  “Sher Dil and others VS The State and 

others” [2003 YLR 110], “Imran and 03 others VS The State” 

[2007 P.Cr.L.J. 721], “Muhammad Shafi VS The State” [1992 

P.Cr.L.J. 1385], “Mst. Naseem Akhtar and another VS The 

State” [1999 SCMR 1744], “Majeed VS The State” [2010 SCMR 

55], “Manjeet Sindh VS The State” [PLD 2006 S.C. 30], “Nizam 

ud Din VS Riaz and another” [2010 SCMR 457], “Muhammad 

Sharif VS the State” [1969 SCMR 521], “Muhammad Gul and 

others VS The State” [1991 SCMR 942], “Anwar Khan and 

another VS The State” [2006 SCMR 1343], “Soobo VS The 

State” [2016 P.Cr.L.J. 290], “Rafiq Ahmad VS Police Constable 

Saeed Shah and another” [1997 MLD 2208], “S.A.K. Rehmani 

VS The State” [2005 SCMR 364], “Shah Nawaz VS The State” 

[1992 SCMR 1583], “Nazir Ahmed and others VS The State and 

others” [PLD 2005 Karachi 18], “Mst. Rizwana Bibi and others 

VS The State and others” [2003 YLR 263], “Muhammad Ashraf 

Khan Tareen VS The State” [1995 P.Cr.L.J. 313], “Nabi Bakhsh 

and another VS The State and another” [1999 SCMR 1972], 

 
11 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

“Tariq Mehmood and others VS The State and others” [2002 

SCMR 1602], “Prithi Chand VS State of Himachal Pradesh” 

[1990 MLD 1389] and “Ch. Muhammad Yaqoob and others VS 

The State and others” [1992 SCMR 1983].     

5.   

The 

learned  State  Counsel  has  adopted 

the 

arguments  advanced  by 

the 

learned  counsel 

for 

the 

Complainant.  

6.   

The learned counsels for the parties have been heard 

and the record perused with their able assistance.   

7.   

Admittedly,  the  Appellant  holds  the  nationality  of  the 

Kingdom  of  Norway  in  addition  to  that  of  Pakistan.  He  had 

rented  the  lower  portion  of  his  house  to  the  Complainant  and 

the  latter  was  residing  there  along  with  his  family  which 

included  the  Deceased,  his  seven  year  old  child.  There  was  no 

eye  witness  of  the  occurrence  and  the  case  against  the 

Appellant  is  based  mainly  on  his  confessional  statement 

recorded  under  section  164  of  the  Cr.P.C.  and  the  evidence 

which  corroborates  the  events  narrated  therein.  The  Appellant 

was arrested on 25.12.2007 on his return from the Kingdom of 

Saudi  Arabia  after  performing  Hajj.  The  dead  body  of  the 

Deceased  was  accidentally  found  lying  on  the  Mumty  of  House 

no.  1314,  by  the  occupant  of  House  no.  1313  i.e.  Rafique 

Ahmed,  PW.2  on  24.11.2007.  It  is  not  denied  that  the  said 

Mumty was accessible from the portion of the house which was 

occupied  by  the  Appellant.  The  Appellant  had  retracted  his 

confessional statement by filing an application on 06.08.2008. It 

 
 
  
 
12 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

is  also  obvious  from  the  record that  his  confessional  statement 

was  recorded  after  almost  seven  days  from  the  date  of  his 

arrest.  The  medical  evidence  confirms  that  the  Deceased  was 

strangulated  besides  being  raped.  The  Appellant  had  led  the 

Investigating  Officer  to  the  recovery  of  the  Shawl  P.1  and 

Chapals  P.3.  The  Chapals  (slippers)  were  identified  by  the 

Complainant  as  those  of  his  daughter  i.e.  the  Deceased  on 

12.02.2007.  The  Appellant  had  also  led  to  the  recovery  of  a 

piece  of  cloth  P.2,  which  according  to  his  own  confessional 

statement  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  cleaning  after  he  had 

committed the offence. The Appellant had also led the police to 

the place where he had left the dead body of the Deceased i.e. 

on  the  Mumty  and  the  Investigating  Officer  had  accordingly 

recorded  a  memo  to  this  effect.  Consequent  to  the  repeal  of 

section  10  of  the  Zina  (Enforcement  of  Hadood)  Ordinance, 

1979, section 376 of the PPC was added. Roshmeen Khan (PW-

3)  had  deposed  that  on  the  day  when  the  Deceased  had 

disappeared,  the  latter  had  bought  cigarettes  and  had  stated 

that it was for her “uncle”. It is obvious from the evidence that 

the  relationship  of  the  Appellant  was  cordial  with 

the 

Complainant. There was no reason for involving the Appellant in 

this case falsely. The question which is required to be answered 

by  us  is  whether  the  confessional  statement  recorded  under 

section  164  of  the  Cr.P.C.  was  given  voluntarily  and  whether 

there is sufficient evidence on record to corroborate the events 

narrated  therein.  The  retraction  of  the  confessional  statement 

 
13 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

on  06.08.2008  is  also  of  relevance.  In  order  to  answer  these 

questions, it would be beneficial to examine the precedent law.  

8.   

The  august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “The 

State VSMinhun alias Gul Hassan” [PLD 1964 Supreme 

Court 813] has held as follows;-  

“As for the confessions the High Court, it 

appears,  was  duly  conscious  of  the  fact  that 

retracted confessions, whether judicial or extra-

judicial, could legally be taken into consideration 

against the maker of those confessions himself, 

and if the confessions were found to be true and 

voluntary, then there was no need at all to look 

for further corroboration. It is now well settled 

that as against the maker himself his confession, 

judicial or extra-judicial, whether retracted or not 

retracted, can in law validly form the sole basis of 

his conviction, if the Court is satisfied and believes 

that  it  was  true  and  voluntary  and  was  not 

obtained by torture or coercion or inducement. 

The question, however, as to whether in the facts 

and circumstances of a given case the Court 

should act upon such a confession alone is an 

entirely different question, which  relate to the 

weight and evidentiary value of the confession and 

not to its admissibility in law. As observed even by 

Munir,  C.J  in  his  commentary  on  the  law  of 

 
 
 
14 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

Evidence at page 168 (Vol.I) “it is a settled rule of 

evidence that unless a retracted confession is 

corroborated  in  material  particulars  it  is  not 

prudent to base a conviction in a criminal case on 

its strength alone. It is the duty of the Court that 

is called upon to act upon a retracted confession 

to  enquire  into  all  the  material  points  and 

surrounding circumstances and satisfy itself fully 

that the confession cannot but be true. 

The  proposition  that  a  retracted  extra-

judicial confession cannot corroborate a retracted 

judicial confession cannot also be assailed where 

corroboration is found necessary, for, that would 

amount  to  utilizing  of  one  piece  of  tainted 

evidence to corroborate another piece of tainted 

evidence”.  

9.   

In the case titled “Ch. Muhammad Yaqoob and others 

VSThe State and others” [1992 SCMR 1983],  the  august 

Supreme  Court,  after  examining  the  precedent  law,  has 

summarized the principles as follows;-  

“From the above cited cases, inter alia, the 
following principles of law are deducible: 

i) 

ii) 

That if a statement of fact made by an accused in 
a confession is of the nature that if it is assumed to 
be  true,  it  would  negate  the  offence  alleged  to  be 
confessed, it is called an exculpatory confession.  

That a statement of an accused that contains self-
exculpatory matter cannot amount to confession. 

 
 
 
iii) 

iv) 

v) 

vi) 

vii) 

viii) 

ix) 

15 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

That a retracted confession is sufficient to sustain 
a conviction for a capital offence, if the Court is of 
the view that the same is voluntary and is true, but 
as  a  rule  of  prudence,  it  has  been  consistently 
held  by  the  superior  Courts  that  the  same  should 
not  be  acted  upon  unless  corroborated  by  some 
other reliable evidence in material particulars.  

That  though  the  confession  of  a  co-accused 
cannot  be  made  foundation  of  conviction  but  it 
may be used in support of other evidence.  

the  confession  of  a  co-accused 

That 
evidence of a weak character.  

is  an 

That  under  Islamic  Jurisprudence,  in  order  to 
make a confession reliable, it should be voluntarily 
made and not on account of any coercion, duress 
or violence.  

That  any  delay  in  recording  of  a  confession  may, 
or may not, be fatal as to the evidentiary value of a 
retracted  confession  as  in  the  case  of  Syed 
Sharifuddin Pirzada VS Sohbat Khan and 3 others 
(supra),  this  Court  has  held  that  the  factum  that 
the  accused  were  in  the  police  custody  for  11  to 
15  days,  was  not  fatal  as  to  the  credibility  of  the 
retracted confessions for the reason that the Court 
was  satisfied  that  the  retracted  confessions  were 
not tutored and were, in fact, made voluntarily. 

That  any  lapse  on  the  administrative  side  on  the 
part  of  a  Magistrate  recording  a  confession,  may 
not  be  fatal  as  to  the  evidentiary  value  of  such 
confession  provided  the  Court  is  satisfied  that  the 
lapses on his part have not, in any way, adversely 
affected  the  voluntariness  or  truthfulness  of  the 
confession.  

if  an  accomplice’s  evidence 

is  not 
That 
corroborated  in  material  respects,  it  cannot  be 
the  evidence  of  an 
acted  upon  and 
to  corroborate 
accomplice  cannot  be  used 
evidence of another accomplice.  

that 

The legal position, which has emerged from 

the  above  reports,  seems  to  be  that  in  order  to 

judge the evidentiary value if retracted confession, 

the Court is to advert to the question, whether the 

same  appears  to  have  been  made  voluntarily, 

without  any  inducement,  duress  or  coercion  with 

 
 
16 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

the object to state the truth. If the Court is satisfied 

on the above aspect, the mere fact that there were 

some  irregularities  in  recording  of  a  confession, 

would not warrant disregarding of the same”.  

10.  

The  august  Supreme  Court  reiterated  the 

law 

annunciated in the case titled “Bahadur Khan VSThe State” 

[PLD 1996 S.C. 336]  and  has  observed  and  held  in  the  case 

titled “Khalid Javed and another VSThe State” [2003 SCMR 

1419] as follows;- 

“The next important test, which the Court is 

required to satisfy is whether the accused has got 

recorded a true confessional statement. In this 

context it is to be seen that accused has retracted 

his confession and alleged that under coercion 

same was obtained from him. Therefore, before 

believing the same it is imperative to examine as 

to  whether  same  is  corroborated  by  other 

evidence no material points as held in the case of 

“Bahadur Khan V. The State” [PLD 1996 SC 336]”.                 

11.  

It  has  been  held  in  the  case  “Bahadur Khan V. The 

State” [PLD 1996 SC 336] that  a  judicial  confession  alone  can 

be made a basis for conviction when it is found true, convincing 

and  made  voluntarily  by  the  accused  without  any  duress  or 

coercion.  

12.  

The above annunciation of law has been reiterated by 

the apex Court in the case titled “Manjeet Singh VSThe 

 
 
 
 
17 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

State” [PLD 2006 Supreme Court 30] and has further observed 

and held as follows;- 

“However, the real test is that confession 

must not only be voluntary but it must also be 

true  and  to  ascertain  its  truthfulness  it  is 

necessary to examine and compare the confession 

with the rest of prosecution evidence to exclude 

any possibility or probability of any doubt qua its 

true character.” 

13.  

The  august  Supreme  Court 

in  the  case  titled 

“Muhammad Amin VSThe State” [PLD 2006 S.C. 219]  has 

observed  and  held  that  a  confession,  judicial  or  extra  judicial, 

whether  retracted  or  not  retracted,  can  validly  form  the  sole 

basis for the conviction of its maker, if the Court is satisfied and 

believes that it was true and voluntary and was not obtained by 

torture,  coercion  or  inducement.  Likewise  in  the  case  titled 

“Allah Nawaz VSState“ [2009 SCMR 736],  the  august 

Supreme  Court  has  reaffirmed  that  it  is  settled  law  that  a 

confession is to be rejected or accepted as a whole. Moreover, a 

mere  suggestion  to  the  Magistrate  who  had  recorded  the 

confessional statement that it was involuntary is not enough to 

throw it away.   

14.  

The  august  Supreme  Court  has  elucidated  the 

principles  regarding  the  effect  of  delay  in  recording  of  a 

confessional  statement  in  the  case  titled  “Majeed VSThe 

 
 
 
 
 
18 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

State“ [2010 SCMR 55]. It has been held that delay in recording 

the  confessional  statement  of  an  accused  by  itself  is  not 

sufficient  to  adversely  affect  its  validity  and  no  hard  and  fast 

rule can be laid down regarding the period for recording such a 

confessional  statement  during  investigations.  Moreover,  it  has 

been  observed  that  any  lapse  on  the  part  of  the  Magistrate  in 

recording a confession cannot always be treated as fatal to the 

evidentiary value of the confession, if the Court is satisfied that 

the  said  lapse  did  not  in  any  way  adversely  affect  the 

voluntariness  or  truthfulness  of  the  confession.  It  has  been 

emphasized  that  a  voluntary  and  truly  recorded  confession 

requires no corroboration and is sufficient for conviction, but as 

a rule of procedure, the Court is required to seek corroboration 

of the same on material particulars.         

15.  

In  the  case  titled “Dadullah and another VSThe 

State”  [2015  SCMR  856],  the  august  Supreme  Court  has 

observed and held as follows;-  

“This is settled law that conviction could not 

be recorded on the sole basis of confessional 

statement and the prosecution has to prove its 

case  beyond  any  shadow  of doubt.  However, 

having gone through the evidence, we have found 

that the confessional statement of the accused 

were not the result of maltreatment and coercive 

measures”.  

 
 
 
 
19 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

16.  

The august Supreme Court has elaborately dealt with 

the  law  relating  to  the  evidentiary  value  of  a  confessional 

statement  in  the  case  titled  “Azeem Khan and another VS

Mujahid Khan and others” [2016 SCMR 274] and  the  relevant 

portion is reproduced as follows;- 

“Keeping in view the High Court Rules, 

laying  down  a  binding  procedure  for  taking 

required  precautions  and  observing  the 

requirements of the provision of section 364 read 

with section 164, Cr.P.C, by now it has become a 

trite law that before recording confession and that 

too in crimes entailing capital punishment, the 

Recording Magistrate has to essentially observe all 

these mandatory precautions. The fundamental 

logic behind the same is that, all signs of fear 

inculcated by the Investigating Agency in the mind 

of the accused are to be shedded out and he is to 

be provided full assurance that in case he is not 

guilty or is not making a confession voluntarily 

then in that case, he would not be handed over 

back to the police. Thereafter, sufficient time for 

reflection is to be given after the first warning is 

administered. At the expiry of that time, Recording 

Magistrate has to administer the second warning 

and the accused shall be assured that now he was 

in the safe hands. All police officials whether in 

 
 
 
20 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

uniform  or  otherwise,  including  Naib  Court 

attached to the Court must be kept outside the 

Court and beyond the view of the accused. After 

observing  all  these  legal  requirements  if  the 

accused person is willing to confess, then all 

required questions formulated by the High Court 

Rules should be put to him and the answers given, 

be recorded in the words spoken by him. The 

statement  of  accused  be  recorded  by  the 

Magistrate with his own hand and in case there is 

a genuine compelling reason then, a special note 

is to be given that the same was dictated to a 

responsible official of the Court like Stenographer 

or Reader and oath shall also be administered to 

such official that he would correctly type or write 

the true and correct version, the accused stated 

and  dictated  by  the  Magistrate.  In  case,  the 

accused is illiterate, the confession he makes, if 

recorded in another language i.e. Urdu or English 

then, after its completion, the same be read-over 

and explained to him in the language, the accused 

fully understand and thereafter a certificate, as 

required under section 364, Cr.P.C with regard to 

these proceedings be given by the Magistrate 

under his seal and signature and the accused shall 

be sent to jail on judicial remand and during this 

process at no occasion he shall be handed over to 

 
21 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

any police official/officer whether he is Naib Court 

wearing  police  uniform,  or  any  other  police 

official/officer, because such careless dispensation 

would considerably diminish the voluntary nature 

of the confession, made by the accused”. 

17.  

Reiterating  the  above  principles  and  law  the  august 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  “Hashim Qasim and another 

VS The State” [2017 SCMR 986] has observed and held that the 

pre-requisites  for  accepting  a  confession  are  twofold  i.e.  there 

are  two  essential  requirements  which  must  be  fulfilled;  first, 

that the confession was made voluntarily and was based on true 

accounts  of  facts  leading  to  the  crime  and,  second,  the  same 

was proved at the trial.  

18.  

It is, therefore, obvious from the above precedent law 

that  a  retracted  judicial  confession  could  be  legally  taken  into 

consideration  if  the  Court  is  satisfied  that  it  was  true  and 

recorded  voluntarily  i.e.  not  obtained  by  torture,  coercion  or 

inducement.  However, 

though  a  retracted  confession 

is 

sufficient to sustain even a conviction of capital punishment but 

the  rule  of  prudence  requires  to  consider  the  surrounding 

circumstances  and  that  it  should  not  be  acted  upon  unless 

corroborated  by  other  credible  evidence  in  material  particulars. 

Depending  on  the  facts  and  circumstances  in  each  case,  delay 

in recording a confessional statement may or may not be fatal. 

The  Recording  Magistrate  has  essentially  to  observe  the 

mandatory procedure highlighted by the august Supreme Court 

 
 
 
22 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

in  the  case  of  Azeem  Khan  and  another  VS Mujahid  Khan 

and others supra.                  

19.  

In  the  instant  case,  we  are  satisfied  that  the 

confessional statement, despite having been retracted, was true 

and made voluntarily. We have no doubt that it narrated actual 

facts as had happened on the fateful day. The Appellant, being 

a citizen and national of the Kingdom of Norway, had the added 

advantage  of  approaching the  Diplomatic  mission  for  counselor 

assistance had he been dealt with otherwise than in accordance 

with the law. It is evident from the record that at no stage had 

the Appellant made any request for allowing him to contact the 

Diplomatic mission of the Kingdom of Norway in Islamabad. The 

Appellant  had  appeared  before  the  Judicial  Magistrate  who 

ordered  sending  him  on  judicial  remand.  Later  in  the  day  he 

also  appeared  before  another  learned  Magistrate  for  recording 

his statement under section 164 of the Cr.P.C. From the time of 

his arrest till recording of his statement under section 164 of the 

Cr.P.C.,  the  Appellant  had  numerous  opportunities  to  bring  to 

the  notice  of  various  judicial  forums  before  which  he  was 

produced  any  illegality  committed  by  the  police  officials  let 

alone  having  been  subjected  to  torture.  After  his  confessional 

statement  was  recorded,  he  preferred  to  keep  silent  for  more 

than  seven  months  and  belatedly  filed  an  application  on 

06.08.2008,  stating  therein  that  he  had  not  recorded  his 

confessional  statement  voluntarily.  In  his  statement  recorded 

under  section  342  of  the  Cr.P.C.,  he  had  taken  a  different 

stance  of  having  been  forced  to  sign  some  documents  and 

 
 
23 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

putting  his  thumb  impressions.  His  confessional  statement  was 

recorded  by  Malik  Muhammad  Afsar,  Assistant  Commissioner  / 

Magistrate,  who  had  entered  the  witness  box  as PW.3.  He  had 

indeed  observed  all  the  legal  procedural  requirements.  Despite 

lengthy  cross  examination  he  remained  consistent  and  the 

credibility  was  unshaken.  The  recoveries  were  proved  and 

corroborated the confessional statement in  material particulars. 

The recovery of the Chapals P.3 (slippers) of the Deceased from 

the  portion  occupied  by  the  Appellant  stands  established  and 

the  same  were  identified  by  the  Complainant  as  that  of  his 

daughter. Moreover, the medical evidence establishes beyond a 

reasonable doubt that the confessional statement was not only 

voluntary  but  reflected  the  true  facts  which  had  led  to  the 

commission  of  the  crime by  the  Appellant.  There  is  no  force  in 

the argument advanced by the learned counsel for the Appellant 

that  the  recovered  Shawl P.1  could  not  have  caused  the  injury 

on  the  neck  which  was  described  in  the  postmortem  report. 

Shawl  is  a  piece  of  fabric  ordinarily  worn  by women.  It  can  be 

used  for  tying  or  binding  something  tightly,  having  the  same 

effect  as  a  rope.  It,  therefore,  can  be  used  to  strangulate  a 

person, which in the instant case was a child of tender age. We 

are satisfied that in the facts and circumstances of the case the 

delay in recording the confessional statement was not fatal. The 

argument  that  after  reframing  of  the  charge  a  retrial  had 

become inevitable is misplaced. No prejudice was caused to the 

Appellant  and,  therefore,  a  retrial  would  have  been  a  futile 

exercise. The learned counsel for the Appellant, despite his able 

 
24 
The State VSShahid Azeem.   

assistance,  was  not  able  to  show  how  in  any  manner 

whatsoever  the  reframing  of  the  charge  had  prejudiced  the 

latter.  Moreover,  the  delay  in  transporting  the  Appellant  to  the 

prison  after  recording  his  statement  was  inconsequential.  The 

reason  for  the  delay  has  been  explained  by  the  prosecution. 

Moreover,  it  did  not  effect  the  recording  of  the  confessional 

statement.                    

20.  

For  what  has  been discussed  above,  we  are  satisfied 

that  the  prosecution  has  established  its  case  beyond  a 

reasonable  doubt.  The  confessional  statement  recorded  by  the 

learned  Assistant  Commissioner  /  Magistrate under  section  164 

of  the  Cr.P.C.  on  02.01.2008  was  corroborated  by  evidence 

which was brought on record during the course of the trial. We 

are  satisfied  that  the  statement  was  made  voluntarily.  We  do 

not  find  any  reason  to  interfere  with  the  conviction  and 

sentence awarded by the learned trial Court. Consequently, we 

answer  the  Murder  Reference  no.  80  of  2009 

in  the 

affirmative  and  accordingly dismiss  Criminal  Appeal  no.  506 

of 2009, the same having been found to be without merit.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB)               

  (ATHAR MINALLAH)             

          JUDGE                                                                JUDGE 

                                                   Announced in open Court on 11.07.2018. 

JUDGE 

JUDGE 

Asad K/*    

Approved for reporting. 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
