ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO.556 OF 2022. 

AKBAR DIN. 
VS    
MST. SHAHNAZ BEGUM AND OTHERS. 

Petitioner by        

Respondents by   

Date of Decision 

: 

: 

: 

Mr. Khurum Masaud Kiyani, ASC. 

Malik Mazhar Javed, Advocate. 

19.05.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:-     The  Petitioner  [Akbar  Din]  has  filed 

the instant petition to assail the Order dated 24.01.2022 and Judgment dated 

08.09.2021 passed by the learned District & Sessions Judge-III, Islamabad-

East, (“Appellate Court”) whereby review petition and appeal filed by the 

Petitioner  against the  Judgment  and  Decree  dated 26.05.2021 (“Impugned 

Ex-Parte  Judgment  and  Decree”)  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court/Guardian  Judge,  East-Islamabad  (“Guardian  Judge”)  have  been 

dismissed.  

2. 

The  facts  as  per  the  contents  of  the  Memo  of  Petition  are  that  the 

Petitioner filed a petition under Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 

1890  before 

the 

learned  Guardian  Judge 

to  seek  custody  of 

the 

minor/Respondent  No.2.  Ex-parte  proceedings  were  initiated  against  the 

Respondents No. 1 & 2 before  the learned Trial Court, who after recording 

ex-parte evidence of the Petitioner and after hearing arguments submitted by 

the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  dismissed  the  Guardian  Petition 

through  the  Impugned  Ex-parte  Judgment  and  Decree  while  allowing 

visitation to the Petitioner according to the following schedule:- 

1.  Petitioner  will  visit  the  minor  after  each  15  days  in  the  Court 
premises on each 15th day of the month and 30th day of each month 
for four hours from 11:00 am to 03:00 pm, father will also bear all 
expenses of travelling on meeting day. 

2.  On  the  religious  festivals,  minor  shall  spend  first  day  of  each 
festival  i.e    Eid-il-Fitar  and  Eid-ul-Azha  with  his  father  subject  to 
surety already directed. 

3.  The  father  Petitioner  shall  have  right  to  attend  parent  teacher 
meeting  at  School  of  minor  when  scheduled  the  father  Petitioner 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                               W.P. No.556/2022 

shall  also  have  right  to  visit  the  teachers  of  minor  if  required  for 
proper study of minor. 

4.  Minor  shall  also  have  right  to  attend  the  family  functions  of  his 
father’s family i.e wedding ceremony, or any other family function, 
which the father feels necessary that minor should attend subject to 
surety if already submitted. 

5.  Minor  shall  celebrate  her  birthday  with  his  father  and  on  his 
birthday he will stay with his father in his house for four hours from 
evening  06:00  pm  to  10:00  pm  night  subject  to  already  submitted 
surety if any and after celebration, Petitioner will drop the minor to 
the custody of his mother.” 

3. 

Being  aggrieved  with  the  Impugned  Ex-Parte  Judgment  and  Decree, 

the Petitioner preferred an appeal before the learned Appellate Court which 

was contested by the Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 and was ultimately dismissed 

vide Impugned Judgment dated 08.09.2021. Thereafter the Petitioner filed a 

review  petition  which  too  was  dismissed  vide  Impugned  Order  dated 

24.01.2022. Hence, the instant petition. 

4. 

Learned counsel for the Petitioner argued that the Petitioner, being the 

father,  is  the  natural  guardian  of  the  minor/Respondent  No.2,  who  is  now 

eight years’ old  and as such needs to spend more time with his father.  He 

contended that the Courts below have not appreciated the law laid  down in 

2018 SCMR 1991. The basic contention of the learned counsel on behalf of 

the  Petitioner  was  that  the  visitation  schedule  determined  by  the  learned 

Guardian  Judge  is  not  sufficient  and  not  in  the  best  interest  of  the 

minor/Respondent No.2  as it does not provide an opportunity for spending 

quality  time  with  the  Petitioner  father  whose  guidance  and  supervision  is 

essential at this stage in the life of the minor. To this end the learned counsel 

for  the  Petitioner  submitted  that  the  Petitioner  is  simply  seeking  that  the 

minor may be allowed to spend 20 days of his Summer Vacations; 10 days 

during  Winter  Holidays;  and  one  night  on  Eid  with  the  Petitioner  at  his 

residence.  

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  No.1 

vehemently  opposed  the  arguments  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

Petitioner and contended that due to the presence of Petitioner’s current wife 

and  their  children  at  the  residence  of  the  Petitioner,  the  life  of  the 

minor/Respondent  No.2  will  be  at  risk  from  his  step  family  if  the 

minor/Respondent No.2 is allowed overnight stay with the Petitioner  at his 

residence.  

 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                               W.P. No.556/2022 

6. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the 

record. 

7. 

A High Court in exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction does not act 

like  a  Court  of  appeal.  It  neither  reappraises  evidence  nor  does  it 

substitute  the  concurrent  findings  of  fact  recorded  by  the  Family  Court 

and  upheld  by  the  Appellate  Court  with  its  own  findings  solely  on  the 

ground  that  another  view  was  possible  on  the  same  evidence.  A  party 

approaching the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution has to 

demonstrate that there is a gross misreading or non-reading of evidence or 

jurisdictional error or such legal infirmity that has caused miscarriage of 

justice.  

8. 

Learned counsel has failed to point out any misreading or non-reading 

of evidence or jurisdictional defect which would warrant interference by this 

Court. Even otherwise as may be seen from the arguments submitted by the 

learned counsel there is a factual controversy between the parties with regard 

to  the  minor/Respondent  No.2’s  safety  and  security  at  the  residence  of  the 

Petitioner.  It  is  trite  law  that  factual  disputes  cannot  be  adjudicated  by  the 

High Court in exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction.  

9. 

In view of the foregoing, the instant petition is hereby dismissed. 

         (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
         JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 25.05.2022. 

JUDGE 

Adnan 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
