ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition no. 195 of 2022 
Imtiaz Ahmed 
VS
Judge Family Court, Islamabad-West and another 

Petitioner by: 
Respondent no.2 by: 
Date of Decision:  

Malik Irfan Asif, Advocate  
Rai Muratib Ali Kharal, Advocate  
11.03.2022 

            SARDAR EJAZ ISHAQ KHAN, J:-   This  writ  petition  assails 

the  order  dated  23.10.2021  striking  off  the  petitioner’s  right  to  file  his 

written  statement  in  the  family  suit  for  maintenance  and  the  order  dated 

11.01.2022 dismissing the application for recalling the striking off order.  

2 

On 11.02.2020, the petitioner/defendant (the husband) was ordered to 

file his written statement. On 11.03.2020, the defendant applied questioning 

the jurisdiction of the family Court and, on rejection of his application, filed 

an  appeal  and  resultantly  the  family  Court  proceedings  remained  stayed.  

The  appeal  was  dismissed  and  the  trial  resumed.    On  12.10.2021,  that  is, 

almost  2  years  after  the  family  suit  was  filed,  the  trial  court  gave  another 

last  opportunity  for  the  defendant  to  file  his  written  statement.  The  order 

sheet  notes  that  counsels  for  both  the  parties  were  present.      On  the  next 

date  of  hearing  on  23.10.2021,  the  defendant’s  right  to  file  the  written 

statement  was  struck  off.    The  order  sheet  again  notes  that  the  parties’ 

counsels  were  present.    The  petitioner’s  counsel  contends  that  neither  the 

petitioner nor his counsel were present on the aforesaid two dates and refers 

to  the  attendance  on  the  cause  list  of  the  trial  court  where  the  petitioner’s 

attendance is not marked.   The respondent’s counsel asserts that the cause 

list  attendance  sheet  is  not  a  reliable  document  because  the  attendance  is 

marked in lead pencil, is not a certified copy, and above all contradicts the 

order sheet of the learned trial court which notes both the parties’ counsels 

as present. 

 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition no.195 of 2022 

-2- 

3 

The  petitioner’s  application  for  recalling  the  order  striking  off  his 

right  to  file  the  written  statement  was  dismissed  by  the  family  Court  vide 

order  dated  11.01.2022  for  the  reason  that  many  opportunities  had  been 

granted to the defendant.  

4 

In  the  petition  before  me,  as  was  the  case  in  the  application  for 

recalling  the  impugned  order,  the  ground  for  absence  is  taken  as  the 

petitioner’s  counsel  being  out  of  station  for  more  than  a  month  when  the 

first impugned order was passed.   He states that instead of striking off his 

right to file the written statement, the court should have ordered to proceed 

ex parte against him and cites 2015 YLR 2220 to claim that his right to due 

process and fair trial has been impinged by the impugned order.   However, 

not only the facts of that case are different, the direction to the defendant in 

that case to file the written statement was not a speaking order, nor was that 

a family Court case.  

5 

Section  9  of  the  Family  Courts  Act  1964  (FCA)  requires  the 

defendant to file its written statement “…on the date fixed under section 8.”  

Section 8 of FCA provides for 15 days for the appearance of the defendant 

after the plaint is presented.   Section 9(1) stipulates that the family Court 

may  allow  the  defendant  to  submit  the  written  statement  on  the  next  date 

which  shall  not  exceed  15  days  only  where  sufficient  reason  which 

prevented the  defendant from submitting the written statement on the first 

date  of  appearance  was  shown.      Reading  sections  8  and  9  of  the  FCA 

together  dovetails  with  the  expedited  trial  process  envisaged  under  the 

FCA, with the defendant being required to file its written statement within a 

maximum  period  of  30  days  instead  of  the  customary  period  of  30  days 

plus at least two (if not more) further opportunities (the latter with costs) for a 

regular trial under section 26A of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908.   

6 

Learned  counsel’s  submission  that  he  should  have  been  proceeded 

against  ex  parte  instead  of  his  right  to  file  the  written  statement  being 

struck off appears to be a submission only in aid of further prolonging the 

trial, for in that case he would have moved an application to set aside the ex 

parte order giving effectively the same reasons as he is giving now for not 

filing  the  written  statement,  that  is,  the  counsel’s  disappearance  from  the 

 
 
 
Writ Petition no.195 of 2022 

-3- 

station for more than a month.   The net result would be the same, further 

prolonging the trial and defeating the object of the FCA of concluding the 

family Court proceedings as expeditiously as possible.   The petitioner has 

already partly  succeeded in that objective  by contesting the jurisdiction of 

the  family  Court  on  frivolous  grounds  which  has  already  consumed  more 

than  a  year  since  it  was  filed.    His  right  to  file  the  written  statement  has 

been struck off but he can still cross-examine and make final arguments; he 

is  not  entirely  bereft  of  the  ability  to  conduct  his  defence.    His  being 

hampered  somewhat  in  his  defence  due  to  the  absence  of  a  written 

statement is for reasons entirely attributable to him, for the impugned order 

clearly notes that there was no request for a further opportunity to file the 

written statement.   He asks me to choose between the learned trial court’s 

order sheet noting his presence and a photocopy of the attendance sheet on 

the  cause  list  showing  the  petitioner  as  not  present.  I  naturally  choose  the 

former. 

7 

In  view  of  the  foregoing,  this  petition  is  without  merit  and  is 

therefore dismissed. 

Imran 

       (SARDAR EJAZ ISHAQ KHAN)    
      JUDGE       

 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
