ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Crl. Misc. No.785/B/2O19

Omer  Hayat

Vergts

S. No. of
order/
proceedlngs
lo4l

The State etc.

Order wtth srgnature of Judge and thatlof parties or
counsel where necessary.

Date of
order/
Proceedings
3O.L2.2O19  Raja Shahzad Javed,  Advocate  for the petitioner.
Barrister Ayesha Siddique Khan, State  Counsel.
Complainant  in person.
Mian Khan,  S.I.

MOHSIN AKIITAR  I(AYANI J. {hrough instant

petition, the petitioner  has prayed  for his post arrest

bail in case FIR No. 452119,  dated 24.09.2019, U/S

496-A PPC, P.S Bara Kahu, Islamabad.

2.  Brief  facts referred in the instaOt F.I.R  lodged on

the complaint of Muhammad Asif/respondent  No.2

are that he is  serving in  Pakistan  Army and on

24.09.2019,  he received a call that hils wife Mst. Abida

Bibi alongwith  two minor children  are missing from

his house,  complainant's  brother ialso verified the

missing  Mst. Abida Bibi from her parents house, but

she was not with her parents, thereafter  Shakeel,

resident  of Ahmad Pur Sial, Tehsil  Jhang and his

relative Wajid were nominated  in

case.

3. 

Learned  counsel for the peti

contends that

petitioner is not nominated  as

sed in this case

nor any role has been attributed re

enticement

and abduction of Mst. Abida Bibi.

further contends

that Mst. Abida  Bibi has filed application before the

2

Ctl. Misc.  No.785/B/2019

learned Judicial  Magistrate,  Section 30, Ahmad Pur

Sial on 03. 10.2019 and recorded  her statement,

whereafter she was sent to Danulamah  to provide  her

security. He further contends that  the  alleged

abductee  has filed suit for dissolutlon of marriage

against  Muhammad Asif/complainant  on 08.09.2019

before learned Judge  Family Court, Ahmad  Pur Sial

prior to the alleged date of occurrence  and as such it

is  a  case of further inquiry and any subsequent

statement  U/s 164 Cr.P.C recorded at Islamabad  has

no legal worth to consider  the same  against the

present  petitioner. It has lastly been contended  that

the challan  has been submitted  before  the Court and

petitioner is no more required for the purpose of

investigation, hence entitled for concession of post

arrest bail.

4.  Conversely, Complainant in  person stated

before  the Court that his counsel is not available and

requests for adjournment,  which has been turned

down as it is the 4th date of hearinrg of instant post

arrest bail, therefore,  learned State Counsel is

directed to argue the case.

5. 

Learned State Counsel contends that although

the petitioner is not directly  noming.ted in this case,

but when the alleged abductee  whs recovered  and

came to Islamabad and recorded

hler statement U/s

L64 Cr.P.C. on 29.tO.2OL9,  she

Ihas ascribed the

complete  role of petitioner, in which  she alleges that

petitioner abducted  her in conni

varic

e with the other

co-accused  persons, who have

l

bbe

n  granted post

arrest bail in this case. It has lastly been contended

I

3

dl. Misc,  No.785lBl2019

that the alleged  abductee has recorded her statement

U/s  L64 Cr.P.C and such statemeflt  could not be

considered on the lighter side at the bail stage, which

prima  face connects the petitioner  with the alleged

crime of enticement and abduction.

6.  Arguments  heard, record perused.

7.  Perusal of record  reveals  that the lady namely

Abida Bibi  was allegedly  enticed away by  the

nominated  accused namely Shakpel and  Wajid

referred  in FIR No. 452/L9, dated 2+.O9.2O19,  U/S

496-A PPC,  P.S Bara Kahu,  Islamabdd lodged on the

complaint of  Muhammad  Asif/ COmplainant, the

husband  of Abida Bibi.

8.  The tentative assessment  of record reflects  that

the alleged abductee was missing  from his abode on

24.09.2019. She has filed suit fon dissolution  of

marriage tttled lEst. Abtda Blbt VS ltuhammad Astf
on 28.09.2OL9  before learned  Family Judge,  Ahmed

Pur Sial and same is pending adjudication  and in

addition  to the said suit, the applicattion  was also filed

by the said abductee on 03.1O.2O19 before the lllaqa

Magistrate,  Ahmed  Pur Sial, District Jhang,  in which

she has referred the conduct  of complainant/her

husband  Muhammad  Asif, the said application was

allowed  by the concerned Magistra[e,  who recorded

the statement  of alleged  abductee orfi OS. lO.2O19 and

sent her to  Darulaman alongwithl two minors for

protection  of life from her husband  ]i.e. Complainant.
When the alleged  abductee wasbrouf,ht to Islamabad,

she again recorded her statement  Uf s 16a Cr.P.C.  on

29.LO.2019 and  ascribed the  r]ole of  Shakeel,

4

Chl. Misc.  No.785/B/2019

Shaukat,  Wajid and Umer Hayat/pfeset petitioner,

who have allegedly  abducted her on gunpoint.

9.  The above referred position clearly shows that

two contradictory  stances have been recorded  by the

alleged  abductee before two different  Magistrates,

which are available  on record, wherefy  in the earlier

statement, she has not  uttered a  single word

regarding her abduction rather she was seeking

protection  from her husband and in  the second

statement, she has taken a somersiult  and alleged

the commission  of offence  against the petitioner  as

well as to others

10.  Besides the  above referred position,  the

co-accused nominated through  supplementary

statement in  this  case namely  Shaukat  Ali,

Muhammad  Tanveer have been  grarnted post arrest

bail by the concerned Illaqa Magistrate and as such

rule of consistency  is applicable in this case.  The

Challan  has been submitted  before the Court on

16.11 .2019, however, charge has not flet been framed.

The element of enticement  is not visible and even the

suit for dissolution  of marriage reflects  the conduct of

complainant,  whereby all these factors establish  the

case as of further inquiry in terms of Section  a97Ql

Cr.P.C, even otherwise, the effect gf two different
statements  of  alleged abductee fecorded  before

different Courts have to be evalua

at the time of

trial in evidence,  therefore,  petitio

is entitled for

concession  of post arrest  bail, who is

ently behind

the bars with no useful purpose.

5

Crl. Misc. No.785/B/20 l9
1 1.  For what has been discussed  afoove, the instant

petition  is alloued,  and the petitioner is admitted  to

post arrest bail subject  to his furnishing of bail bonds

in the sum of Rs.100,0OO/-  with one $urety in the like

amount to the satisfaction  of learned  frial.Court.

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KIYANI)

JUDGE

RAMZAN

