JUDGMENT 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  J.-  Through  this  consolidated  judgment,  we  will  answer  the 
instant Murder Reference and decide Jail Appeal No. 76 of 2015 filed by Aamir Shah son of 
Ali Asghar Shah (hereinafter referred to as the "Appellant"). The Murder Reference has been 
referred  for  confirmation  of  death  sentence  handed  down  vide  judgment,  dated  15.04.2015, 
passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  and  Sessions  Judge-V  (West),  Islamabad.  The 
Appellant has been convicted and sentenced in the following terms:- 

For reasons above, accused Amir Shah is hereby found guilty of the offence of rape 
with minor girl Mst, Hameeda Bibi as defined in section 375, P.P.C. And looking to 
the  helplessness  of  the  poor  victim  being  minor  girl,  took  shelter  in  the  family  of 
accused person being relatives and fell prey of the lust of the accused person who has 
ruined  her  life  even  before  she  turns  to  major  and  mature  to  foil  such  attempt  and 
understand pretext. The sentences/punishment prescribed in Section 376, P.P.C. are to 
bring  deterrence  in  the  society,  thus,  in  such  circumstances,  the  accused  person 
convicted and sentenced to death. He be hanged by the neck till he is dead subject to 
confirmation of death reference from the Honorable Islamabad High Court, Islamabad, 
as  envisaged  under  Section  374  Cr.P.C.  In  addition  to  above,  the  accused  is  further 
ordered  to  pay  Rs.100,000/-  (Rupees  one  lac  only)  fine  is  also  imposed  upon  the 
accused person. In case of default of payment of fine, he shall further undergo simple 
imprisonment for six (6) months." 

2.  The facts, in brief, are that at about 8.30 pm on 02-07-2011, Qari Muhammad Anwar, 
Khateeb  of  Syedena  Hassan  Mousque  had  informed  Ch.  Nazir  Ahmad  son  of  Muhammad 
Yaqoob (PW-2) that a child, namely, Hameeda Bibi (hereinafter referred to as the "Victim"), 
was bleeding and complains of being raped. The mother of the latter had passed away while 
her father appears to have abandoned her. Pursuant to the said information, Ch. Nazir Ahm ad 
went to Roshan Basti where he met the Victim and her elder sister, namely, Zameeda Bibi. 
The Victim informed him that her paternal cousin i.e. the Appellant, had subjected her to rape. 
Ch. Nazir Ahmad took the Victim, accompanied by her elder sister and one of the neighbors, 
namely, Safia Bibi (PW-1), to the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (hereinafter referred 
to as the "Hospital"). At the Hospital the Victim was medically examined and given treatment 
by Dr. Syeda Rana Fatima (PW-14). The latter took 4 swabs and prepared Medico Legal Report 
Exh-PL.  The  examination  report  Exh-PK  was  also  prepared  by  her.  The  concerned  Police 
Station  was  informed  and  in  response  Zafar  Iqbal,  ASI  (PW-11)  reached  the  Hospital  and 
reduced the complaint to writing (Exh.PH), which was sent to the Police Station for registration 
of a criminal case. On receiving the written complaint, FIR No.285, dated 03.07.2011, Ex-PC, 
was registered under section 376 of the Pakistan Penal Code,  1860 (hereinafter referred to as 
'P.P.C.'). Zafar Iqbal, ASI (PW-11) took into possession blood stained clothes of the Victim 
vide  recovery  memo  Ex-PB.  On  03-07-2011  the  investigations  were  transferred  to  Ghulam 
Shabbir, SI (PW-15). On 04.07.2011, the latter arrested the Appellant who volunteered to take 
the police officials to the house which was the crime scene. He, therefore, led the Investigating 
Officer,  Ghulam  Shabbir  (PW-15)  and  other  officials  to  the  crime  scene,  where  the  latter 
prepared  an un-scaled  site  plan Exh.PM  and  took into  possession  a blood  stained bed  sheet 
vide recovery memo Exh.PA. The Appellant also led the Investigating Officer to the recovery 
of the blood stained clothes worn by him at the time when the offence was committed. The 
clothes were taken in possession vide recovery memo Exh.PF. Other small pieces of cloth were 
also  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.12.  The  Appellant  was  examined  on 
05.07.2011 by Dr. Muhammad Farrukh Kamal, Deputy Director (PW-9). The latter prepared a 
report, which was brought on record as Exh.PG. The Appellant was said to be physically fit 
and  sexually  active.  The  National  Forensic  Science  Agency  (DNA  Laboratory)  prepared  a 
report, dated 09.03.2012, which was tendered in evidence as Exh-PJ, while the report of the 
Chemical  Examiner,  dated  11.07.2011  was  brought  on  record  as  Exh.PN.  According  to  the 
latter  report  the  sample  swabs  were  found  to  be  stained  with  semen,  while  the  DNA  report 
Exh.P5 was negative. The charge was framed on 13-12-2011 to which the Appellant did not 
plead guilty. The prosecution produced 15 witnesses while the Appellant preferred not to be 
examined  on  oath  and  his  statement  under  Section  342  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 
1898 (hereinafter referred to as the "Cr.P.C.") was duly recorded. After conclusion of the tri al 
and affording an opportunity of hearing to the parties, the learned trial Court convicted and 
sentenced the Appellant vide the impugned judgment, dated 15.04.2015. The Jail Appeal has 

 
 
 
 
been preferred by the Appellant while Murder Reference No.07 of 2015  has been referred to 
this Court for confirmation of the conviction and sentence. 

3.  Barrister  Ahsan  Jamal  Pirzada,  Advocate  High  Court,  assisted  us  on  behalf  of  the 
Appellant.  He  has  contended  that;  the  evidence  brought  on  record  was  not  sufficient  for 
convicting and sentencing the Appellant; the obvious contradictions in the testimonies of the 
prosecution  witnesses  raises  serious doubts  regarding the  commission of  the  offence  by  the 
Appellant; the contradictions were pointed out from the record; the investigations conducted 
by PW-1 and later PW-15 were defective and not honest; the witnesses were not consistent 
and, therefore, the benefit ought to go in favour of the Appellant; reliance has been placed on 
"Mujeeb ur Rehman v. The State" 2018 YLR 389 "Mst. Nazia Anwar v. The State and others" 
2018  SCMR  911,  "Malik  Sher  Muhammad  and  another  v.  Malik  Khair  Muhammad  and  4 
others"  2018  YLR  110,  "Tariq  Pervez  v.  The  State"  1995  SCMR  1345,  and  "Gulfam  and 
another v. The State" 2017 SCMR 1189; the articles taken into possession by the Investigating 
Officers were in violation of section 103 of the Cr.P.C; the articles recovered vide recovery 
memos Exh.PA and Exh.PH cannot be relied upon; the police officials had visited the crime 
scene on 03.07.2011 and, therefore, the stance that they had been led there by the Appellant 
on 04.07.2011 is definitely a concocted story; reliance has been placed on "Mst. Askar Jan and 
others v. Muhammad Daud and others" 2010 SCMR 1604 and "Zafar Iqbal and another v. The 
State" 2016 YLR 1891; the DNA report was negative; the prosecution had failed to prove its 
case beyond a reasonable doubt. 

4.  Mr. Imtiaz Ahmed Sehra, Advocate, appeared on behalf of the complainant and argued 
that;  the  testimony  of  the  Victim  who  entered  the  witness  box  as  PW-3  was  reliable  and 
trustworthy; it is settled law that the testimony of a child victim of rape is sufficient to prove 
the case, provided the testimony is corroborated by other evidence; the testimony of the Victim 
stood  corroborated;  the  Appellant  had  led  the  Investigating  Officer  to  the  crime  scene;  the 
prosecution proved the case beyond reasonable doubt. 

5.  The learned State Counsel adopted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for 
the respondent Complainant. He argued that the prosecution had established the guilt of the 
Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. 

6.  The learned counsel for the parties and the learned State Counsel have been heard and 

we have gone through the record with their able assistance. 

7.  The age of the Victim was about ten years at the time of the commission of the offence. 
The Appellant and the Victim are related as first cousins i.e. the formers mother is the Victim's 
paternal aunt. The elder sister of the Victim, namely, Zameeda Bibi is married to the younger 
brother of the Appellant. The Victim, who had lost her mother and had been abandoned by her 
father, was living with her paternal aunt i.e. Ms. Nasreen Bibi, mother of the Appellant. They 
were living in Roshan Basti at the time of the commission of the offence and before th at they 
used to live in the house where the offence was committed. The Appellant did not mention in 
his statement recorded under Section 342, Cr.P.C. regarding any ill will or acrimony towards 
him by the Victim or her sister. However, he referred to some vague incident in the past, which 
had no nexus with the Victim or her sister. The Victim had entered the witness box as PW -3 
and she was subjected to extensive cross-examination, yet she remained consistent, credible 
and trustworthy. Ch. Nazir Ahmad (PW-2),  who had no relationship with the Victim or her 
family, was informed about the occurrence and, pursuant thereto, he had met the Victim and 
her sister at the mosque. As an independent witness, his statement corroborated the deposition 
of the Victim. Moreover, the un-scaled site plan of the crime scene Exh.PM also supports the 
testimony  of  the  victim.  The  recoveries  and  depositions  of  other  witnesses  have  also  been 
found to lend support to the deposition of the Victim. 

8.  The learned counsel, who assisted us on behalf of the Appellant, has laid great stress 
on the reliability of the Victim's testimony because, as argued by him, she was a child witness 
and  she  could  have  been  tutored  or  influenced  by  elders.  He  has  strenuously  argued  that  it 
would not be safe to rely on the testimony of a child witness. By now the law relating to the 
competence of a child witness to depose in a criminal case and its evidentiary value is well 
settled. It would, therefore, be relevant to discuss the precedent law in this regard. Article 3 of 
the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "Order  of  1984") 
contemplates that all persons are competent to testify unless the Court considers that they are 
prevented  from  understanding  the  questions  put  to  them  or  from  giving  rational  answers  to 

 
 
those questions, by tender or extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or any other 
cause of the same nature. The said Article contains three provisos. The Lahore High Court in 
the case titled "Muhammad Afzal v. The State" PLD 1957 (WP.) Lahore 788 has observed and 
held that each case depends upon its particular facts and circumstances and that no general rule 
of  universal  application  could  be  laid  down  that  in  no  case  should  the  evidence  of   a  child 
witness  be  believed.  It  was  further  observed  and  held  that  the  evidence  of  a  child  witness, 
before it is acted upon should, however, be subjected to close and careful scrutiny. The learned 
Court  referred  to  two  judgments  from  the  Indian  jurisdiction  and  held  them  to  be 
distinguishable. The learned Sindh High Court, in the case titled "Sultan and another v. The 
State" PLD 1965 Karachi 615 observed and held that it was unsafe to base the conviction upon 
the sole testimony of a young child. In the case titled "Abdullah Shah v. The State" 1968 SCMR 
852 the august Supreme Court was considering a conviction based on the solitary evidence of 
a child aged 7 or 8  years who happened to be the convicted accused's daughter. The august 
Supreme Court, while interpreting Section 118 of the Evidence Act, 1872 held and observed 
as follows:- 

"We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  there  is  no  substance  in  either  of  these 
contentions. Section 118 of the Evidence Act, as rightly pointed out by the High Court, 
makes  all  persons  competent  to  testify,  unless  the  Court  considers  that  they  are 
prevented  from  understanding  the  questions  put  to  them  or  from  giving  a  rational 
answer to those questions by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body 
or  mind,  or  any  other  cause  of  the  same  kind.  In  the  present  case  the  Court  had,  by 
questioning  the  child  concerned,  fully  satisfied  itself  that  she  was  capable  of 
understanding the questions put to her and of giving rational answers to those questions. 
Indeed, the trial Court had remarked that she also stood the cross-examination well and 
her evidence was in no way shaken by such cross-examination. In the circumstances 
she was a fully competent witness. Whether she was to be believed or not, was for the 
Courts below to consider. Both the Courts below have believed her testimony because 
she  was  a  natural  witness  and  her  version  found  corroboration  from  the  medical 
evidence and the other circumstances of the case." 

9. 

In  the  case  titled  "Ameer  Umar  v.  The  State"  1976  SCMR  338,  the  august  Supreme 
Court, in the context of a child witness, observed and held that a trial Court was required to 
satisfy itself that the child witness was capable of giving rational answers to the questions put 
to him or her. In the case titled "State through Advocate-General Sindh, Karachi v. Farman 
Hussain  and others" PLD  1995 SC 1,  the  august Supreme Court  observed  and  held  that the 
evidence of a child witness was required to be assessed with care and caution. It was further 
observed and held as follows:- 

"Evidence of child witness is a delicate matter and normally it is not safe to rely upon 
it unless corroborated as rule of prudence. Great care is to be taken that in the evidence 
of child element of coaching is not involved. Evidence of child came up for examination 
before Division Bench of the High Court in the case of Amir Khan and others v. The 
State PLD 1985 Lah. 18 in which after consideration of the relevant case-law on the 
subject, Abdul Shakurul Salam, J. (as he then was) as author of the judgment observed 
that 'children are a most untrustworthy class of witnesses, for, when of tender age, as 
our common experience teaches us, they often mistake dreams for reality, repeat glibly 
as of their own knowledge what they have heard from others and are greatly influenced 
by fear of punishment, by hope of reward and the desire of notoriety. In any case the 
rule of prudence requires that the testimony of child witness should not be relied upon 
unless it is corroborated by some evidence on the record." 

10.  In the case titled "Muhammad Jamal and others v. The State" 1997 SCMR 1595, the 
apex Court found the testimony of the child witness as inspiring and credible and upheld the 
conviction because it was supported by medical evidence. In the case titled "Mst. Raz ia alias 
Jia v. The State" 2009 SCMR 1428, the august Supreme Court upheld the conviction handed 
down, inter alia, on the basis of ocular testimony of two child witnesses. The apex Court had 
observed  that  the  trial  Court  had  taken  all  possible  and  due  steps  to  judge  the  level  of 
intelligence and maturity of the child witnesses before recording their statements because they 
had given consistent accounts of the occurrence and the participation of their mother i.e. the 
convicted accused. It was further observed that this ocular evidence had derived strength and 
corroboration from other evidence. The august Supreme Court, exercising its Shariat appellate 

 
 
 
 
jurisdiction, has observed and held in the case titled "Fayyaz alias Fayyazi and another v. The 
State" 2006 SCMR 1042 as follows:- 

"It has also been rightly observed by the learned Federal Shariat Court that conviction 
could be based on the solitary statement of the victim provided the same is capable of 
implicit reliance and is corroborated by any other piece of evidence if so available in 
the case." 

11.  In  the  case  titled  "Mushtaq  Ahmed  and  another  v.  The  State"  2007  SCMR  473,  the 
august Supreme Court, exercising its Shariat appellate jurisdiction, has observed and held as 
follows:- 

"It is consistent view of this Court that in rape cases mere statement of the victim is 
sufficient  to  connect  the  petitioners  with  the  commission  of  offence  in  case  the 
statement of the victim inspires confidence." 

12.  In the case titled "Ulfat Hussain v. The State" 2010 SCMR 247 the apex Court held that 
although  in  principle  a  conviction  could  be  based  on  the  testimony  of  an  intelligent  and 
understanding child witness but it is always preferred to adopt the settled principle of prudence 
and  rule  of  care  attached  to  the  sole  testimony  of  a  child  witness  despite  the  latter's 
understanding and intelligence. 

13.  It is, therefore, obvious from the above discussion relating to the precedent law, that a 
child witness is not barred from entering the witness box. It is the satisfaction of the trial Court 
which  is  of  crucial  importance.  A  child  who  also  happens  to  be  a  victim  of  an  offence  is 
competent to testify as a witness and the deposition would be worthy of reliance provided the 
Court  is  satisfied  that  he  or  she,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  intelligent  and  understands  the 
significance  of  entering  the  witness  box.  A  conviction  can  also  be  handed  down  placing 
reliance  on  the  sole  testimony  of  a  child  witness  but  as  a  rule  of  prudence  it  is  generally 
preferred  that  it  should  be  corroborated  by  some  other  evidence  so  as  to  ensure  the  safe 
administration of justice. 

14.  In the facts and circumstances of the appeal in hand, the learned trial Court, for good 
reasons  and  after  adopting  precautionary  measures,  was  satisfied  that  the  Victim  was 
competent  to  testify  and  that  her  deposition  could  be  relied  upon.  Her  testimony  remained 
unshaken  despite  being  subjected  to  protracted  cross-examination.  The  medical  evidence, 
recoveries  and  above  all  testimonies  of  other  uninterested  witnesses  lent  support  to  and  
corroborated the plea of the Victim. There is nothing on record to even remotely indicate that 
the Victim or the other witnesses had any reason for falsely implicating the Appellant. To the 
contrary, the credence of the deposition of the Victim and other witnesses is fortified because 
the former, having been abandoned by her father, was living with the Appellant's mother in 
her house and the latter's son was also married to the Victim's sister. There is nothing on record 
to  even  remotely  suggest  that  there  could  have  been  a  reason  for  falsely  implicating  the 
Appellant. The prosecution had succeeded in establishing its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
The Appellant had indeed committed a most heinous offence and there can be no redemption 
or compensation for the Victim because she will have to live with the worst scars that one can 
imagine.  There  are  no  mitigating  circumstances  in  order  to  consider  handing  down  a  lesser 
sentence. 

15.  In view of the above discussion, we answer the reference in the affirmative and confirm 
the conviction and sentence handed down by the learned trial Court. The Jail Appeal No. 76 
of 2015 filed by the appellant is consequently dismissed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
