JUDGMENT 

  MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.---Through 

instant  appeal,  Muhammad 
Shafaqat/appellant  has  assailed  judgment  dated  22.09.2016,  passed  by  learned  Additional 
Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  appellant  was  convicted  in  case  FIR  No.180/2012, 
dated  09.05.2012,  under  section  302/34,  P.P.C.,  Police  Station  Tarnol,  Islamabad  and 
sentenced to life imprisonment as Tazir along with payment of  compensation in the sum of 
Rs.100,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of  deceased  under  section  544-A,  Cr.P.C.  and  in  default 
whereof, the appellant has to further undergo 06 months simple imprisonment. The appellant 
was also extended benefit of section 382-B, Cr.P.C. 

in  brief  are 

2.  The  facts 

that  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/  complainant  filed 
complaint/Exh.PH  and alleged  that  on  09.05.2012,  Sadaqat  Ali informed  him  that  his sister 
namely Asraj Bibi died due to fire and her dead body is lying in  Alfalah Hospital Sangiani, 
whereupon  he  reached  in  the  said  hospital,  where  his  brother-in-law  namely  Muhammad 
Shafaqat/appellant along with his brother namely Rafaqat and other people were present. The 
said Rafaqat told him that the appellant along with his wife (the deceased) and children while 
coming from Dhoke Ali Gohar in his car bearing registration No.DGA-7494 were intercepted 
by three (03) persons in the way and after robbing them they made two fire shots on the chest 
and neck of deceased, who was seated on rear seat of the vehicle, and succumbed to injuries 
later on. The robbers did not snatch the mobile phone of appellant as the same was with his 
sons namely Danish, aged 09 years and Waleed aged 07 years, who were seated on the front 
seat  of  vehicle.  However,  the  complainant  and  his  relatives  belied  the  story  as  narrated  by 
Rafaqat, brother of appellant and had the apprehension that Asraj Bibi has been murdered by 
her husband i.e. the appellant. 

3.  On the basis of complaint/Exh.PH, the case FIR No.180/2012 (Exh.PS) was registered 
and during the investigation of the case, the appellant was arrested and found involved in the 
commission  of  alleged  offence,  therefore,  report  under  section  173,  Cr.P.C.  was  submitted 
before  the  Court  for  trial.  The  charge  was  framed  against  the  appellant  on  20.11.2012,  to 
which he pleaded guilty and placed himself at the mercy of Court, whereafter the appellant 
was  convicted  and  sentenced.  Feeling  aggrieved  thereby,  the  appellant  filed  Appeal 
No.188/2015  before  this  Court,  which  was  allowed  vide  order  dated  16  06.2016  and  the 
impugned conviction and sentence was set aside and the matter was remanded to the learned 
trial  Court  for  the  reason  that  material  evidence  was  not  exhibited  in  the  matter.  After 
remand  of  the  matter,  the  learned  Trial  Court  conducted  the  trial  and  ultimately  found  the 
appellant  guilty  and  sentenced  him  vide  impugned  judgment  dated  22.09.2016.  Hence,  the 
instant appeal. 

4.  Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the learned Trial Court has acqui tted 
two of the co-accused namely Tariq Mehmood and Gulfraz but convicted and sentenced the 
appellant on the same set of evidence; that learned Trial Court has failed to give reasons for 
difference amongst the role of co-accused with the appellant; that the only piece of evidence, 
which surfaced on record is the testimonies of defence witnesses Muhammad Sadaqat/D.W.1 
and  Danish  Ali/D.W.2/  eye-witness/real  son  of  the  deceased,  who  have  not  attributed  any 
overt  act  to  the  appellant  rather  denied  the  happening  of  the  event  as  set  up  by  the 
prosecution  side;  that  entire  case  is  of  circumstantial  evidence  and  there  is  no  eye -witness 
except the appellant and his son Danish Ali/D.W.2; that recovery of crime weapon has been 
planted; that motive has not been established in any manner; that the prosecution has failed 
to prove its case beyond any shadow of doubt. 

5.  Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.2 contends that he heavily relies upon 
statement  of  the  appellant  recorded  at  the  time  of  framing  of  the  charge,  whereby  the 
appellant pleaded his guilt that he has committed murder of his wife and the said statement 
was voluntary and without any duress or coercion; that the said confessional statement has to 
be  taken  into  consideration  while  placing  the  other  evidence  in  juxtaposition,  which  leads 
that  the  appellant  has  committed  murder  of  his  wife  although  the  appellant  has  denied  the 
alleged  incident  in  his  subsequent  statement  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.,  which  is  an 
afterthought;  that  evidence  of  Danish  Ali/D.W.2  has  been  managed  by  way  of  family 
pressure, which has no value in the eye of law; that the prosecution has successfully proved 
its case beyond any shadow of doubt that the appellant has murdered his wife. 

 
 
6. 

I have heard the arguments advanced by learned counsel for both the parties as well 

as learned State Counsel and perused the record. 

7.  Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/  complainant  also 
recorded  his  statement  and  reiterated  his  stance  of  complaint  and  perceived  that  his  siste r 
Mst.  Asraj  Bibi/deceased  has  been  murdered  by  the  appellant  due  to  family  dispute  and 
belied the story that robbers shot her dead and looted the appellant of his belongings i.e. his 
ID  card  and  money.  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/complainant  alleged  the  motive  behind  the 
murder  that  appellant  was  demanding  money  from  deceased  to  purchase  a  tractor.  PW -8 
Muhammad  Sagheer/complainant  in  his  statement  further  stated  that  he  joined  the 
investigation  and  during  the  course  of  investigation,  the  appellant  disclosed  about  the 
weapon of offence i.e., .32 bore revolver, which was recovered on 08.05.2012 vide recovery 
memo Exh.PF, whereas licence of the pistol was taken into possession vide recovery memo 
Exh.PG,  whereas the  vehicle  (DGA-7494), Corolla  white  colour,  was taken  into possession 
vide recovery memo Exh.PB. 

8.  During  cross-examination,  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/  complainant  acknowledged 
that he did not write date of occurrence in his complaint/Exh.PH and the incident appears to 
be without any witness and that he himself is not an eyewitness of the occurrence and even 
no eyewitness has ever contacted him. He conceded that inquest report was prepared by the 
police in his presence and Columns No.22 and 23 of the report are blank. He also conceded 
that he filed written application to the concerned police officer at about 01:40 a.m. in the mid 
night. He further conceded that Danish and Waleed were sitting on the front seat of vehicle at 
the  time  of  occurrence.  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/  complainant  being  brother  of  the 
deceased admitted that his sister neither came to his house during the period of her marriage 
in an infuriated position nor he filed any application to the police station against his brother -
in-law i.e. appellant. He also acknowledged the most important fact that, "I have no evidence 
to the effect that all three accused, in connivance with each other, committed the murder of 
my  sister".  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/complainant  during  cross-examination  further  stated 
that when he reached Al-Falah Sangjani Hospital, 60/70 relatives were present there and he 
identified  the  dead  body  along  with  his  close  relative  Shaukat  in  the  hospital.  He  further 
acknowledged that he recorded his statement on 09.05.2012, in which he did not mention the 
fact that PW-3 Nazik Mehmood saw co-accused Tariq Mehmood and Gulfraz at the place of 
occurrence.  He  also  acknowledged  that  he  conceded  the  stance  of  Rafaqat  regarding  the 
occurrence. 

9.  The other important piece of evidence is recovery of weapon of offence i.e. .32 bore 
revolver,  bearing  No.B4339,  which  was  recovered  from  Barsati  Nala  on  the  pointation  of 
appellant  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PF  on  19.05.2012.  The  said  recovery  was  effected  in 
presence of PW-8 Muhammad Sagheer/complainant and PW-7 Shakeel Akhtar/ constable. 

10.  PW-7  Shakeel  Akhtar/constable  stated  that  on  09.05.2012,  Investigation  Officer 
prepared  recovery  memo/Exh.PC  of  bloodstained  soil  and  recovery  memo/Exh.PD  of  last 
worn clothes etc. (P6 to P10). He is also witness of Sikka Goli (Exh.P11) given by the MLO 
to  Investigation  Officer  through  Exh.PE.  He  further  stated  that  on  19.05.2012,  .32  bore 
revolver (Exh.P12) was recovered from Barsati Nala on the pointation of Tariq Mehmood/co -
accused.  He  further  stated  that  two  live  cartridges  (P13  and  P14)  were  recovered  on 
unloading  the  .32  bore  revolver.  However,  during  the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-7 
Shakeel  Akhtar/constable  conceded  that  engraved  number  near  the  barrel  of  revolver  is 
illegible and the place of recovery is not a thoroughfare, rather is a field, where there is no 
population.  He  further  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  on  13.05.2012  and 
revolver was recovered on 19.05.2012, which is registered in the name of Ghulam Farid son 
of Bostan. PW-7 Shakeel Akhtar/constable also conceded that "after recovery of license  and 
pistol  we  straightaway  came  to  the  police  station".  Such  statement  clearly  spells  out  that 
pistol  was  neither  sealed  nor  its  recovery  memo  was  prepared  on  spot  and  such  illegal 
practice makes the recovery inconsequential. 

11.  The last important witness in this case is the Investigation Officer namely Muhammad 
Idrees/S.I.,  who  appeared  as  PW-11  and  stated  that  on  08.05.2012,  he  reached  to  Al-Falah 
Sangjani Hospital on official vehicle when he received information of the alleged occurrence 
and witnessed the dead body of deceased on stretcher, whereafter he prepared memo of dead 
body  vide  Exh.PM.  He  further  stated  that  he  received  written  application  from  PW -8 
Muhammad  Sagheer/complainant  for  registration  of  FIR  and  taken  into  possession  vehicle 
bearing registration No.DGA-7494 (white colour, Model-1974) vide recovery memo Exh.PB, 
whereafter he sent the dead body to PIMS Hospital for postmortem examination. He further 

stated that he could not inspect the place of occurrence due to darkness, rather prepared t he 
site  plan  (Exh.PO)  in  the  morning  as  well  as  taken  into  possession  bloodstained  earth  vide 
recovery  memo  Exh.PC  along  with  two  empties  of  .32  bore  revolver  vide  recovery  memo 
Exh.PJ. He also stated that the CMO handed over him sealed parcel of Sikka Goli (Exh.PE), 
which was recovered from the dead body of deceased. He further stated that on 13.05.2012, 
statements  of  three  witnesses  were  recorded  under  section  161,  Cr.P.C.  and  all  three 
nominated  accused  i.e.  appellant,  Tariq  Mehmood  and  Gulfaraz  Khan  were  arrested  and 
during  the  course  of  investigation,  they  were  found  guilty.  He  further  stated  that  on 
19.05.2012,  Tariq  Mehmood/co-accused  got  recovered  the  weapon  of  offence  i.e.  .32  bore 
revolver from a Naala leading towards cement factory. He also stated that on the pointation 
of Gulfaraz/co-accused, the licence of .32 bore revolver was recovered from clothes lying in 
the room of cement factory. 

12.  However,  during  the  course  of  cross-examination,  PW-11  Muhammad  Idrees/I.O. 
conceded  that  Naeem  Ullah/Moharrar  informed  him  at  about  10:55  p.m.  that  a  victim  has 
received  bullet  injury  during  dacoity  and  has  been  taken  to  Sangjani  Hospital.  He  also 
conceded  that  he  has  not  joined  Sadaqat  Ali  in  the  investigation  as  well  as  the  two  minors 
due  to  their  tender  age,  who  were  present  with  the  appellant  at  the  time  of  occurrence.  He 
also  conceded  that  he  has  not  produced  the  accused  persons  before  the  Magistrate  for 
recording  of  their  statements  under  section  164,  Cr.P.C.  He  further  acknowledged  that  the 
blood-stained  clothes  of  appellant  were  not  taken  into  possession  because  he  disappeared 
from  the  hospital.  He  also  conceded  that  he  neither  mentioned  about  the  presence  of  blood 
inside  the  vehicle  nor  took  mobile  numbers  of  PW-8  Muhammad  Sagheer/complainant  and 
Sadaqat Ali. He received Sikka/bullet from Dr. Nasreen Butt in sealed parcel for analysis but 
the same was not sent for the purpose of chemical analysis. He further conceded that .32 bore 
revolver  was  sent  to  the  laboratory  on  10.07.2012.  He  also  acknowledged  that  empties 
remain inside after making fire shots from the revolver. He also stated that no person made 
statement  before  him  that  all  three  accused  persons  were  seen  together  at  the  place  of 
occurrence. 

13.  On  the  other  hand,  the  prosecution  has  heavily  relied  upon  the  evidence  of  PW-2 
Zaheer  regarding  motive,  who  stated  that  one  month  prior  to  the  occurrence  his 
sister/deceased  came  to  his  house  and  told  him  and  her  mother  Zarmin  Bibi  that  her 
husband/appellant  is  demanding  Rs.250,000/-  to  purchase  a  tractor,  who  also  extended  life 
threats in case if she failed to manage the said amount. However, this stance of PW -2 Zaheer 
has not been corroborated through any independent source, therefore, the motive setup by the 
prosecution through PW-2 Zaheer has not been proved. 

14.  Essentially,  the  prosecution  case  mainly  rests  upon  circumstantial  evidence  of  the 
appellant and his son Danish Ali, whereas the former has been made an accused in this case, 
while  the  later  was  never  associated  by  Investigation  Officer.  However,  Danish  Ali  put 
appearance before the learned Trial Court as DW-2 and expressed his stance in the following 
manner:- 

"That on 08.05.2012 we went to Dhok Aksar Khan and left our house at 8:30 p.m. We 
went to the house of a friend of my father whose name is Aksar Khan. We came back 
from  there  during  the  night  time.  In  the  way  there  was  three  men  they  stopped  our 
vehicle. They deboarded my father and they were demanding money from my father. 
Then they also demanded vehicle from my father. My mother started shouting. Then 
they fired upon my mother, on hearing the voice of fire the men from the house where 
we  gone  as  guest  came  and  took  my  mother  in  the  vehicle  to  Hospital.  Me  and  my 
brother went home with a taxi wala. I went to police station two or three times after 
the occurrence. I also made my statement before the I.O. 

xxxxxxxxxx by learned counsel for the complainant. 

It is correct that my mother was murdered during the occurrence. After the occurrence 
till  today  I  am  residing  at  the  home  of  my  father.  Me  and  my  brother  were 
sitting/boarding at the front seat of vehicle. It is correct that at the time of occurrence 
me and my brother were playing with the mobile of our father. Said mobile remained 
with us even after the occurrence. My mother was sitting right behind our seat and not 
behind driving seat. My mother did not go out from the vehicle. Two fire shots hit my 
mother.  She  did  not  speak  any  thing  after  being  hit  with  the  bullets  as  she  became 
unconscious immediately. At the time of occurrence it was dark. I know that this case 

 
 
 
was  decided  earlier  and  my  father  was  awarded  sentence  of  imprisonment  by  the 
court.  During  the  previous  trial  proceedings  I  did  not  appear  as  defense  witness.  I 
cannot tell the reason why I did not appear during the first round and why I am before 
the  court  now.  Police  has  not  recorded  my  statement  during  the  investigation  of  the 
instant case. I love both my mother and father. The murderer of my mother should be 
punished. It is incorrect to suggest that I have deposed falsely just to save the skin of 
my father." 

15.  Keeping  in  view  the  above  background,  I  am  of  the  view  that  PW-11  Muhammad 
Idrees/I.O. had not conducted the investigation in its true perspective. The weapon of offence 
i.e.  .32  bore  revolver  was  got  recovered  on  the  pointation  of  Tariq  Mehmood/co-accused, 
who was acquitted on the basis of same evidence. Even otherwise, the recovered weapon of 
offence  has  not  been  matched  as  per  report  (Exh.PR)  of  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency, 
conclusion of which is reproduced as under:- 

  The  item  C1  cartridge  case  was  eliminated  as  having  been  fired  in  the  item  R1 

revolver. 

  The  item  C2  cartridge  case  was  examined  and  found  to  be  not  suitable  for 

comparison. 

16.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  revolver  has  a  cylinder  that  contains  the  bullet  and  does  not 
automatically  eject  a  spent  casing,  but  surprisingly  the  Investigation  Officer  got  recovered 
two  firearm  empties  of  .32  bore  revolver  from  the  place  of  occurrence  through  rec overy 
memo Exh.PJ, whereas it is tolerable to a prudent mind that an offender while using revolver 
as his weapon of offence would manually eject spent cases at the crime scene. Nevertheless, 
the  recovered  two  empties  did  not  match  with  the  recovered  weapon of  offence,  hence, the 
recovery  is  inconsequential,  especially  when  the  revolver  was  sent  to  laboratory  on 
10.07.2012 with inordinate delay of two months. 

17.  This Court is mindful of the facts that appellant did not report the dacoity, while PW -
8  Muhammad  Sagheer  filed  complaint  (Exh.PH)  on  the  basis  of  verbal  statement  of 
appellant's  brother,  whereas  the  star  witness  of  this  case,  i.e.  Danish  Ali,  son  of  appellant, 
aged  about  09  years  at  the  time  of  occurrence,  was  not  associated  in  the  investigation  and  
such  best  available  evidence  was  withheld  by  the  Investigation  Officer  without  giving  any 
reason,  however,  the  said  Danish  Ali  put  appearance  as  DW-2  in  defence  and  imposed 
liability upon three unknown persons. 

18.  On  20.11.2012,  the  appellant  pleaded  guilty  at  the  time  of  framing  of  charge 
regarding  murder  of  his  wife,  however  the  learned  trial  Court  did  not  accept  the  stance  of 
appellant and opined in the following manner:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accordingly,  prosecution  has  produced  evidence  of  12  witnesses  to  bring  guilt   of  the 
appellant  home, however,  the  entire  evidence is  silent  qua  the  connection of  appellant  with 
the  crime,  except  that  he  was  present  at  the  place  of  occurrence  and  he  was  nominated  by 
brother of deceased as accused. Although, PW-8 Muhammad Sagheer/complainant failed to 
place on record any evidence to connect the appellant with the commission of offence. 

19.  Since the case in hand is based on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution has failed 
to prove the same through cogent evidence and also failed to establish the chain of evidence 
in  any  manner,  even  otherwise,  the  learned  trial  Court  acquitted  Tariq  Mehmood  and 
Gulfaraz,  co-accused  persons  on  the  basis  of  same  set  of  evidence,  which  approach  should 
have also been adopted to the extent of present appellant being an alleged co-accused as also 
held  by  the  apex  Court  in  judgments  reported  as  2018  SCMR  313  (Ulfat  Husain  v.  The 
State), 2017 SCMR 1672 (Tariq v. The State), 2017 SCMR 1645 (Muhammad Afzal v. The 
State) and 2015 SCMR 137 (Muhammad Ali v. The State), wherein the following principles 
have been settled. 

i. 

acquittal of all co-accused persons having similar role as that of accused on the same 
evidence, also entitled the accused to same treatment. 

ii.  Same set of evidence which was disbelieved qua involvement of co-accused persons 

could not be relied upon to acquit the accused on capital charge. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  analogy,  a  doubt  emerges  on  record  in  favour  of  the  appellant, 
who has been nominated for murder of his wife in connivance with two co-accused persons, 
who  have  already  been  acquitted  by  the  learned  trial  Court  on  the  basis  of  same  set  of 
evidence,  against  whom  no  appeal  has  been  filed  by  the  prosecution  side.  Similarly,  the 
weapon of offence was recovered on the pointation of Tariq Mehmood/co-accused, therefore, 
the  recovery  has  nothing  to  do  with  appellant,  whereas  the  role  of  commission  of  murder 
points towards the co-accused persons, and not towards the appellant. 

20.  On the other hand, it is trite law that interested and closely related witnesses cannot 
be  called  as  independent  witnesses  and  their  statements  cannot  be  relied  upon  unless  their 
evidence  is  corroborated  through  an  independent  source.  Whereas.  PW-8  Muhammad 
Sagheer complainant and PW-2 Zaheer, being brothers of deceased are interested witnesses. 
have  nominated  the  appellant  for  commission  of  murder  of  deceased,  even  otherwise,  they 
are neither eyewitnesses of the occurrence nor they are able to relate any event to prove their 
alleged  motive  against  the  appellant  regarding  his  demand  of  money  to  the  tune  of 
Rs.250,000/- 
therefore,  evidence  of  PW-8  Muhammad 
Sagheer/complainant  and  PW-2  Zaheer  could  not  be  taken  as  credible  evidence  to  award 
capital  punishment  as  also  opined  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  judgment  reported  as 
2017 SCMR 486 (Muhammad Asif v. The State). 

for  purchase  of 

tractor, 

21.  On  the  contrary,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  relied  upon  the  confessional 
statement of appellant dated 20.11.2012. In my humble view, if the statement of appellant is 
accepted  in  toto,  even  then  independent  prosecution  evidence  was  required  to  prove  the 
charges against the appellant and the learned trial Court has rightly adopted the said course 
as  provisions  of  section  265-E(2),  Cr.P.C.  provide  recourse  to  the  trial  to  convict  the 
appellant or called for evidence and the word "may" is used along with discretion of the trial 
Court.  The  above  referred  order  dated  20.11.2012  of  the  learned  trial  Court  explain  the 
reason  for  calling  the  evidence  that  the  case  is  for  the  offence  of  murder  under  section 
302/34, P.P.C. 

22.  Likewise,  the  apex  Court  has  elaborated  the  requirements  of  confession  in  2018 
SCMR 495  (Intekhab  Ahmad  Abbasi  and others  v.  The  State  and  others),  2017 SCMR  986 
(Hashim  Qasim  and  others  v.  The  State)  and  2017  SCMR  713  (Muhammad  Ismail  v.  The 
State). While relying upon the said judgments, I am of the view that the appellant was unable 
to  understand  the  questions,  especially  when  a  question  was  put  to  him  and  recorded  in 
English in the following manner: 

Q.2. Do you plead guilty to the charge? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ans.  Yes,  I  plead  guilty  to  the  charge.  "I  myself  had  killed  my  wife  -  Siraj  Bibi 
deceased with a ,fire arm due to my honour as I suspected her to be the lady of easy 
virtue. I am of the guilty of her murder and co-accused Tariq Mahmood and Gulfraz 
have no concern whatsoever with this case. I place myself at the mercy of the Court." 

The above referred statement gives rise to the situation where the apex Court in the case of 
Intekhab  Ahmad  Abbasi  supra  highlighted  the  reasons  for  not  accepting  such  kind  of 
statement in the following words: 

"Admittedly  some  of  the  accused  were  illiterate  or  not  well  educated  and  spoke  the 
language  the  Magistrate  could  not  understand  -  No  translator/interpreter  was 
appointed to record their statement in words exactly spoken by them." 

23.  Evidently,  though  the  learned  Trial  Court  followed  other  prerequisites  while 
recording  the  statement  of  appellant  but  recorded  the  statement  in  English,  which  is  not  in 
line  with  the  principles  discussed  above,  therefore,  such  kind  of  confession  on  the  part  of 
appellant misses the element of voluntariness, especially such statement has been retracted in 
second  round  of  litigation.  This  Court  is  also  of  the  opinion  that  since  the  said  alleged 
confession  has  not  been  corroborated  through  any  independent  evidence  of  reliable  nature, 
the same could not be used for the purpose of conviction on capital charge. Reliance in this 
regard is placed upon 2017 SCMR 898 (Muhammad Ismail v. The State), 2017 SCMR 335 
(Abdul Nabi v. The State) and 2016 SCMR 1617 (Muhammad Ashraf v. The State). It is also 
trite  law  that  conviction  could  not  be  recorded  on  the  sole  basis  of  confessional  statement, 
especially when the prosecution failed to prove its case beyond any shadow of doubt as  also 
held in 2015 SCMR 856 (Dadullah and others v. The State). 

24.  Keeping  in  view  the  above  background,  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  link  the 
appellant  with  the  murder  of  deceased,  which  results  into  a  benefit  of  doubt  in  favour  of 
appellant  and  it  is  trite law  that  if  a  slightest  doubt  emerges  on  record,  benefit  of  the  same 
shall  be  extended  to  the  accused,  therefore,  the  captioned  Criminal  Appeal  No.180/2016 
(Muhammad  Shafaqat  v.  The  State  and  others)  is  ALLOWED  impugned  judgment  dated 
22.09.2016  passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad  is  hereby  SET  ASIDE 
and  the  appellant  is  ACQUITTED  from  case  FIR  No.180/2012.  dated  09.05.2012,  under 
section  302/34,  P.P.C.,  Police  Station  Tarnol,  Islamabad,  hence,  he  be  released  forthwith 
from jail, if not required in any other case. 

Appeal allowed. 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

NOTE: This document has just text (draft) of judgment. Please contact copy branch of IHC for complete Judgment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
