JUDGMENT 

Through  this  single  judgment,  I  intend  to  decide  the  captioned  two  criminal  appeals  and 
criminal  revision  as  the  same  have  arisen  out  from  FIR  No.334,  dated  09.09.2015,  under 
sections 302, 342, 34, P.P.C., P.S. Industrial Area, Islamabad. 

2.  Through  the  captioned  Criminal  Appeal  No.  107/2019,  appellant  Amir  Sajjad  has 
assailed the judgment dated 12.04.2019, passed by learned Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad, 
whereby Amir Sajjad/ appellant was convicted and sentenced to pay Diyat of Rs.16,80,270/ - 
to the legal heirs of deceased and shall also undergo for 04 years' R.I as Tazir under section 
316, P.P.C. Appellant was also convicted under sections 344/34, P.P.C. to undergo 03 years' 
R.I with fine of Rs.50,000/-. In default of payment of fine, he shall further undergo six months' 
S.I. 

3. 

In Criminal  Appeal No. 240/2019, appellant Abdul Hafeez has assailed the judgment 
dated  29.06.2019,  passed  by  learned  Sessions  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  Abdul 
Hafeez/appellant was convicted and sentenced to pay Diyat Rs.16,80,270/- to the legal heirs 
of  deceased  and  shall  also  undergo  for  04  years'  R.I  as  Tazir  under  section  316,  P.P.C. 
Appellant was also convicted under sections 344/34, P.P.C. to undergo 03 years' R.I with fine 
of Rs.50,000/-. In default of payment of fine, he shall further undergo six months' S.I. 

4.  Complainant  Muhammad  Asif  filed  criminal  revision  against  the  judgment  dated 
12.04.2019, passed by  learned Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad in case of Amir Sajjad and 
prayed for enhancement of sentence upto 14 years of RI in terms of sections 302/34, P.P.C., in 
addition  to  above  a  sentence of  RI  four  years  with  fine  of  Rs.  50,000/-  in  terms  of  sections 
344/34, P.P.C. 

5.  Brief  facts referred in the complaint Ex.PM (Ex.PK in the second trial) submitted by 

PW-10 Zulfiqar Ahmed, Inspector (PW-11 in second trial) are as under:- 

6.  The complaint has been converted into FIR No.334, dated 09.09.2015, under sections 
302/34,  P.P.C.,  P.S.  Industrial  Area,  Islamabad  referred  as  Ex.PN  (Ex.PK  in  second  trial), 
whereby  matter was investigated by Muhammad Rafique Inspector/PW-12 and subsequently 
by  PW-13  Ashiq  Shah,  SI  who  arrested  both  the  accused/appellants  and  submitted  challan 
under section 173, Cr.P.C. whereby trial Court framed the charge under sections 319/34, P.P.C. 
in case of Amir Sajjad and in case of Abdul Hafeez the charge was framed under section 302, 
P.P.C.  separately  vide  order  dated  26.05.2016  and  11.06.2019  respectively,  however,  trial 
Court while recording the evidence of 13 PWs in the trial of Amir Sajjad and 12 PWs in case 

 
 
 
 
of  Abdul  Hafeez/appellant,  convicted the  appellants  under  sections  316/344,  P.P.C. through 
two  different  judgments  by  declaring  the  appellants  as  guilty  of  Qatl  Shibh-i-Amd.  Hence, 
these two appeals have been filed by the appellants. On the other hand legal heirs of deceased 
Irfan (Muhammad Asif, real brother) filed Criminal Revision No.72/2019 for enhancement of 
sentence of Amir Sajjad only. 

7.  Learned counsel for the appellants contends that appellants are innocent and they were 
convicted on the basis of surmises and conjecture as there was no direct evidence against the 
police for causing qatl-i-amd or qatl shibh-i-amd in any manner, even prosecution has failed 
to link the appellants with the crime; that there was no independent witness  in this case and 
trial Court has not appreciated the medical condition of deceased who was suffering from ulcer 
as well as enlargement of liver and the injuries noted in the post mortem are only superficial 
and are bruises, which could not cause death to any person in the ordinary course of nature; 
that  deceased  was  arrested  on  09.09.2013  in  case  under  section  392,  P.P.C.  whose  health 
condition  was  deteriorated  during  the  period  of  physical  remand  and  appellants  took  the 
deceased to hospital but he took his last breath on his way and as such appellants have provided 
due care to the deceased due to his medical condition and as such appellants are not guilty of 
offence. 

8.  Conversely, learned counsel for the legal heirs of deceased contends that deceased was 
illegally  arrested  from  the  jurisdiction  of  Police  Station  in  District  Attock  and  was taken to 
CIA Center, Islamabad where he was tortured, abused and assaulted by the appellant s, even he 
died in the judicial custody and the dead-body was lying in a car, as such the conduct of the 
appellants  require  maximum  punishment  who  violated  the  police  orders  as  well  as 
constitutional  guarantees  provided  to  the  citizens  of  Pakistan  including  the  deceased;  that 
petitioner has prayed for enhancement of sentence of principal accused Amir Sajjad in terms 
of section 316, P.P.C. as R.I. for 14 years being the maximum punishment . 

9.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

10.  Perusal of record reveals that appellants arrested the deceased Irfan for investigation in 
criminal case FIR No.79, dated 11.03.2015, under section 392, P.P.C., P.S. Sihala, Islamabad 
being  I.O  of  the  said  case  who  were  performing  their  duties  in  CIA  Centre,  Islamabad, 
however, the  said  accused/deceased  was  ill  and  while  shifting  to  hospital  for treatment  was 
died. Both the appellant left the deceased in car No.LEA-4128, at street No.5, 1-9/3, Islamabad. 
The  information was given  by the CIA staff  Moharir to the Inspector Zulfiqar Ahmed/ PW-
10/PW-11 in the second trial who lodged the complaint Ex.PN/PK with the allegations that on 
the information they reached at street No.5, I/9, Islamabad along with constable Waseem Iqbal 
where they found dead body of Irfan on the back seat of the car and as such he declared Abdul 
Hafeez ASI and Amir Sajjad ASI of CIA being guilty of murder. The autopsy of deceased was 
conducted by Dr. Muhammad Naseer, CMO PW-1 on 09.09.2015 and following injuries were 
found on the dead body of deceased:- 

Injury No. 1 
Injury No. 2 

Injury No. 3 
Injury No. 4 

Both feet were reddish in colour i.e. fleshing of red skin. 
There were contusion marks on the left thigh in its upper 1/3 
antero-laterally measuring 6 x 3 x 3 cm. 
Contusion on the front of left iliac fossa measuring 2 x 1 cm. 
Contusion marks on right thigh and antero-laterally 8 x 3 x 3 cm in 
its upper 1/3. 

 
 
Injury No. 5 

Injury No. 6 

OPINION 

Contusion marks on the right arm right lumber region measuring 2 
x 2 cm. 
Abraded area on right wrist antero-laterally 4 x 1.5 x 1 cm. 

Stomach and aesophafus has got engorgement of veins and aesophafus varieces. Liver 
colour was not normal. All the organs mentioned above i.e. liver spleen, kidney  piece 
of small instine and stomach with its content were taken for any intoxication and were 
histo-pathological  examination.  Final  opinion  was  not  given  regarding  the  cause  of 
death till the receipt of chemical examiner report. 

The probable time between death and post mortem 6 to 6-1/2 hours. 

Postmortem  report  Exh.PA/1-4,  is  my  handwriting  and  bears  my  signatures.  On  the 
back of page No. 4 as the samples of stomach and its content, small instine liver, spleen 
and kidney were sent to Punjab Forensic Laboratory Lahore for any  intoxication and 
histo-pathological  examination.  Report  of  histo-pathologist  shows  stasis  of  bile  in  a 
canalculi with fatty degeneration and the renal section reveals vascular congestion. 

Cause of death could not be determined as it was negative autopsy. 

11.  During the course of cross-examination, PW-1 acknowledged that deceased was patient 
of ulcer and injuries so caused on the dead body of the deceased are not fatal in nature or could 
cause death in ordinary course of nature. However, he acknowledged that as per his experience 
the injuries might be result of police torture. The medical board was also constituted and even 
chemical  examination  report  disclosed  no  poison  or  drug  detected  from  sample.  He  also 
confirmed that contusion can occur due to fall on ground or due to any  blunt trauma  injury. 
The injury No.v is a contusion mark on the right arm, lumber region measuring 2 x 2 cm. He 
confirmed  that  medical  board  completely  agreed  with  his  opinion  given  in  the  post  mortem 
report Ex.PA. 

12.  Besides the evidence of doctor prosecution produced Nasreen Bibi, mother of deceased 
Irfan  who  stated  that  he  was  employee  at  Petrol  pump,  Tarnol  and  was  unmarried.  On 
26.08.2015 her son Muhammad Asif on gate knock came inside and told that two persons are 
standing out of the house and asking for Irfan on which Irfan went towards the gate, hue and 
cries  started  and  men  standing  outside  the  house  abducted  him  whereupon  her  son  Basit, 
maternal cousin Abdullah present inside the house rushed towards the gate along with Asif and 
followed the abductors but till their reaching outside her son was taken away by those persons 
in their vehicle. She went to police station Basal along with her relatives and official of the 
police told them that two persons from Islamabad police are Amir Sajjad and Abdul Hafeez, 
who took the deceased, whereafter application was submitted by Abdullah, which was filed in 
the said police station, then they contacted Islamabad Police where deceased Irfan was detained 
and Amir Sajjad present in the court demanded Rs.5,00,000/- from them for release of her son, 
however,  on  09.09.2015  at  about  10:00  p.m.  Abdullah  was  informed  through  mobile  phone 
that Irfan died in police custody. 

13.  PW-2 stated that when she saw the dead body, whereby number of torture marks on the 
dead body were present and blood was coming from nose and ears. During the course of cross-
examination she acknowledged that when she came out of house accused persons have already 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taken her son in the vehicle. She also saw her son Irfan in the building of CIA on 27.08.2015, 
however,  she  stated  that  she  did  not  see  the  accused  Amir  Sajjad  with  her  own  eyes  while 
torturing her son in the CIA building. 

14.  The  prosecution  has  also  produced  Abdullah  PW-6,  who  reiterated  the  same  facts 
brought on record by the real mother of deceased, who stated that he has submitted complaint 
to the P.S. Basal for the abduction of deceased Irfan by the appellants. He confirmed that he 
identified two persons who brought Irfan deceased from their house as Abdul Hafeez, ASI and 
Amir Sajjad, ASI. He further stated on oath that both the accused demanded Rs.5,00,000/- for 
release of Irfan and subsequently demanded Rs.3,00,000/- for his release. During the course 
of cross-examination he confirmed that his statement was recorded on 10.09.2015 by the I.O 
and  no  identification  parade  of  any  of  the  accused  was  arranged  during  the  course  of 
investigation.  However,  he  denied  the  involvement of  deceased  Irfan  in  number  of  criminal 
cases, even he denied suggestion that Irfan was proclaimed offender wanted by police. 

15.  Similarly,  Muhammad  Asif  appeared  as PW-7, who  is  real  brother of  deceased  Irfan 
and  stated  that  on  26.08.2015  when  he  came  outside  the  house  saw  that  appellants  were 
standing and asking for the deceased and when Irfan came outside the house these two persons 
kidnapped him forcibly. He further stated that he informed P.S. Basal that Irfan was taken into 
custody by the police officials of CIA, Islamabad. During the course of cross-examination he 
acknowledged that he is employee of Highway department. He was cross-examined at length 
but nothing important has been extracted. 

16.  Defense  side  has  cross-examined  PW-7  with  particular  question  that  as  to  whether 
appellants were dressed in police uniform, while answering the question at the first instance 
he  said  yes  but  subsequently  stated that they  were  wearing  civilian  dress  but on  27.08.2015 
they were in uniform in P.S. 

17.  The  prosecution  has  also  produced  Ghulam  Rasool  constable  who  stated that  he  was 
present  in  Industrial  Area  and  received  information that  dead  body  was  lying  in  the  vehicle 
parked. Rafique Inspector took photographs of the dead body and prepared inquest report, then 
shifted the deceased to PIMS for autopsy. He stated that post mortem was not conducted on 
the same day due to late time on refusal of Dr. Naseer, which was conducted on the very next 
day. However, during the course of cross-examination he acknowledged that taking of pictures 
of dead body lying in the car was not referred in Ex.DA. 

18.  The case has been investigated by Ashiq Shah, S.I/I.O/ PW-13, who interrogated Amir 
Sajjad  appellant  stated  that  during  his  investigation  it  was  found  that  appellant  arrested  the 
deceased on 09.09.2013 from vicinity of chungi No.26 and during shifting to CIA head office 
Irfan  deceased  stated  that  he  was  ill  and  was  not  feeling  well  and  colour  of  his  face  was 
changed, and was being taken to hospital but he died on his way. Further confirmed that both 
the appellants have denied the issue of torture and stated that deceased died due to his medical 
condition. During the course of cross-examination he confirmed that he changed the offence 
under section 302, P.P.C. which was not made out, same was converted into section 319, P.P.C. 
and challan was submitted in this regard. The said I.O. was declared hostile on the request of 
prosecution. During the course of cross-examination he acknowledged that he has not obtained 
CCTV footage of 27.08.2015 from CIA building, further confirmed that location of accused 
persons  were  available  on the  CDR  at  Basal,  Attock on 26.08.2015.  He  also  confirmed  that 
post mortem report reveals that there were contusion marks on the dead body of deceased. He 

 
 
further  confirmed  that  he  converted  section  302,  P.P.C.  to  319,  P.P.C.  after  getting 
confirmation from PDSP branch, sanction of SDPO and the District Attorney. 

19.  The appellant Amir Sajjad recorded his statement under section 342, Cr.P.C. and denied 
the case of prosecution and even denied the arrest of deceased. He also stated that car in which 
dead  body  was  lying  No.LEA-4128  belongs  to Abdul  Hafeez  ASI.  Similarly,  Abdul  Hafeez 
ASI  while  recording  statement  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.  answered  question  No.9  in  the 
following manner:- 

Ans.  Deceased  Irfan  was  a  notorious  criminal  and  was  wanted  in  different  crimes  to 
different police stations for Islamabad and Punjab. He was arrested on 09.09.2015 by 
me along with police party from Chungi No. 26 on a tip of informer and deceased was 
arrested in presence of Syed Shujat Kazmi, Syed Farasat Kazmi, Wajid Hussain, Shed 
Shahrukh,  Tariq  Aziz,  Malik  Rabnawaz  and  Abdul  Waheed  who  are  residents  of the 
place  where  from  deceased  was  arrested.  By  the time  he  was  arrested,  deceased was 
terminally ill and I have informed about his state of affairs to my superiors and under 
their direction, I took Irfan to PIMS hospital. At the main entrance of PIMS, there was 
agitation  of  PIMS  employees  and  they  had  blocked  the  entrance  to  the  hospital. 
Deceased expired and I and Ameer Sajjad ASI (convict) was directed by our seniors to 
fetch the dead body of deceased to CIA centre. In the meantime, news was fletched on 
TV channels and the superior officers with intent to save their own skin and to avoid 
the consequences of passing away of deceased in police custody promptly lodged false 
and fake case against me and another. I am innocent. 

20.  Abdul Hafeez appellant has also appeared as defense witness in his favour in terms of 

section 340(2), Cr.P.C. on oath and recorded the following statement:- 

On  09.09.2015  I  had  arrested  the  deceased  from  Chungi  No.  26,  Islamabad  at  about 
02:15/02:30 p.m. on receipt of secret information. He was sick and he also vomited in 
my  presence.  I  immediately  informed  my  high  ups  about  his  condition.  I was taking 
him to PIMS hospital on the asking of Moharrar however on the way I was asked to 
bring  Irfan  to  CIA  but  his  condition  was  worsening  therefore  I  took  him  to  PIMS 
hospital.  As  there  was  strike  of  Para-medical  staff  so  the  main  gate  of  hospital  was 
closed. Despite my  best efforts I could not enter there and in the meantime Irfan had 
died. I informed Moharrar and thereafter on the direction of DSP I shifted dead body 
to CIA. I brought the vehicle at street No. 5 that was the parking of CIA from where I 
proceeded further. Later on I was falsely involved in this case. 

21.  The appellant was cross-examined by the prosecution side, whereby he acknowledged 
that they were on private car No.LEA-4128, which was owned and driven by  him and Amir 
Sajjad was also sitting  in the car. He also confirmed that he had no warrants of arrest at the 
time when he arrested Irfan deceased, although he made entry in the P.S. Basal regarding his 
arrival and departure. 

22.  The  entire  case  of  prosecution  revolves  around  the  allegation  of  torture  of  deceased 
Irfan  who  was  arrested  from  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  P.S.  Basal,  as  such  there  was  no 
warrants of arrest with the present appellants who claimed to be I.O of FIR No.79/2015, under 
section 392, P.P.C., P.S. Sihala, Islamabad rather deceased was arrested on suspicion in terms 
of section 54, Cr.P.C. as admitted by appellant Abdul Hafeez  in his statement under section 

 
 
 
 
340(2),  Cr.P.C.  The  deceased  was  taken  to  CIA  Centre  within  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of 
Industrial Area and was found dead in the vehicle No.LEA-4128, Toyota Corolla at street No.5, 
I/9, Islamabad. The report was lodged on the complaint of Zulfiqar Ahmed, Inspector/PW-10 
(PW-11 in second trial) being officer of CIA through Ex.PN (Ex.PK in the second tria l), who 
took the dead body of deceased to the hospital. Autopsy was conducted by PW-1/Dr. Naseer, 
who confirmed injuries on the dead body which are simple in nature and are contusion marks 
around left thigh, feet, iliac  fossa, lumber region and wrist, although these injuries were not 
enough to cause death in ordinary course of nature. There is no denial that all the injuries were 
caused due to torture, which has been confirmed by the Dr. Naseer/PW-1. The cause of death 
remained mystery in this case and as such there was no evidence to confirm the exact cause of 
death. 

23.  The matter was investigated by Muhammad Rafique Inspector/PW-12 and Ashiq Shah, 
S.I/PW-13,  who  arrested  the  accused  persons/appellants.  The  deceased  family  has  lodged  a 
complaint at P.S. Basal, whereby it was revealed that deceased was taken by CIA staff/present 
appellants. On the minute scanning of prosecution evidence viz-a-viz statement recorded under 
section  342,  Cr.P.C.  there  is  no  denial  that  deceased  was  under  investigation  in  case  FI R 
No.79/2015, under section 392, P.P.C., P.S. Sihala, Islamabad by Abdul Hafeez ASI and Amir 
Sajjad ASI (present appellants) and this  fact was confirmed by the I.O Muhammad Rafique, 
Inspector and Ashiq Shah, S.I. The arrest of deceased was referred at Chungi No.26 which is 
incorrect statement on the part of appellants. 

24.  While  considering  the  above  details  it  is  the  duty  of  I.O  of  any  case  to  provide  due 
medical  assistance  when  required  to  any  accused  under  custody,  even  no  one  is  allowed  to 
abuse or physically torture to any accused under custody and as such both the appellants are 
found guilty of physical abuse and torture on the basis of evidence of Dr. Naseer/PW-1. The 
only question for determination for the trial Court was as to whether it is murder under section 
302,  P.P.C.  or  it  is  in  terms  of  section  316,  P.P.C.  as  such,  there  is  no  direct  evidence  of 
committing  murder  of  deceased,  even  it  is  not  the  case  of  prosecution  that  deceased  was 
murdered by appellants in technical manner in line with the requirements in terms of section 
302, P.P.C. 

25.  I have gone through the judgment of the learned Trial Court, whereby the appellants 
have been convicted under sections 316/34, P.P.C. in terms of qatl  shibh-i- amd, therefore, it 
is necessary to go through section 315, P.P.C. which defines the qatl shibh-i-amd: 

  Whoever, with intent to cause harm to the body or mind of any person causes the death 
of that or of any other person by  means of a weapon or an  act which  in the ordinary 
course of nature is not likely to cause death is said to commit qatl shibh-i -amd. 

26.  The above mentioned offence i.e. Qatl Shibh-i-Amd is applicable in those cases where 
death was caused but the injuries would not result into death in ordinary course of nature, such 
aspects have been given weightage in 2020 YLR 985 (Ghulam Nabi v. The State), 2020 PCr.LJ 
Note 53 (Hidayat Ullah v. The State), 2018 YLR 2181 (Hafiz Amjad Saeed v. The State), 2016 
PCr.LJ  1928  (Nisar  Ahmad  v.  The  State),  2014  PCr.LJ  165  (Jumman  v.  The  State),  2007 
PCr.LJ 440 Lahore (Ahmad Sher v. The State), 2003 MLD 1409 Lahore (Muhammad Nawaz 
v. The State), 2000 YLR 2909 Lahore (Asma Bibi  v. The State) and 1996 MLD 204 Quetta 
(Jalal-ud-Din v. The State), whereby it has been settled that: 

 
 
(a)  The weapon of offence which has been used would not be called as a weapon of offence 

in technical sense; 

b)  The injuries would not cause death in ordinary course of nature; 

c)  The injury is on non-vital part; 

d)  An  intention  to  commit  Qatl-i-Amd  was  not  reflected  from  the  circumstances  of  the 

case; and, 

e)  Where cause of death is not known. 

27.  In  view  of  above  case  law,  I  have  gone  through  the  injuries  referred  in  the  medical 
evidence of Dr. Muhammad Naseer CMO, PW-1 clearly spells out that such injuries, which in 
the ordinary course of nature are not likely to cause death. The appellants who have exclusive 
knowledge qua the condition of deceased, who remain in their custody, even the sign of torture 
on the body of deceased is visible which have been corroborated by the evidence of PW-1 Dr. 
Muhammad Naseer, therefore, the appellants have a special knowledge of a particular fact i.e. 
condition of the deceased as he was in custody of the appellants, hence in terms of Article 122 
of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, the only piece of evidence which comes on record from 
the appellants perspective is the statement of appellant Abdul Hafeez, who categorically stated 
in his statement under section 340(2), Cr.P.C. that deceased condition was worsening and he 
was taken to PIMS hospital, but on the said date there was strike of paramedical staff and the 
main gate of hospital was closed and during this effort deceased died in his vehicle No.LEA-
4128, which was being driven by him and co-accused Amir Sajjad was also along with him. 

28.  The  above  referred  facts  and  statements  clearly  spells  out  that  firstly  the  deceased 
Muhammad Irfan was in the custody of the appellants, secondly, he was taken to hospital on 
vehicle LEA-4128 by both the appellants, and thirdly they left the deceased in the said vehicle 
in  street  No.  5,  Sector  I/9  Islamabad  and  deceased  was  found  dead  in  the  vehicle  by  the 
Investigation Officer. 

29.  There is no justification for six injuries available on the body of deceased as recorded 
by PW-1/Dr. Muhammad Naseer. The appellants have taken a special plea that they have taken 
the deceased to the hospital in vehicle No. LEA-4128 for medical assistance, but same could 
not  be  extended to  him  in  PIMS  Hospital,  resultantly  the  deceased  died  in  the  vehicle,  such 
special knowledge of a particular fact has to be proved by the appellants and its onus is upon 
the appellants however, the burden was not discharged by the appellants in terms of Qanun-e-
Shahadat, Order, 1984 through any independent evidence. 

30.  The torture on the dead body of the deceased is apparent which is in line with medical 
evidence. The custody of deceased was taken by the appellants from territorial jurisdiction of 
P.S. Basal without any warrants of arrest and even the appellants have failed to provide due 
medical care and attention to the deceased, in this backdrop the police officials i.e. appellants 
who  are  custodian  of  the  life  and  property  of  citizens  are  negligent  in  their  duties  and  are 
involved in criminal activities, therefore, such kinds of police officials have to be taken to task 
as  held  in  PLD  2020  SC  310  (Saddam  Hussain  v.  The  State).  Even  the  Police  Order,  2002 
provides exhaustive mechanism to prosecute such police officials, who have extended torture 
to the deceased, whereby Article 113 of the Police Order, 2002 can be applied to those police 
officials as held in 2010 SCMR 624 (Ghulam Sarwar Zardari v. Piyar Ali alias Piyaro). 

 
 
31.  In view of above, the trial Court has rightly convicted the appellants for qatl shabih-i-
amd of Muhammad Irfan deceased and even charge under section 344, P.P.C. has rightly been 
imposed for wrongful confinement of the deceased, as such the appellants are the officials of 
police Department, whereby heavy onus lays upon them to prove that they are performing the 
official  duties  in  accordance  with  law,  as  such, they  have  failed  to  justify  any  such  actions, 
rather were found guilty of criminal misconduct, though no such charge was framed. 

32.  While considering the case of enhancement of sentence to the extent of Amir Sajjad, 
there is no distinction drawn by the petitioner in Criminal Revision No.72/2019 (Muhammad 
Asif v. The State and others) as to why the sentence of Amir Sajjad be enhanced from 04 
years to 14 years' R.I. As such, sentence awarded by the trial Court fulfills the requirement in 
this case, therefore, while maintaining the conviction, Criminal Appeal No.107/2019 (Amir 
Sajjad v. The State) and Criminal Appeal No. 240/2019 (Abdul Hafeez v. The State and 
others) as well as Criminal Revision No.72/2019 (Muhammad Asif v. The State and others) 
(for enhancement of sentence) are hereby DISMISSED. The appellant Amir Sajjad, who is 
present before this Court on bail is taken into custody to serve his remaining sentence, the 
bail bonds stand discharged. 

Disclaimer: The content available In this document are just for Information. Users are advised not to depend 
on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High Court, Islamabad is not responsible for 
any damages arising in contract from the use of the content of this documen 

Uploaded by IT department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
