ORDER SHEET 

IN THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD. 

(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Crl.  Misc.  No.52-BC of 2020 

..... 

Mst. Waheeda Zulifqar Zaidi 

Syed Awais Haider & another 

S.  No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  order/  Order with signature .of Judge and that of parties or counsel 
Proceedings 

where necessary. 

15.07 .2020 

Petitioner in  person. 
Respondent No.1  in  person. 
Ms.  Khadija  Ali,  State  Counsel  alongwith  M.  Arshad 
Awan,  Inspector. 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani.  J.:-  The 

petitioner (Mst. Waheeda Zulifqar  Zaidi  wife  of Syed 

Zulifqar  Zaidi)  seeks  cancellation  of  bail  granted  in 

favour  of  respondent  No.1/  accused(hereinafter  be 

called  as  "respondent'),  in  case  F.l.R  No.48~ 

dated  18.11.2019,  offence  under  Section489-F 

P.P.C, 

registered  at  Police  Station  Kohsar, 

Islamabad. 

2. 

Briefly  facts  of  the  case  as  alleged  in  the 

F.l.R  are 

that 

the  petitioner/  complainant  was 

induced  by 

the 

respondent,  who  was  second 

Manager in  MCB,  Blue Area  branch,  Islamabad,  for 

investment  and  received  certain  amount  at  different 

times  from  her,  which  he  returned  alongwith  profit. 

That  six  months  prior to  registration  of  instant  case, 

respondent  received  an  amount  of  Rs.30,00,000/  

(thirty  lac) from  her,  but  neither  gave  any  profit  nor 

returned  principle  amount,  and  on  her  repeated 

requests,  he  issued  a  cheque  dated  09.08.2019 

amounting 

to  Rs.30,00,000/-  of 

the  Standard 

Chartered  Bank, which  upon presentation  before the 

2 

Cr/.  Misc.  No. 52-BC  of 2020 

concerned  bank, was  dishonored  due  to  insufficient 

amount, hence, the above said F.l.R. 

3. 

The  respondenU  accused  applied  for  the 

grant  of  pre-arrest  bail before the  learned Additional 

Sessions  Judge-IX, 

Islamabad-West,  which  was 

confirmed  on  18.12.2019.  The  petitioner  being 

aggrieved filed the  instant petition for  cancellation of 

bail granted to respondenU accused. 

4. 

Petitioner  in  person  appeared  before  the 

Court and submitted that the learned trial Court while 

passing the  impugned order  has committed  material 

irregularity  and  failed  to  appreciate  the  evidence 

available  on  record; 

that 

the 

respondent  with 

malafide 

intention  issued  bogus  cheque  to  the 

petitioner;  that  the  respondent  has  deprived  the 

petitioner from  huge amount; that sufficient evidence 

was available on record to connect the petitioner with 

commission  of  the  alleged  offence;  that  no  malafide 

has been established against the  petitioner to falsely 

involve the  respondent  in  the  instant  case,  as  such, 

the impugned order is  liable to be recalled. 

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  respondent  in  person 

appeared  before  the  Court  and  submitted  that  the 

petitioner  has  already 

received  an  amount  of 

Rs.67,00,000/- from  him against the said cheques as 

well  as  profits.  Further  stated  that  no  ground  for 

cancellation  of  bail  is  available to  the  petitioner; that 

the  challan  has  already  been  submitted  before  the 

learned  trial  Court  on  25.12.2019.That  the  whole 

story narrated by the petitioner is  baseless and false. 

Further  stated  that  he  has  filed  a  civil  suit  for 

cancellation  of  the  above  said  cheque  against  the 

petitioner  which  is  pending  adjudication.  Learned 

State counsel opposed the impugned order. 

3 

Cr/.  Misc.  No. 52-BC  of 2020 

6. 

7. 

Arguments heard; record perused. 

Perusal of the record reveals that there  is  a 

business transaction  between the  parties and as per 

record; 

they  have  concluded 

three  business 

agreements.  Civil  suit  filed  by  the  respondent  for 

Declaration  and  Cancellation  of  the  alleged  cheque 

is  still  pending  adjudication  before  the  competent 

Court  of  jurisdiction.  Further,  there  is  an  inordinate 

and  unexplained  delay  of  about  three  months  in 

lodging  of  the  F.l.R.  Further  the  petitioner  admitted 

before  the  Court  that  she  had  already  received  an 

amount  of  Rs.  67,00,000/-  from  the  respondent  on 

account of business transaction. 

8. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  respondent 

has  tampered  with  the  prosecution  evidence  or 

misused the concession of bail. The  bail can only be 

cancelled if the order on the face of it  is  perverse and 

has been passed in  violation of the  principles for the 

grant of bail.  In  this regard, reliance is  placed on the 

Judgments  titled  Muhammad Akram  VS  Zahid  Iqbal 

and  others  (2008  SCMR  1715),  "Muzaffar  Iqbal  VS 

Muhammad  lmran  Aziz  and  others"  (2004  SCMR 

231 ),  "The  State VS  Khalid  Mehmood"  [2006  SCMR 

1265], "Shahneel Gui  and two  others  VS  The  State" 

(2018  YLR  999)  and  "Ahsan  Akbar  VS  The  State" 

[2007 SCMR 482]. 

9. 

The  considerations for  the  grant  of  bail are 

quite  different 

from 

the 

considerations 

for 

cancellation of bail. Once bail has been granted by a 

competent  Court  of  law,  strong  and  exceptional 

grounds  are  required  for  cancelling  the  same.  In 

such  cases,  it  is  to  be  seen  as  to  whether  order 

granting  bail  is  patently  illegal,  erroneous,  factually 

incorrect  and  has  resulted  in  miscarriage  of  justice 

4 

Crl.  Misc.  No. 52-BC  of 2020 

whereas,  in  the  instant case the  petitioner has failed 

to  establish  any  such  ground  in  the  instant  case. 

Further the grant of  bail does  not mean an acquittal. 

The  learned trial  Court  is  in  a  position to  adjudicate 

on  the guilt or otherwise of the  respondenU accused 

after  evidence  is  led  and  analyzed  and  it  can  also 

look  into  and  evaluate  the  malafide  from  the  facts 

and circumstances of the instant case. 

10. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  impugned 

order  dated  18.12.2019, which  is  based  upon  legal 

principles  and  no 

illegality  has  been  observed, 

therefore,  requirement  of  Section  497(5)  Cr.P.C  is 

not  visible,  as  no  perversity,  illegality  or  violation  of 

Court  order  or  tampering  with  prosecution  evidence 

of  this  case  has  been  established  against  the 

respondent, 

therefore, 

instant 

petition 

is 

misconceived and the same is  hereby dismissed. 

11. 

However, 

the 

observations  made 

hereinabove  are  meant 

for  disposal  of 

this 

application, which shall have no bearing on  merits of 

the case. 

(GHUlA.M AZAM q.\ltiBRANI) 
JUDGE\ 

