ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

W.P. No. 3394/2019 

Muhammad  Israr 

VS

Learned  Additional  District Judge, Islamabad-East,  etc. 

Petitioner  by: 

Raja Iftikhar Ahmed,  Advocate. 

Respondent  No.3 by: 

Syed Asad Abbas Naqvi,  Advocate. 

Date of Decision: 

21.09.2020. 

~·: - ...... 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through 

this  Writ  Petition,  the 

petitioner  has assailed  the concurrent findings  of the Family Court,  whereby  suit 

filed by  respondents  No.3  to 6  for recovery  of maintenance  allowance,  recovery 

of  dowry  articles  and  dower,  was  partially  decreed  vide  judgment  &  decree 

dated  15.04.2019, passed  by  Judge  Family  Court  (East), Islamabad  and  the  said 

judgment was  maintained  by learned Additional  District Judge (East), Islamabad 

vidc judgment  dated  06.07.2019. 

2. 

1  .carncd  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  both  the  courts  below 

have  not  considered  the  evidence  in  its  true  perspective  and  even  right  to 

produce  the evidence  was closed by the Judge Family Court  without  adhering  to 

the  principle  of  affording  fair  opportunity  to  prove  the  contention  of  the 

petitioner  and  as  such  it  is necessary  to  give  one  fair  chance  for  production  of 

evidence;  that  respondent  No.3 remained  living  with  the  petitioner  and  as  such 

she is not  entitled  to claim maintenance  allowance  for  the  said  period from  2013 

to  2016  and  even  plot  was  transferred  in  her  name  by  the  petitioner  through 

mutation,  therefore,  claim  of dower  was  satisfied  but  all  these  aspects  have  not 

been  considered  which  resulted  into  passing  of  the  impugned  judgment  which 

amounts  to miscarriage  of justice. 

W.P.  No.3394/2019 

2 

3. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3  contends  that  learned 

Judge  Family  Court  has  given  number  of  opportunities  to  the  petitioner  but 

despite  availing  opportunities  he  has  failed  to  produce  his  evidence,  therefore, 

his  right  to  produce  evidence  was  closed;  that  maintenance  has  already  been 

fixed at lower  side and  even  the date  of desertion  was  admitted;  that plot agreed 

to  be  transferred  as  dower  has  not  been  transferred  in  the  name  of respondent 

No.3, even  mutation  which  has  been  referred  by  the  petitioner  is  not  from  his 

name  rather  one  I laji  Abid  Hussain  transferred 

the  plot  in  the  name  of 

respondent  No.3 which  has nothing  to do with  the claim of petitioner. 

4. 

5. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  has  assailed  the  concurrent 

findings  of  the  courts  below  whereby  judgment  passed  by  the  trial  Court  was 

maintained.  The relief granted by the trial Court  is as under:- 

Consequent  upon  my  discussion  on  all  issues,  instant  suit  is  decreed. 

Plaintiffs  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  maintenance  @  rate  of R.s.4000/-  per 

nionili  from  Tebruanj  2013  with  10  percent  annual 

increase.  Plaintiffs 

No.2 

to  4  shall  be  entitled 

to  receive  such  amount 

till 

their 

legal 

entitlement.  Plaintiff No.1  shall  be  entitled  to recover  doum]  articles  as per 

list.  If defendant  did  not  procure  the  articles  mentioned  in  list  Ex. P4  then 

lze  would  either  pay  half  price  of  each  article  otherwise  would  procure 

second  hand  and  used  articles  suitable  for  use.  Defendant  shall  be  bound 

lo  transfer  10  Mar/as  plot  in  said  vicinity  as  agreed  by  him  at  time  of 

marriage  and  stipulated  in  Nikahnanui  to  Plaintiff  No.1.  I Ier  claim  with 

regard  to  ornaments 

is  dismissed,  however,  no  order  as  to  cost.  Decree 

sheet  be  prepared.  File  be  consigned  lo  record  room  after  its  completion 

and  compilations. 

6. 

The  entire  record  reflects  that  respondent  No.3  is  the  wife  of  present 

petitioner  who  filed  suit for recovery  of maintenance,  dowry  articles and  dower, 

whereby  petitioner  has not denied  the relationship,  nor even proved  anything on 

record  for  consumption  of  this  Court  to  believe  that  he  had  paid  the  dower 

amount,  dowry  articles as well as maintenance.  The evidence  of respondent  No.3 

W.P.  No.3394/2019 

3 

has  been  referred  through  Ex.P-1 on  record,  whereby  she  has  taken  categorical 

stance that:- 

and  this  aspect  was  further  confirmed  during  the  course  of  cross-examination 

and  it was reiterated  by respondent  No.3 that:- 

_i;k,J~.::.../f~)LII 

0.04.2013 ~ 

Therefore,  the  question  relating  to joint  living  till  2016 was  never  asked  by  the 

petitioner  nor reflected from record; hence, the period for which maintenance  has 

been  claimed  by  respondent  No.3  is  justified  from  evidence  as  well  as  from 

record.  The  second  important  question  is relating  to  10 Marlas  plot  situated  in 

Tarlai  as  reflected  from  column  No.16 of  the  Nikahnama  referred  as  Ex.P-3 and 

same  was  acknowledged  by  the  petitioner,  whereas  it  is trite  law  that  dower  is 

the  responsibility  of  husband  who  is  under  obligation 

to  pay  the  same 

immediately  after  marriage  but  despite  this  acknowledged  state  of  affairs 

petitioner  has not yet  provided  any  proof  through  which  it could  be considered 

that  he  has  transferred  the  agreed  plot  referred  in  column  No.16  of  the 

Nikithnanut. 

7. 

Similarly,  petitioner  has  taken  specific  stance  during  arguments  before 

this  Court  that  he  has  purchased  plot  which  was  transferred  in  the  name  of 

respondent  No.3  through  mutation  No.14461, measuring  5  Marlas.  On  minute 

scanning  of the document  referred  by the petitioner,  it reveals  that 05 Marlas plot 

was  in  the  name  of  I laji  A bid  I Iussain  which  was  transferred  in  the  name  of 

respondent  No.3,  who  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  plot  agreed  as  dower; 

therefore, contention  of the petitioner  is not justiciable from record. 

8. 

At last it has  also been  observed  from  evidence  that  respondent  No.3 has 

categorically answered  that:- 

W.P.  No.3394/2019 

4 

This  aspect  clearly  establishes  that  petitioner  has  not  handed  over  the  dowry 

articles to respondent  No.3. 

9. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  background,  the  petitioner  was  confronted  as 

to why  he has  not  produced  his evidence,  whereby  he contends  that  his right  to 

produce  evidence  was  closed  and  he  has  assailed  the  said  order  through  writ 

petition  No.1381/2019  but  the  same  became  infructuous  as  final  decree  was 

passed.  The  record  reflects  that  14 opportunities  were  granted  to  the  petitioner 

for  production  of  his  evidence  but  he  has  failed  to  produce  the  evidence, 

resultantly,  Family Court was left with  no other  option  but to proceed  against  the 

petitioner  by all means. 

10. 

Keeping in view  the above position,  petitioner  is not entitled  for any relief 

as he  has  not  performed  his  lawful  duty  and  obligation  towards  his  family  and 

children  and  no jurisdictional  error  has been  pointed  out by  the  petitioner  in the 

impugned  judgment,  the  same  has  been  passed  within  four  corners  of  law. 

I  lcncc, instant  writ petition  is devoid  of merits  and the same is hereby  dismissed. 

(MOHSIN-AKHTAR KAYA11f) 
JUDGE 

