JUDGMENT  SHEET

IN THE IS

HIGH COURT.

ISLAMABAD

\ry.P.  NO.24 0F 2020

Shahnaz  Siddique
VS
ADDITIONAL DISTRICT  JUDGE, ISLAMABAD,  ETC.

Petitioner  by

Ch. Gulfam  Ashraf Goraya,  Advocate.

Respondents  by :

Mr. AzharMahmood,  Advocate.
(For Respondent No. 3)

Date of hearing z 

14.02.2020

LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ. J.  Petitioner has filed instant Writ
Petition assailing  judgment dated 03.12.2019,  passed by learned  Additional

District Judge,  West-lslamabad,  whereby the judgment  and decree dated

12.10.2019,  passed  by learned  Judge Family  Court, West-Islamabad,,  was

modified  to the extent of recovery  of dowry  articles. Petitioner has further

prayed  for modification of judgment  and decree dated 12.10.2019, passed

by leamed  Judge Family  Court,  and allow recovery  of dowry  articles  as per

list attached by the Petitioner  as Ex:P-13.

2.  Admitted  facts of the case are that the Petitioner  married to the
Respondent  No.3 on26.09.2016,  however, the said marriage  was dissolved

on 22.11.2018,  whereafter,  Petitioner  filed suit for recovery of dowry
articles of Rs. 12,07,915/-  as per list exhibited  as Ex.P-13. The suit was

partially  decreed  by entitling her for the recovery  of dowry articles as per
list Ex.P-13  except articles mentioned at serial No. 7 & ll  and gifts given
by the Respondent  No.3 with the direction that as the articles  remained  in

use of the Petitioner/Plaintiff  therefore,  she would accept  the same in the
form in which  those articles were. It was further held that if any of the
articles,  except gold articles,  is missing  then RespondentNo.3  shall pay 75

Yo of the prices  mentioned  in list Ex.P-13.  Both the parties  challenged  the

judgment dated  12.10.2019,  before the Court of learned  Additional District
Judge, Islamabad  (West), who vide consolidated  judgment  dated

03.12.2019,  modified  the decree  of trial Court by holdingthatthe Petitioner

l(.P.  No. 24/2020
Shahnaz Siddique  v. Additionsl Distict  Judge,  etc

2

is entitled to recover dowry articles  as per list Ex-D6 and if any of the

dowry article is missing, then Respondent  No. 3 shall be bound  to pay its

75Yo price. Petitioner/Plaintiff  being  dissatisfied with the said judgment

preferred this petition.

3.  Learned  Counsel for Petitioner  contended that consolidated
judgment dated  03.1,2.2019,  suffers from non-reading and misreading  of
evidence as the learned  Appellate Court has not appreciated  the

documentary as well as oral evidence  submitted by the Appellant/Petitioner

during the trial. Learned Counsel emphasized that though the Petitioner

belongs to a poor family,  however,  her parents in view of the culture  and

customs  in Muslim  marriages  has given dowry  to their daughter.  In this

regard  learned  Counsel referred statement of PW-2 (Petitioner's brother-in-

law) whereby  he stated that the parents  of the Petitioner  have given dowry
to his wife as well as to her younger daughteriPetitioner also. Learned

Counsel  also referred statement of the Petitioner  given on oath as PW-l

wherein she narrated the list of articles  in her dowry which contained  two

gold  bangles of three tolas, one locket and one ring. Learned  Counsel
contended  that statement  of the Petitioner has not been denied by

Respondent  No.3 during  the trial. Thus, learned Addl. District Judge, has

erroneously presumed  that dowry  articles in general and gold ornaments in
particular have been retained  by the Petitioner ffid, therefore, held

Petitioner entitled to recover the dowry  articles  as per list Ex.D6 submitted

by the Respondent  No.3 and in case of missing article  the Respondent

would bound  to pay its75o price.

4.  Learned counsel for Respondent  No.3, vehemently  opposed  the
contentions of the learned counsel for Petitioner and denied the list of

dowry articles submitted by the Petitioner  as Ex.P13  and submitted that

Petitioner is entitled for dowry articles  as per receipt of dowry articles
produced by the Petitioner vide Ex.D6.  Learned Counsel argued that

Petitioner  belongs  to a poor family thus could not afford to give the articles

as claimed in the list Ex:P13.  He pointed out that the Petitioner has stated

in her statement on oath and during cross examination that the gold  was

purchased from the shop of her brother-in-law  namely Qaiser Abbas but
did not produce  him as a witness.  Learned  Counsel  submitted  that all the

W.P.  No. 24/2020
Shahnoz Siddique  v. Additional  Dktrict  Judge,  etc

3

gold ornaments  were in the custody of the Petitioner  and she could not
prove snatching  of the same from her at the time she was allegedly

expelled  from the house.  Leamed  Counsel  referred  judgment titled Mst.

Somiva lqbal Butt VSRehan Zafar,  etc reported as NLR 2013 Civil

369 wherein it has been held as under:

".-.we are of the view that  the latter Court considered  every  piece of evidence
led while  passing  the judgment and  deuee  and rightly  excluded the afore-
mentioned  articles from consideration  as it was of the view that the jewelry in
question  being  items of daily use could not have been left behind by
petttioner-wife while leaving  the house.  Petitioner's  learned counsel  has not
referred  to any piece of evidence  which  could  persuade  us to interfere  with
t he afor e -r efe rr e d fi nding of fac t. "

Learned Counsel contended  that the Petitioner  not only miserably failed to
prove her claim before the learned Courts below also remained

unsuccessful in pointing out any illegality in the impugned judgment  dated

03.12.2019,  and prayed for dismissal of the petition.

5.  Arguments advanced  by the learned Counsel  for the parties  have

been heard and the documents, placed on record  have also been  examined

with their able assistance.

In the present  case both the parties are asserting  on the list of dowry

6. 
articles prepared  and exhibited  during trial. Petitioner  claims  dowry  articles

as per Ex-P13, whereas,  Respondent's  assertion  is that the Petitioner is

entitled  to receive said articles as per list Ex-D6. Both  the parties at the trial

stage presented the material evidence  and made statements on oath and

thereafter  were cross examined  to prove their contentions. Learned Counsel

for the Respondent questioned  affordability  of Petitioner's family to give

that much dowry,  in this regard this court is of the view  that bride's  parents
at the wedding of their daughter  normally give articles in the name of

dowry mainly  comprising  of daily  use household  goods  e.g furniture and

certain electronic items, most of the times beyond their  capacity  in view of
the culture  and custom of the society.  Thus, there is no force in this
contention of the Respondent  No.3. Moreover,  from the averments of the
Respondent's  Counsel  and record it is apparent that dispute is only
regarding  the quantity of dowry articles,  and both the parties  are trying to

prove  their claim as per their lists, in that regard it is observed  that list
produced by the Petitioner i.e. Ex-Pl3  comprised  of articles worth

It.P. No. 24/2020
Shahnaz Siddique  v. Additlonal  District  Judge,  etc

4

Rs. 12,07,915  out of which  articles amounting to Rs. 2,89,3001- are without

receipts and regarding  articles of Rs. 7,39,615/- receipts are produced, and
also includes  gifts from Respondent  No. 3 worth Rs.  1 ,79,0001-, whereas,
it is pertinent to note that the Respondent  No. 3 in his statement  given  on

oath admitted to present 3 tolas gold  bangles (karay)  worth Rs. 150,000/-  to

the Petitioner  as Mehr,  and this statement  has not been countered  by the
Petitioner.  Besides, it is generally  accepted that the gold ornaments  are

always retained by the wife. Considering  the above  said  contentions  of the
parties and perusal of record, I am of the view that the grievance of the
Petitioner voiced  through  present petition mainly relates to the factual
controversy in respect of the quantum  of claim which  could only  be
ascertained on the basis of facts put forth and evidence  produced by the

parties before the leamed Courts below and the learned  Appellate Court

while modiffing the judgment/decree  has ably dealt with each and every

, material evidence and came to the conclusion  that the Petitioner is entitled

to recovery of dowry  articles as per list Ex:D6. It has been held in a number

of cases that factual controversies are not to be decided by the High  Court
while exercising constitutional  jurisdiction  under Article  199 of the
Constitution  of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. Thus, judgment  dated
03.12.2019, passed  by the learned  Appellate  Court is not open to

interference by this Court.

7.  For the reasons  mentioned  hereinabove,  instant writ petition, being
devoid of any merit, is hereby  dismissed.

(LUBNA  SALEEM PERVEZ)
JUDGE

M. JUilADUSrlAN

