ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
W.P No. 2384-2021 

Khurram Mehboob 

VS

Judge Family Court, Islamabad and others.  

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 
(02) 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 
28.07.2021  Mr. Mehboob-e-Hasnain, Advocate for the petitioner.  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary.  

Respondents No. 2 & 3 in person. 

   MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI  J.  Through  the 

instant petition, the petitioner has assailed the order 

dated  22.06.2021,  passed  by  learned  Judge  Family 

Court  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  written  reply  to 

the  Guardian  petition  filed  by  the  respondent  No.2 

was  received  by  Judge  Guardian  Court,  despite  the 

fact  that  number  of  opportunities  were  granted  to 

her, even with cost. 

2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that 

petitioner  has  filed  custody  petition  for  the  custody 

of  minor  Muhammad  Rohaan/respondent  No.3 

against Mst. Shazia Akbar Ghilzai/respondent No.2, 

the  mother  on  30.07.2019,  but  the  matter  was 

delayed  for  one  reason  or  the  other  and  despite 

availing 38 adjournments, respondent No.2 has filed 

written  reply  to  the  said  petition  on  22.06.2021, 

although  the  cost  of  Rs.  2,000/-  was  also  imposed 

upon  her,  in  such  scenario,  the  right  to  file  written 

reply  has  to  be  forfeited  and  written  reply  filed  by 

respondent  No.2/Mst.  Shazia  Akbar  Ghilzai  on 

record of the Guardian Court may be stand excluded 

 
 
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P No. 2384/2021 

from  consideration  and  ex-parte  proceedings  be 

ordered.  

3.  Conversely,  respondent  No.2,  Mst.  Shazia 

Akbar  Ghilzai 

alongwith  minor  Muhammad 

Rohan/respondent No.3 in person contends that she 

is  facing  hardship  in  this  case  and  even  the  matter 

has  adjourned  for  one  reason  or  the  other  due  to 

Covid-19  from  the  last  one  and  half  year  and  even 

due to strikes of the Bar Association due to incident 

of  Islamabad  High  Court  attack  by  the  Lawyers  of 

Bar  Association,  as  such  delay  is  not  attributed  to 

her.  

4.  Arguments heard and record perused. 

5.  Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  custody  petition 

in  terms  of  Section  25  of  The  Guardian  and  Wards 

Act has been filed by the petitioner for the minor son 

respondent  No.3/Muhammad  Rohan  against  the 

mother  Mst.  Shazia  Akbar  Ghilzai,  whereby  Judge 

Family Court has given direction for filing of written 

reply  after  appearance  of  respondent  No.2  in  the 

Court,  but  matter  was  adjourned  on  numerous 

dates  as  reflected  from  the  record,  even  cost  of 

 Rs.2,000/- was imposed upon respondent No.2 vide 

order  dated  16.01.2021,  but  the  reply  was  finally 

filed  on  22.06.2021,  which  was  accepted  by  Judge 

Guardian  Court,  which  is  the  cause  of  main 

grievance of the petitioner, as such the orders of the 

cost  are  already  in  field  and  the  petitioner  can  get 

the said order implemented from the said Guardian 

Court , who is bound by its own orders.  

3 

W.P No. 2384/2021 

6.  The  petitioner  has  been  confronted  as  to 

whether  the  order  impugned  before  this  Court  is  of 

permanent  character  or  to  be  called  as  interim 

order,  whereby  it  has  been  candidly  conceded  that 

the impugned order is interlocutory in nature as the 

main case is subjudice before the Court of law. 

7. 

In  view  of  above  reasons,  this  Court  is  not 

inclined  to  proceed  further  in  the  matter  as  this 

Court  has  earlier  passed  order  dated  05.07.2021 

with  direction  to  learned  M.I.T  to  call  a  report  from 

the  concerned  Judge  to  explain  the  reasons  as  to 

why  38  opportunities  were  granted  to  respondent 

No.2  for  submission  of  written  reply  and  case  has 

been  adjourned 

for  one  reason  or  the  other. 

However,  the  report  of  the  said  Judicial  Officer  has 

been  received  and  placed  on  record,  which  is  taken 

care  on  administrative  side  through  learned  M.I.T 

and  the 

impugned  order 

is  considered  to  be 

interlocutory  in  nature,  whereby  writ  petition  in 

such  matters  is  not  maintainable  as  no  final 

adjudication has been made so far.  

8.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant 

writ petition stands DISMISSED. However, propriety 

demands  that  Judge  Guardian  Court  shall  decide 

the  case  in  accordance  with  law  within  period  of 

sixty (60) days by all means and the report shall be 

submitted  through  learned  M.I.T  for  perusal  in 

chambers on its administrative side.   

RAMZAN             

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
              JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
