ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

Crl.  Misc.  No.707-B/2020 
Shujat Kiyani 
VS
The State & another 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date  of 
order/ 
Proceedings 
10.06.2020 

Order with  signature  of Judge  and  that of parties  or 
counsel  where  necessary. 

Mr.  Naveed Shahzad Ch., Advocate for petitioner. 

Ch. Ehsan Majeed Gujjar, State Counsel. 

Mumtaz Malik, S.I., P.S. Golra Sharif, Islamabad. 

Rashid Mehmood, AS!, P.S. Sabzi Mandi, Islamabad. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  I:  Through 

this 

criminal miscellaneous petition,  the petitioner  has prayed  for 

post  arrest  bail  in  case FIR No.373, dated  09.08.2019, under 

Sections 392/ 411 PPC, P.S. Golra Sharif, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief facts as referred  in the above-mentioned  FIR are 

that  Masood  Ahmad  Bhatti  (respondent  No.2)  submitted  a 

complaint  alleging  therein  that  on  30.07.2019, at  about  11:25 

a.m., when  he  along  with  his family  members  was  at home, 

three  (03)  armed  men  with  muffled  faces, aged  about  25-40 

years,  forcibly  entered 

in  his  house  and  robbed 

their 

valuables  including  jewelry,  electronic  items  and  cash.  The 

said complaint was converted  into case FIR No.373/2019 and 

during  investigation  of the same, the petitioner  was arrested. 

The petitioner  applied  for his post  arrest  bail before Learned 

Judicial  Magistrate  Section-30,  Islamabad  and 

learned 

Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad,  however 

the 

same  was 

concurrently  dismissed.  Hence,  the  instant  post  arrest  bail 

application. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the 

petitioner  had  not  been nominated  in the  instant  case, rather 

Crl.  Misc.No.707-B/2020 

[2] 

he has been involved on the statement of co-accused, which 

otherwise has no value in the eyes of law; that the allegations 

against  the  petitioner  are  false,  frivolous,  baseless  and 

concocted in  nature  having  no  legs  to  stand  against  the 

petitioner; that  the  investigation in  the  instant  matter  has 

already been completed and  further  detention of petitioner 

would not serve any useful purpose, therefore, the petitioner 

may be enlarged on bail. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  opposed  the 

instant post  arrest bail application on  the  grounds  that  the 

petitioner  is  guilty  in  instant  matter  as  some  of  gold 

ornaments have been recovered from  the  petitioner, which 

have been identified by the complainant, and as such, challan 

has been submitted in the Court and charge has been framed 

against the petitioner, therefore, the  instant bail application 

may be dismissed. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

The  tentative  assessment  of  record  reveals  that 

petitioner  has  been  arrested  in  criminal  case  FIR No.373, 

dated  09.08.2019, under  Section 392 PPC, P.S. Golra Sharif, 

Islamabad, lodged  on  complaint  of  Rasool Ahmad  Bhatti 

(respondent No.2), whereby on 30.07.2019, at 11:25 a.m., three 

unknown armed persons with muffled face entered into his 

residence i.e.  House No.6, Main Double Road, Sector D-12, 

Islamabad  and  robbed  the  complainant  and  his  family 

members of gold ornaments, necklaces, jewelry, Apple Mac, 

Macbook Pro and  other personal belongings. The petitioner 

has been nominated through supplementary statement, who 

got recovered two gold necklaces belonging to complainant's 

family  on  25.12.2019, which  were  also  identified  by  the 

complainant. 

Crl.  Misc.No.707-B/2.020 

[3] 

7. 

Learned  counsel 

for  petitioner 

contends 

that 

petitioner  has  not  been  identified  in  identification  parade 

conducted  in jail  on  29.11.2019, however  the  appreciation  of 

identification  parade  could  not  be  considered  at  this  stage, 

especially  when  petitioner  has  also  been  identified  in  two 

other  criminal cases prior  to identification  parade  conducted 

in instant  matter. 

8. 

At  this  stage,  the  petitioner,  who  got  recovered  the 

robbed  gold ornaments,  prima facie,  is connected with heinous 

crime  of  armed  robbery  and  as  such,  the  investigation  has 

been  completed  to his  extent,  challan  has  been  submitted  in 

the Court on 30.11.2019 and  even charge has been framed. On 

the other  hand,  the learned  State Counsel  contended  that  the 

trial will be concluded  soon. 

9. 

While  considering 

the  above  background, 

the 

petitioner 

is,  prima  jacie,  connected  with  the  offence, 

which otherwise  falls within  the prohibitory  clause of Section 

497Cr.P.C. 

10. 

Keeping in view  the  above  position,  the  instant  post 

arrest  bail  application  is  meritless  and  the  same  is  hereby 

DISMISSED. 

11. 

However, while considering  the analogy drawn  from 

2011  SCMR 1332 (Rehmat  Ullah  VS  The  State),  the  learned 

Trial Court  seized with  the matter  is directed  to conclude the 

trial within the period  of 08 months. 

MOHSlN-'AKHTARKAY~I) 

JUDGE 

Khalid  z. 

