ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

C.R. No.175/2014 
Mst. Syeda Irshad Fatima Rizvi 
VS
Bashir Ahmad, etc.  

Petitioner by: 

Raja Muhammad Aleem Khan Abbasi, Advocate. 

Respondents by: 

Mian Ghaffar, Advocate for Respondent No.1. 
Mr. Zahid Mehmood Raja, Advocate for 
Respondent No.2 through LRs. 

Date of Hearing: 

28.08.2019. 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J: Through this civil revision, the 

petitioner namely Mst. Syeda Irshad Fatima Rizvi has assailed judgment 

and  decree  dated  09.02.2011,  whereby  her  suit  for  specific  performance 

of  agreement  to  sell,  permanent  and  mandatory  injunction  has  been 

dismissed  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge,  1st  Class,  Islamabad,  which  was 

further upheld by the  learned first Appellate Court vide judgment  and 

decree dated 30.01.2014. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  civil  revision  petition  are  that 

Mst.  Syeda  Irshad  Fatima  Rizvi  (petitioner)  filed  a  suit  for  specific 

performance  of  agreement  to  sell  dated  09.10.1999  (Exh.P2),  executed 

between  Bashir  Ahmad  (Respondent  No.1)  and  the  petitioner  for  sale 

and  purchase  of  Plot  No.4,  Category-V,  measuring  25x40,  Street No.80, 

Sector  G-13/1,  Islamabad  (suit  plot)  in  the  scheme  launched  by  the 

Federal  Government  Employees  Housing  Foundation  (FGEHF).  The 

total  sale  consideration  fixed  between  the  parties  was  Rs.275,000/-, 

whereas  Rs.150,000/-  was  paid  by  petitioner  to  respondent  No.1  as 

earnest  money  while  the  remaining  consideration  was  to  be  deposited 

 
 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 2 

by  petitioner  in  the  office  of  FGEHF  within  prescribed  days.  All  the 

original documents were handed over to petitioner by respondent No.1 

at  the  time  of  execution  of  agreement.  The  suit  plot  was  provisionally 

allotted to respondent No.2 by the FGEHF. Respondent No.1 executed a 

receipt  (Exh.P3)  dated  09.10.1999  regarding  receiving  of  Rs.25,000/-, 

from the petitioner and the entire suit has been contested on the basis of 

authority  letter  Exh.P4,  which  was  allegedly  executed  on  behalf  of 

Respondent  No.2  in  favour  of  Respondent  No.1,  whereby  an  authority 

was  given  to  Respondent  No.1  to  deal  with  the  affairs  of  suit  plot.  An 

agreement  dated  20.03.2000  (Exh.P5)  was  also  placed  on  record,  which 

was executed between Respondents No.1 and 2.  

3. 

The suit was contested by Respondent No.2, whereas respondent 

No.1 conceded the claim of petitioner and  the learned Trial Court after 

framing of issues recorded the evidence of parties and finally dismissed 

the suit, which was upheld by the learned first Appellate Court and as 

such,  there  are  concurrent  findings  of  facts  recorded  against  the 

petitioner, who failed to substantiate her claim before the Courts below. 

Hence, the instant civil revision.  

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  petitioner  has  paid 

the  entire  sale  consideration  and  her  stance  was  conceded  by 

Respondent  No.1,  who  was  the  actual  purchaser  of  the  suit  plot  from 

allottee  i.e.  Respondent  No.2;  that  Respondent  No.2  acknowledged  her 

signature on the authority letter given by her to Respondent No.1 and as 

such,  the  denial  of  claim  on  the  part  of  Respondent  No.2  is  just  an 

afterthought;  that  once  the  contents  of  document  have  been  admitted, 

the  due  execution  stands  proved  and  as  such,  both  the  Courts  below 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 3 

have  not  appreciated  the  admission  of  authority  letter  Exh.P4;  that  the 

petitioner  has  proved  the  due  execution  of  documents,  even  produced 

the  entire  record 

in  shape  of  documentary  evidence,  whereas 

Respondent  No.2  has  not  only  failed  to  substantiate  her  plea,  but  also 

failed to explain under what circumstances her original documents have 

been  placed  on  record  by  the  petitioner  side,  which  shows  her  greedy 

nature  to  extort  money  from  the  petitioner as  the  price  of  suit  plot  has 

been increased manifold.  

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  Respondent  No.2  contends  that 

she neither entered into agreement to sell with any of the parties nor she 

received  any  sale  consideration  with  respect  to  suit  plot  and  even  she 

was not aware  that  any plot was allotted by  Respondent  No.3 unless a 

notice issued by the Court was served upon her; that Respondent No.1 

has  committed  fraud  in  connivance  with  Respondent  No.3  as  the 

address for the purpose of communication in record of Respondent No.3 

was  changed,  whereafter  all  the  original  records,  documents  and 

allotment  letter  were  corresponded to  Respondent  No.1,  who  allegedly 

handed  over 

the 

same 

to 

the  petitioner; 

that 

the  alleged 

affidavit/authority 

letter  Exh.P4 

is  a  forged  document  and  the 

signatures  allegedly  attributed  to  Respondent  No.2  are  forged  and 

fabricated,  which  have  not  been  confronted  or  proved  through  any 

handwriting expert as petitioner has not proved the due execution of the 

document,  therefore,  she  has  rightly  been  deprived  of  the  claim  of 

specific performance.  

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 4 

7. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  filed  a  suit  for  specific 

performance of agreement to sell, permanent and mandatory injunction 

on  29.12.2003  against  Bashir  Ahmad  (Respondent  No.1),  Mrs.  Sharafat 

Begum  (Respondent  No.2)  and  FGEHF  (Respondent  No.3)  regarding 

Plot  No.4,  Category-V,  measuring  25x40,  Street  No.80,  Sector  G-13/1, 

Islamabad  (suit  plot),  which  was  allotted  to  Respondent  No.2  vide 

provisional  allotment  letter  dated  01.09.1999  (Exh.P6).  The  petitioner 

entered into agreement to sell with Respondent No.1 directly through an 

agreement  dated  09.10.1999  (Exh.P2)  against  sale  consideration  of 

Rs.275,000/-,  whereby  it  was  specifically  written  in  the  body  of 

agreement that the plot is allotted to Respondent No.2, who is unable to 

pay  the  charges  and  amount  of  suit  plot  in  the  office  FGEHF,  which 

compelled her to authorize Respondent No.1 to make the said payments, 

whereafter she will transfer the suit plot through an agreement.  

8. 

Respondent  No.1  has  conceded  the  claim  of  petitioner  in  his 

written  statement  and  contended  that  he  has  received  the  entire  sale 

consideration  of  suit  plot  at  prevailing  market  price  and  as  such,  the 

claim of petitioner/plaintiff was acknowledged, whereas the contesting 

original  allottee  i.e.  Respondent  No.2  has  denied  the  version  of 

petitioner in her written statement with the specific plea taken in Para-4, 

which is as under: 

That  the  Plaintiff  has  not  come  to  the  Court  with  the 
“4. 
clean hands, in fact outset of the pleading shows the connivance 
of the Plaintiff and the Defendant No.1, which further affirms the 
manipulation  of  the  alleged  agreement  malafidely,  illegally  and 
for  the  ulterior  motives,  moreover  all  the  correspondence  on 
behalf  of  the  answering  Defendant  with  the  Defendant  No.3  is 
forged,  fabricated  and  without  the  written  permission  of  the 
answering  Defendant.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  answering 
Defendant  is  residing  in  House  #  C-708,  Chowk  Nasir  Khan, 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 5 

Mohallah  Nadir  Ali,  Peshawar  City,  and  applied  for  a  plot 
against  the  application  No.29568  in  the  office  of  the  Defendant 
No.3,  who  asked  the  answering  Defendant  to  deposit  the  seed 
money  and  accordingly  the  answering  Defendant  deposited 
Rs.35,000/- through pay order No.562612 dated 09.02.1999 and 
thereafter  kept  on  waiting  for  intimation  from  the  office  of 
Defendant  No.3,  but  the  answering  Defendant  never  received 
any  information  about  the  allotment  of  the  plot,  the  answering 
Defendant being lady of old age was unable to visit the office and 
to pursue her case, the answering Defendant received the notice 
from this Honourable Court and thereafter, approached the office 
of  Defendant  No.3,  from  where  it  revealed  to  the  answering 
Defendant  that  the  suit  plot  stand  allotted  in  the  name  of 
answering Defendant and from checking the file it revealed that 
the Defendant No.1 cleverly and in connivance with the staff of 
the  Defendant  No.3  managed  to  change  the  address  of 
correspondence i.e. House # 180-D, St. # 56, G-6/4, Islamabad, 
where  the  Defendant  No.1  is  residing.  That  the  answering 
Defendant  had  no  concern  at  all  with  the  Defendant  No.1  and 
never ever either authorized the Defendant No.1 to deal with or 
to  execute  any  of  the  agreement,  and  also  not  visited  the  office 
before,  therefore what ever  is  done  in the office No.3 which  was 
exclusively done by the Defendant No.1 fraudulently and all the 
correspondence with the Defendant No.3 was carried out by the 
Defendant  No.1  with  the  fake  and  bogus  signatures  against 
which  the  Plaintiff  reserves  her  right  to  initiate  criminal 
proceedings against the wrong doers.” 
(Underlining is provided for emphasis) 

9. 

On  the  basis  of  above  referred  pleadings,  the  learned  Trial  Court 

has  framed  issues,  pursuant  to  which  the  petitioner  put  appearance  as 

PW-1  and  reiterated  her  stance  of  entering  into  agreement  to  sell  with 

Respondent  No.1  against  sale  consideration  of  Rs.275,000/-  and  has 

submitted  special  attorney  (Exh.P1)  in  favour  of  Asim  Ali,  agreement  to 

sell  dated  09.10.1999  executed  between  Respondent  No.1  and  petitioner 

(Exh.P2),  receipt  amounting  to  Rs.25,000/-  signed  by  Respondent  No.1 

(Exh.P3),  authority  letter  allegedly  executed  by  Respondent  No.2  in 

favour  of  Respondent  No.1  (Exh.P4)  and  has  also  produced  an  alleged 

agreement  executed  between  Respondent  No.2  and  Respondent  No.1 

 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 6 

dated  20.03.2005  (Exh.P5).  The  petitioner  has  also  produced  provisional 

allotment letter dated 01.09.1999 (Exh.P6), the payment schedule (Exh.P7) 

and payment receipts (Exh.P8 & Exh.P8/1-7) and original allotment letter 

dated 16.04.2002 (Exh.P9). However, during the course of cross examination, 

the  petitioner  conceded  that  agreement  Exh.P2  was  not  executed  with 

Respondent  No.2,  who  is  the  actual  owner  of  the  suit  plot  and  it  was 

admitted by petitioner as PW-1 that alleged power of attorney Exh.P4 was 

executed in favour of Respondent No.1 after the agreement Exh.P2. 

10. 

The  petitioner  has  also  produced  Syed  Mehdi  Abbas  Rizvi  as 

PW-2  and  Aleem  Akhtar  as  PW-3,  who  are  witnesses  of  Exh.P4  and 

Exh.P5.  Both  the  said  witnesses  reiterated  the  stance  of  petitioner  and 

acknowledged  that  at  the  time  of  execution  of  agreement  Exh.P2,  plot 

number was not allocated and authority letter/power of attorney Exh.P4 

was  executed  after  execution  of  agreement  Exh.P2,  even  PW-3  Aleem 

Akhtar has not confirmed as to the fact that Respondent No.2 has signed 

Exh.P5 in his presence. Besides this admission, he has also not confirmed 

as to whether signature of Respondent No.2 are original or otherwise.  

11.  On  the  other  hand,  Respondent  No.2  appeared  as  DW-2  and 

reiterated  her  stance  that  she  has  neither  entered  into  agreement  nor 

received  any  amount  or  signed  any  authority  letter  and  as  such,  she 

denied  her  signature  on  Exh.P4  and  Exh.P5  as  she  declared  her 

signatures  thereon  as  forged  one.  She  has  produced  her  applications 

Exh.D3 &  Exh.D4 together with seed  money Exh.P5 on record. She has 

further taken the specific plea that: 

Agreement 

 ہیلعاعذه ںیه ےھ ایک ہن
 یئوک  ھتاس  ےک  ریشت  محمد  وت  ہن  ےن  ںیه  ۔یھت  یتناج
 ہک وج ںیہ ہن ظختسد ےریه رپ
 ےس جح یہ ةج ۔ںیہ یلعج ظختسد ےریه یھت رپ

 اک ہیوعذته ٹلاپ ھتاس ےک یسک ےن ںیه"
رثون
 ۔اید رٹیل یٹراھتا یئوک یہ ہن ایک ہهانرارقا
 ۔ںیہ ےیک رپروط یلعج

  ہن  لثق  ےس  ہهذقه  وک

Exh.P5

Exh.P4

1 

 
 
 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 7 

 رپ سج ںیہن ہک ےہ لاکن ٹلاپ اریه ہک لاچ ہتپ وت ایاورک ہتپ ےن
 ماوت رک ےد ہتپ انپا رک له ےس ںولاو رتفد ےن

1 

 ںیه وت یئآ سپاو
رثون ہیلع اعذه ہک اوہ نلع ےھجه
"۔اہر اترک رپ ہتپ یسا دوخزا تتاتک و ظخ

During  the  course  of  cross-examination,  she  was  confronted  with  a 

question as to what was the date of allotment of the plot and in response 

whereof she has taken the following acknowledgment:  

 ۔ںوہ  یتیل  رک  یھت  ظختسد  روا  ںوہ  یتاگل  یھت  اھٹوگنا  ںیه  ںوہ  ھڑپ  ىا  ںیه

"

"۔ںوہ یتناج ہن وک

1 

رثون ہیلع اعذه ریشت ںیه ۔ںیہ ہن ےریه  ظختسد رپ

Exh.P5

She has also acknowledged that she has only deposited the seed money, 

but  any  of  the  installments  has  not  been  paid  by  her  as  she  has  not 

received  any  letter  in  this  regard.  However,  at  the  same  time  she  has 

admitted that she is not in possession of original documents of suit plot. 

Respondent No.2 was when confronted with Exh.P4, she acknowledged 

her  signature  thereon  and  contended  that  the  signatures  are  same  as 

available on Exh.D7. 

EFFECT OF ADMISSION  
12. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  background,  the  petitioner  is 

contesting the entire matter on the strength of only one admission on the 

part of Respondent No.2 that: 

"۔ںیہ ظختسد ےریه رپ

Exh.P4

 ہک ےہ تسرد ہی"

13.  As  per  petitioner’s  stance,  once  a  party  admits  signature  on  a 

disputed document, the entire document stands prove and in this regard 

the counsel for petitioner has relied upon 2006 SCMR 774 (Syed Zawar 

Hussain  Shah  VS  Haider),  wherein  it  was  held  that  “execution  of 

agreement  was  admitted  by  defendant  who  took  the  plea  that  their  signatures 

and thumb impressions were obtained on blank paper.” However, the facts of 

instant  case  are  different  as  in  the  aforesaid  case  the  plaintiff  had 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 8 

otherwise  proved  due  execution  of  agreement  as  observed  by  the  apex 

Court in the following manner:  

“Plaintiffs  had  duly  proved  execution  of  sale  agreement  as  well 
as  receipt  of  payment  of  entire  consideration  amount  by 
defendants by producing stamp vendor, deed writer and attesting 
marginal witnesses.” 

Essentially,  this  aspect  is  lacking  in  the  instant  matter.  The  learned 

counsel for petitioner while relying upon 2000 CLC 929 Lahore (Zubaida 

Begum VS Majeeda Kaukab), 1995 SCMR 296 (Muhammad Ashraf Khan 

VS  Abdul  Qadar),  1995  CLC  1  Lahore  (Amanullah  Khan  VS  Abdul 

Majeed  Khan),  2001  CLC  1530  Karachi  (Muhammad  Ameer  VS  The 

State),  and  2008  MLD 252 Lahore (Chiragh Din  VS Akram Mohiuddin) 

tried to convince this Court that once a signature has been admitted no 

exception  could  be  taken.  However,  the  above  referred  case  laws  are 

distinguishable  from  the  instant  matter  as  Respondent  No.2  is  an 

illiterate  lady  and  the  petitioner  has  not  proved  the  contents  of  Exh.P4 

i.e. the authority letter, which is a unilateral and unregistered letter, even 

only one witness namely PW-2 Syed Mehdi Abbas has been produced to 

prove  the  said  document,  while  the  other  attesting  witness  was  not 

produced in the Court, therefore, the due execution of Exh.P4 (authority 

letter) is in doubt. 

14. 

Besides the above referred legal proposition, the petitioner  seeks 

specific performance of Exh.P2, which was not executed by Respondent 

No.2, therefore, if the suit is decreed in favour of petitioner on the basis 

of alleged agreement to sell dated 09.10.1999, the same is not executable 

against  Respondent  No.2  i.e.  the  original  allottee.  Even  otherwise,  the 

conceding statement of Respondent No.1 in favour of petitioner is of no 

use,  when  he  himself  not  opted  to  put  appearance  in  witness  box  in 

 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 9 

favour  of  petitioner  to  prove  the  contents  of  the  alleged  power  of 

attorney i.e. Exh.P4, which was executed on a white page. The signature 

available  on  the  document  Exh.P4  and  circled  as  Exh.D7,  although  the 

same  was  confronted  to  Respondent  No.2  during  the  course  of  cross 

examination, requires proper verification and comparative analysis from 

a  handwriting  expert,  especially  when  Respondent  No.2  denied  the 

document  as  well  as  her  signature  on  the  ground  of  fraud  in  the 

pleadings  (written  statement),  therefore,  the  onus  is  shifted  upon 

petitioner  to  prove  the  due  execution  of  power  of  attorney  Exh.P4,  the 

petitioner is under legal duty to get the alleged thumb impression or the 

signature  on  Exh.P4  to  verify  the  same  from  the  expert,  which  has  not 

been  done  by  the  petitioner  and  the  same  resulted  into  an  adverse 

inference.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2019  MLD  485    Lahore  (Jameel 

Ahmad Zahid VS Rasheeda Begum, etc.). 

15. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  has  also  argued  his  case  on  the 

strength  of  Section  196  of  the  Contract  Act,  1872  and  tried  to  convince 

this Court that the act of ratification has been done by Respondent No.2 

and  she  has  acknowledged  her  signature  on  Exh.P4,  by  such 

acknowledgment  all  acts  done  by  Respondent  No.1  stand  ratified,  but 

this  Court  is  of  the  view  that  the  knowledge  requisite  for  valid 

ratification is materially defective in terms of Section 198 of the Contract 

Act,  1872  as  Respondent  No.2  was  confronted  with  her  signature  in 

isolation. 

16. 

The  mere  admission  of  signature  in  one  line  itself  is  wrong  on 

point of fact. In terms of Article 34 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, 

an admission, even though, if considered to be legal one, was a relevant 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 10 

fact, which clearly connoted that admission was not a conclusive against 

a  party  making  it.  Similarly,  the  oral  admission  as  to  contents  of 

document is not relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove 

them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of contents of 

such  document  in  terms  of  Article  35  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 

1984  or  unless  the  genuineness  of  document  along  with  contents  has 

been proved. Similarly, Article 36 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 

settled the proposition in the following manner:  

36.  Admissions  in  civil  cases,  when  relevant:  In  civil  cases 
no  admission  is  relevant  if  it  is  made  either  upon  an  express 
condition  that  evidence  of  it  is  not  to  be  given,  or  under 
circumstances  from  which  the  Court  can  infer  that  the  parties 
agreed together that evidence of it should not be given. 

Therefore,  keeping  in  view  the  above  background,  the  one  liner 

admission  of  signature  on  Exh.P4  on  behalf  of  respondent  No.2  is  not 

conclusive of the matter and admission which is wrong in point of fact 

or made in ignorance of legal right has no binding effect on the person 

making it as settled in PLD 1979 SC 311 (Amjad Khan VS Rasool Shah, 

etc.).  This  view  has  also  been  highlighted  in  2013  CLC  1171  Peshawar 

(Fida  Muhammad,  etc.  VS  Umar  Khitab),  wherein  it  was  held  that 

admission  being  wrong  on  point  of  fact  was  also  not  admissible. 

Reliance  is  also  placed  upon  2005  YLR  946  Lahore  (Shahadat  Khan  VS 

Zulfiqar,  etc.).  This  Court  considers  the  admission  of  signature  by 

respondent  No.2  on  Exh.P4  is  in  ignorance  of  her  rights  and  the  same 

was made erroneously, whereas mere admission regarding signature on 

Exh.P4  without  admission  regarding  contents  of  Exh.P4  is  of  no  use, 

therefore,  the  same  could  not  be  relied  upon.  Reliance  is  placed  upon 

1993 CLC 1248 Lahore (Fateh Muhammad VS Additional Commissioner, 

 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 11 

etc.),  2006  YLR  1431  Lahore  (Maqsood  Ahmad  VS  Muhammad  Anwar 

Ali), 2001 MLD 427 Lahore (Mst. Hameeda Begum VS Khadim Hussain) 

and 2001 CLC 527 Lahore (Nazir Ahmad VS Zeban Bibi). 

PRECAUTIONS FOR ILLITERATE AND PARDA NASHEEN LADY 

17. 

Respondent  No.2  is  an  illiterate  parda  nasheen  lady  and  in  this 

regard petitioner/plaintiff has been burdened with heavy responsibility 

to discharge the onus that no fraud has been committed while executing 

Exh.P4.  In  this  context,  the  apex  Court  in  judgments  reported  as  2016 

SCMR  1225  (Phul  Peer  Shah  VS  Hafeez  Fatima),  2017  SCMR  1110 

(Abdur Rehman VS Mst. Majida Bibi alias Majeedan), 2015 SCMR 1704 

(Baja  through  LRs  VS  Behkan,  etc.),  2014  SCMR  1469  (Mst.  Zaitoon 

Begum VS Nazar Hussain, etc.), 2012 SCMR 1258 (Syed Sharif ul Hassan 

through LRs VS Muhammad Hafeez, etc.), 2006 SCMR 930 (Fateh Khan 

deceased  through  LRs  VS  Surraya  Begum)  and  2004  SCMR  1259 

(Khawas  Khan  through  LRs  VS  Sabir  Shah,  etc.),  has  outlined  the 

following mandatory provisions to be complied with:  

a) 

That 

lady  was  fully  cognizant  and  was  aware  of 

transaction and its probable consequence.  

b) 

She  had  independent  advice  from  reliable  source/person 

of trust who fully understands the nature of transaction.  

c)  Witnesses  to  the  transaction  were  such,  who  were  close 

relatives  or  fully  acquainted  with  the  lady  and  had  no 

conflict of interest with her.  

d) 

e) 

Sale consideration was duly paid and received by the lady.  

Very nature of transaction may be explained in a language 

she  understands  and  she  was  apprised  of  the  contents  of 

deed, receipts, as the case may be.  

 
 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 12 

f) 

Courts have to look into the surrounding circumstances to 

ascertain  the  true  intent  behind  the  document  so  as  to 

determine its validity and to ensure that women were not 

deprived of their property through frivolous or fraudulent 

means  by  taking  advantage  of  their  illiteracy,  weak  social 

background and other compelling circumstances to which 

they might be easily exposed.  

g) 

The burden of proof was on a person in whose favour the 

deed was executed by such lady.  

h)  Mere  thumb  marking  a  document  would  not  tantamount 

to  a  valid  execution,  until  and  unless  such  lady  was  duly 

apprised  with  and  made  to  understand  true  nature  and 

contents thereof.  

The  above  referred  principles  left  no  other  exception  in  favour  of 

petitioner’s  case  as  Respondent  No.2  is  an  illiterate  parda  nasheen  lady, 

who was not privy to any advice from her close relative, husband, son or 

brother and even Exh.P4 was not attested by any of the family member 

of Respondent  No.2, therefore,  the document Exh.P4 fails on the above 

referred guiding principles established by the superior Courts.  

EFFECT OF NON REGISTRATION OF EXH.P4 

18. 

In the instant proposition, the petitioner is under legal obligation 

to  submit  those  reasons  as  to  why  she  has  not  directly  entered  into  an 

agreement with Respondent No.2 when the instrument Exh.P4 was not a 

registered instrument. Whereas, it is trite law that the power of attorney 

requires registration in terms of Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, 

a  document  conveying  transfer  of  title  or  authority  to  transfer  requires 

compulsory  registration  and  in  case  of  non-registration  in  terms  of 

Section  49,  it  has  no  legal  effect.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2015 CLC  385 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 13 

(Bakhtiar VS Nasrullah), 2002 CLC 1165 SC AJK (Manzoor Hussain VS 

Muhammad  Fazal),  2002  SCMR  1821 

(Muhammad  Sadiq  VS 

Muhammad  Ramzan),  and  2007  YLR  2440  Lahore  (Mst.  Salaman  VS 

Bashir  Ahmad),  therefore,  authority  letter  Exh.P4  has  no  legal  sanction 

to  convey  any  right  or  title  on  behalf  of  Respondent  No.2  in  favour  of 

Respondent  No.1  to  execute  any  agreement  with  the  petitioner, 

therefore, the agreement to sell Exh.P2, even though has been conceded 

by Respondent No.1 (who is not the actual owner), has no legal value. 

EXECUTION  OF  POWER  OF  ATTORNEY  (EXH.P4)  AFTER  THE 
EXECUTION OF EXH.P2 

19. 

In  addition  to  above  referred  technical  defects,  the  power  of 

attorney Exh.P4 was executed after the execution of agreement Exh.P2 as 

acknowledged  by  the  witnesses  of  petitioner,  therefore,  Exh.P4  is  an 

afterthought  and  was  executed  with  intent  to  defeat  the  right  of 

Respondent No.2 and as such, the plea of misrepresentation and fraud is 

apparent  on  record.  The  petitioner/plaintiff  is  under  legal  obligation  to 

prove due execution of document i.e. Exh.P4 (attorney), which is lacking 

in  this  case,  especially  when  two  attesting  witnesses  of  Exh.P4  have  not 

substantiated  the  case  as  per  law  and  consideration  has  not  been 

conveyed to Respondent No.2 in any manner, even the change of address 

by  Respondent  No.1,  in  connivance  with  officials  of  FGEHF,  has  been 

alleged and no legal justification was brought on record by the FGEHF as 

well  as  Respondent  No.1  as  to  why  the  address  has  been  changed.  All 

these  factors  confirm  that  Respondent  No.1  has  committed  fraud  in 

connivance  with  petitioner  as  well  as  with  officials  of  the  FGEHF  to 

deprive  Respondent  No.2  (actual  owner  of  suit  plot)  from  her  valuable 

right of allotment.  

 
 
  
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 14 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

20. 

Besides  the  above  referred  position,  it  is  astonishing  to  observe 

that  Respondent  No.1 has submitted his conceding statement  in favour 

of  petitioner  and  acknowledged  the  agreement  in  which  Respondent 

No.2 was not privity and as such, the said written statement on behalf of 

respondent  No.1  was  drafted  and  executed  by  the  same  counsel,  who 

has  also  separately  filed  written  statement  on  behalf  of  FGEHF  in  the 

same  suit, which itself is a conflict of interest as it has been noted with 

great  concern  that  the  counsel,  who  was  representing  the  department 

has also been engaged by private party in the same suit having different 

rights/claims,  especially  in  this  case  when  Respondent  No.2  has 

specifically alleged fraud on the part of Respondent No.1 in connivance 

with  officials  of  the  FGEHF  to  deprive  her  from  her  valuable  rights, 

therefore, such kind of practice by same counsel is depreciated and not 

to be allowed in legal proceedings.  

INTERPOLATION OF JUDICIAL RECORD  

21. 

I have also gone through the record of the learned Trial Court in 

order  to  ascertain  the  veracity  of  Exh.P4  (affidavit/attorney),  but 

surprisingly  the  plaint  filed  by  petitioner/plaintiff  is  silent  qua  the 

execution  of  Exh.P4  and  the  said  document  has  not  been  mentioned  in 

the body of plaint, even the petitioner has not referred the same in any 

of  the  paragraphs  of  plaint  to  the  effect  that  Exh.P4  was  executed  by 

Respondent No.2 in favour of Respondent No.1, who was authorized to 

alienate the suit plot to any third party. I have also gone through  order 

dated  04.07.2009,  passed  on  application  filed  under  Order  XXXIX  Rule 

1&2  CPC,  whereby  reference  of  Exh.P4  was  neither  argued,  nor  even 

 
 
 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 15 

reflected,  therefore,  as  a  last  resort,  I  have  gone  through  the  list  of 

documents  appended  with  the  plaint  (ہدرک  شیپ  تاسیوتسد  تسرہف)  which  was 

signed  by  presiding  officer  on  05.01.2014,  in  which  Exh.P4  has  not  been 

referred. 

22. 

Similarly, 

I  have  gone 

through 

the 

list  of  reliance 

in 

terms  of  Order  VII  Rule  14(2)  of  CPC,  wherein  Exh.P4  (یفلح  ىایت) 

/authority  letter  dated  25.10.1999  was  found  mentioned  in  Column 

No.2, 

but 

it  has  been  observed 

that 

the  original  Urdu  version  of 

the  document  in  question  was  filled  with  black  ballpoint  as  Column 

No.1 i.e. (ىوک ىوک ،ےکچ رک لخاد سیواتسد یئوک ھتاس ےک  ٰیوعد باوج نت ایک  ٰیوعد یضرع) has 

been 

filled 

with 

black  ballpoint  referring  (تاسیواتسد  تسرہف  قتاطوت  ںاھ  یج),  while  the  second 

column 

i.e. (

ںیہ ںیه ہضثق ےک سک سک روا ںیہ ںیه رایتخا ،ہضثق ےراہوت وج ےگ

ورک شیپ تاسیواتسد روا یئوک نت ایک

), 

which has been answered while using the same black ballpoint with ( یج

ںاہ),  while  rest  of  the  entries  there-under  have  been  made  with  blue 

ballpoint 

at 

later  stage  in  order  to  manage  affairs  of  Exh.P4,  which  shows 

interpolation  of  record  with  aim  to  achieve  ulterior  motives  of 

petitioner/plaintiff,  therefore,  any  document  which  is  not  part  of 

pleadings  at  the  initial  stage  and  even  not  mentioned  in  the  list  of 

documents  in  terms  of  Order  VII  Rule  14(1)  CPC  or  relied  in  terms  of 

Order  VII  Rule  14(2)  CPC  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  be  placed  on 

record  as  by  placing  Exh.P4  on  record 

through  a  backdoor 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 16 

intervention  as  reflected  from  the  record  gives  a  premium  to  the 

petitioner/plaintiff,  who  is  not  allowed  to  lead  evidence  beyond  her 

pleadings and in case such evidence is led, the same could not be read, 

nor a party can be allowed to improve its case through evidence, if the 

case  is  not  set  up  in  the  pleadings.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  PLD  2010 

Lahore  649  (Irshad  Begum  VS  Muhammad  Rafique),  2008  SCMR  1682 

(Muhammad  Iqbal  VS  Ali  Sher)  and  2007  SCMR  1682  Lahore 

Development  Authority  VS  Sultan  Ahmad),  and  as  such,  the  rule  of 

secundum allegata et probeta precluded a party from proving what had not 

been alleged or pleaded as held in 2014 SCMR 914 (Muhammad Nawaz 

alias Nawaza VS Member Judicial Board of Revenue). 

23. 

It  is  the  sacred  duty  of  courts  of  law  to  explore  the  ways  and 

means  for  undoing  what  was  unjust  and  unfair  as  a  principle  of 

administration  of  justice  and  this  Court  is  of  a  clear  view  that  Exh.P4 

was  not  in  existence  at  the  time  of  filing  of  suit,  which  was  placed  on 

record through a backdoor by interpolation in record of the learned Trial 

Court  after  filing  of  suit.  This  aspect  has  not  been  noted  by  both  the 

Courts  below,  though  the  suit  of  petitioner  has  rightly  been  dismissed 

vide  impugned  judgments,  therefore,  contents  of  document  Exh.P4 

could  not  be  looked  into  by  any  stretch  of  imagination  despite  the  fact 

that  Exh.P4  was  exhibited  and  no  objection  was  raised  by  Respondent 

No.2, even otherwise, Order XIII Rule 2 CPC permits to bring on record 

any such document if good cause is shown to the satisfaction of court for 

non production thereof and in such eventuality the court receiving any 

such  evidence  shall  record  the  reasons  for  doing  so,  otherwise  the 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 17 

language  referred  in  Order  XIII  Rule  2  CPC  is  mandatory  to  be 

implemented  as  the  phrase  used  by  the  legislature  i.e.  “no  documentary 

evidence in  the  possession  or  power  of  any  party  which  should  have  been,  but 

has  not  been  produced  in  accordance  with  requirement  of  Rule  1  shall  be 

received  at  any  subsequent  proceedings”,  therefore,  Exh.P4  was  not  placed 

on  record,  even  on  the  first  hearing  of  the  suit  as  required  under 

Order XIII Rule 1 CPC as it was not found mentioned in the list at that 

very time.  

CONCLUSION 

24. 

I  have  gone  through  the  concurrent  findings  of  both  the  Courts 

below,  wherein  no  legal  defect  has  been  found  and  both  the  Courts 

below  have  rightly  passed  the  judgments  and  dismissed  the  suit  for 

specific performance in a right manner under the law. It is trite law that 

concurrent  findings  of  facts  could  not  be  interfered  with  as  there  is 

neither any error on record nor any factor of misreading or non-reading 

of evidence is available on record, even no illegality has been observed 

therein.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon  2016  SCMR  24  (Nazim-

ud-Din VS Sheikh Zia-ul-Qamar), 2007 SCMR 953 (Province of Punjab 

through  Collector  Sargodha  VS  Muhammad  Akhtar),  2014  SCMR  1469 

(Mst.  Zaitoon  Begum  VS  Nazar  Hussain),  2000  SCMR  431  (Anwar 

Zaman  VS  Bahadur  Sher)  and  2010  SCMR  817  (Moulvi  Muhammad 

Azeem VS Alhaj Mehmood Khan Bangish).  

25. 

Besides the above referred legal position, it is not obligatory upon 

the Courts to pass a judgment for specific performance of agreement in 

favour of plaintiff in all cases, even in cases  where agreement has been 

 
 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 18 

proved as the relief of specific performance is discretionary. Reliance is 

placed  upon  2015  SCMR  828  (Adil  Tiwana  VS  Shaukat  Ullah  Khan 

Bangash),  2017  SCMR  1696  (Muhammad  Abdur  Rehman  Qureshi  VS 

Sagheer Ahmad) and 2018 SCMR 769 (Shaukat Ullah Khan Bangash VS 

Adil  Tiwana).  Although, 

in  present  case  the  payment  of  sale 

consideration  to  Respondent  No.2  is  not  proved  by  the  petitioner. 

Respondent  No.  2  i.e.  allottee  of  the  suit  plot  had  not  authorized 

Respondent No.1 to alienate her property in any manner, even she was 

not  privy  of  contract  with  petitioner/plaintiff  qua  the  suit  plot, 

therefore, there is no occasion to pass a decree for specific performance 

under the law. The record has been manipulated and document Exh.P4 

has been brought on record unauthorizedly and illegally, which was not 

part of pleadings and not even referred in the list of reliance in the first 

instance,  and the so called power of attorney Exh.P4 was un-registered 

and the attorney i.e. respondent No.1 himself has failed to appear before 

the  Court  as  a  witness  and  as  such,  the  best evidence  was  withheld  by 

the petitioner.  

26. 

By  virtue  of  above  discussion,  the  instant  civil  revision  is 

misconceived and the same is hereby DISMISSED.  

27. 

Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  it  has  been  observed  that  the 

petitioner  has  deposited  installments  against  the  suit  plot  through 

Exh.P8  and  Exh.P8/1  to  Exh.P8/7,  therefore,  petitioner  is  entitled  to 

receive  the  same  and  as  such,  the  legal  heirs  of  Respondent  No.2  are 

directed  to  return  the  amount  by  way  of  depositing  the  same  in  the 

learned  Trial  Court/Executing  Court  account,  within  the  period  of  30 

 
 
C.R. No.175/2014 

Page | 19 

days.  The  learned  Trial  Court  shall  release  the  same  in  favour  of 

petitioner after its verification. 

28. 

The  entire  amount  of  sale  consideration  i.e.  Rs.275,000/-  was 

received  by  Bashir  Ahmad/Respondent  No.1  from  Mst.  Syeda  Irshad 

Fatima Rizvi/petitioner through Exh.P2 (agreement to sell), therefore, he 

is  directed  to  return  the  same  to  the  petitioner  along  with  additional 

amount  of  Rs.500,000/-  as  compensation,  within  the  period  of  30 days, 

by applying the principles settled by the apex Court in cases reported as 

2017 SCMR 902 (Malik Bahadur Sher Khan VS Haji Shah Alam)  ,  2015 

SCMR  21  (Muhammad  Iqbal  VS  Mehboob  Alam),  2010  SCMR  1507 

(Shakeel  Ahmad  VS  Mst.  Shaheen  Kousar),  and  2018  SCMR  769 

(Shaukat  Ullah  Khan  Bangash  VS  Adil  Tiwana).  The  original 

documents  i.e.  Exh.P6  (provisional  offer  of  allotment)  along  with 

schedule of payment Exh.P7, Exh.D1 and Exh.D2 shall be returned to the 

legal heirs of Respondent No.2 i.e. Sharafat Begum, through the learned 

Trial Court/Executing Court.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
    JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 3rd September, 2019. 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  

Khalid Z. 

    JUDGE 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
