JUDGMENT SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD,
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P.No.1336/2021

Usama Farooq

VS

Additional Sessions Judge (MCAC) (West), Islamabad & 03 others

Petitioner by:

Respondents by:

Mr. Mazhar Akram Awan and Mirza Irfan
Ghazanfar, Advocates.

Mr. Shahzad Saddiqui Alvi, Advocate for
respondents No.3 & 4

Date of Decision:

24.02.2022.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J: Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  the

petitioner has called in question judgment and decree of the learned Additional

District  Judge  (MCAC)  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  06.01.2021,  whereby  appeal

filed by the petitioner against judgment and decree of the learned Judge Family

Court (West), Islamabad, dated 30.09.2020, has partially been allowed.

2.

Succinctly, Mrs.  Naida  Usama  and  Ms.  Elaya  Fatima  (minor)  i.e.

respondents  No.3  and  4,  respectively,  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance

allowance,  dower  and  gold  ornaments  contending  therein  that Mrs.  Naida

Usama (respondent No.3) and Usama Farooq (petitioner) married on 02.12.2016

against a deferred dower of Rs.200,000/- and the petitioner gifted 04 tolas of gold

ornaments, which were allegedly taken back after few days of the marriage. The

parties  were  blessed with  a  daughter  Ms.  Elaya  Fatima  (respondent  No.4)  on

14.10.2017,  but  the  relationship  between  the  parties  became  strained  with  the

result that the petitioner expelled respondent No.3 from his house and thereafter

did not turn back to meet the respondent or minor or pay any maintenance. The

suit was contested by the petitioner by filing written statement, whereafter issues

were  framed,  as  such,  after  recording  of  pro  and  contra  evidence,  the  learned

W.P. No.1336/2021

Page | 2

trial Court partially decreed the suit vide impugned judgment and decree dated

30.09.2020.  Feeling  aggrieved  thereof,  the  petitioner  preferred  an  appeal,  which

was  partially  allowed  vide  impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated  06.01.2021.

Hence, instant writ petition.

3.

Learned counsel for petitioner contends that the petitioner herself left the

abode  of  petitioner  without  any  reason  and  proved  to  be  Nashiza,  even  she

herself  admitted  during  the  course  of  cross-examination  that  she  lived  in  the

house  of  one  Athar,  who  is  otherwise Ghair  Mehram to  respondent  No.3;  that

both the Courts below have misconstrued the facts while fixing the maintenance

allowance,  even  they  have  wrongly  exercised  the  jurisdiction  vested  in  them

while passing the impugned judgments and decrees.

4.

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.3  & 4  stressed  that the

petitioner  is  serving  in  a  private  bank  earning  a  handsome  salary,  therefore,

maintenance allowance of Rs.5000/- per month is justiciable; that the petitioner

maltreated  respondent  No.3  and  expelled  her  from  his  abode  leaving  her  and

their  daughter  at  the  mercy  of  no  one, as  such,  both  the  Courts  below  have

rightly  appreciated  the  overall  circumstances  of  the  case  and  passed  the

impugned judgments and decrees in accordance with law.

5.

6.

Arguments heard, record perused.

Perusal of record reveals that the petitioner has only argued his case to the

extent of maintenance awarded to respondent No.3 Mrs. Naida Usama, who has

now been divorced by the petitioner but no such proof has been placed on record

by  both  the  parties.  Family  Court  has  awarded  maintenance  @  Rs.5,000/- to

respondent No.3 w.e.f. date of institution of suit i.e. 05.03.2018 till subsistence of

marriage.  The  judgment  of  Family  Court  fully  explains  each  and  every  aspect

and circumstance in this case, even the concept of maltreating respondent/wife

W.P. No.1336/2021

Page | 3

is apparent. The petitioner though based his arguments on the basis of Nashiza

(disobedient wife) but failed to substantiate any such fact in the trial court and at

this  stage,  he  tried  to  malign  the  character  of  respondent  No.3  by  referring  a

portion  of  evidence  in  which  respondent  No.3  conceded  that “she  lived  in  the

house of one Athar, who is family friend”, such aspect is depreciable and the ground

raised  by  the  petitioner  is  an  afterthought.  The  concurrent  findings of  fact

recorded by the courts below could not be interfered in constitutional jurisdiction

based  upon  contrary  view.  Even  there  is  no  misreading  or  non-reading  of

evidence demonstrated by the petitioner in any manner. In such circumstances,

concurrent  findings  require  no  interference,  therefore,  instant  writ  petition  is

misconceived and the same is hereby dismissed.

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)
JUDGE

Zahid.

