JUDG

SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P I[o. gS3Ol2Ol4

Mst. Haleema Sadia

VS
Abdul Qayyum etc.

Petitioner  by:

Sh.Muhammad Khizar-ur-Rashid,
Syed Asghar  Hussain  Sabzrvari,  Ms.
Shahina  Shabuddin,  Advocates.

Respondents  No. 1 by:

Mr. Arshad  Mehmood,  Advocate

Date of decision:

18.12.2019.

MOHSIN  AKIITAR  KAYANI J. Through this writ petition,

the petitioner  has prayed for the following  relief:-

"ft  is,  tlerefore, respectfullg praged  that this
Honourable Court  maV uery graciously be pleased  to
rrssue  ertiorari  writ so as to address  and redress  the
Petitioner's  grieu ane. "

2.  Learned counsel  for the petitioner contends that petitioner
had filed suit for recovery of dowry articles, gifts worth

Rs. 57,39,975/-  and maintenance  against  the respondent  No.1 on

tlre basis of Nikah dated 15.01.2007.  He further contends  that

Rrtklwati  took place on 26.07.2008  and parties only lived together

for two (o2l months,  whereafter respondent left for Barcelona
(Spain) and failed to affange the visa of the petitioner; that

petitioner was tortured and abused by respondents  parents,

whereas  respondent/husband  gave orcJ Talaq to the petitioner in

July, 2oo9, but later on, he reconciled with petitioner  again in

November, 2oo9. However, divorce proceedings were concluded  in
February, 2olo before the union council  Gangal. He further

contends that petitioner is seeking maintenance as well as dowry

2

W.P No. 353012014
articles referred in the list of articles,  but both the courts below
have not  considered  the  fachral aspect and granted the

maintenance at the rate of Rs. 10,000/- p.m for a period starting

from 01.08.2009  to 01.05.2010  and even not granted  the dowry

articles  as per list. It  has lastly been contended  that the

respondent  No.1 has not produced  any evidence  to contradict  the

stance of the petitioner, even the father of the respondent

Muhammad Azan Shahid put appear€rnce  through Exh.Dl, who

has not uttered  a single word while appearing as witness  in favour

of his son/respondent,  therefore, the appreciation  of facts recorded

by the Courts below  are contrary to record.

3.  Conversely, learned counsel  for the respondents  contends

that all the dowry  articles  claimed by the petitioner have  already

been handed  over to her, even the maintenance  till the lddat period

has been paid on the basis of judgment  passed by the Court while

considering  the available evidence on record.

4.  Arguments heard, record perused.

5.  From the perusal of record, it reveals that the question  of

maintenance and dowry articles  have been settled by the learned

Trial Court as well as learned Appellate  Court concurrently  in the

following  manner:-

"As a nutshell  to mg aboue discussion,  suit of the plaintiff
for maintenane  is lwrebg decreed for a peiod  from
01.08.2009 to 01.05.2010  with three months  lddat
period  @ Rs. IO,OOO/- per month and to tlrc ertent of
dowry afticles decreed  as per list produced by tle
defendant.  Parties are lefi, to bear tleir own osts. Decree
slrcet be prepared  accordinglV. File be consigned to the
record room after due ampletion."

6.  Both the Courts below  have discussed each and every aspect

of the case, however, the question relating to the period  of

maintenance  till expiry of Iddat period has been appreciated by the

Courts below. As per the record, the petitioner submitted her

evidence  through affidavit as Ex.Pl, in which she claims that she

3

W.P No. 353012014
was divorced orally in July, 2OO9 and she reconciled  with her

husband on O7.LL.2OO9, but subsequently  she was divorced in

February, 2oLo. The relevant  extract of the evidence  is reproduced

as under:-

aJ t c' J tb / * t Ait :t iS tp  t t tV ( * t vr!2009  [ tt t -Q"

S 

or lr d  { UA !,/[ t n t, t : c- I t trlT :t i 
tk  t Ju .b V, 4 / I - t t -OS ! o
1J t0 il, t t .fet r, t 4{ n di sappear,r,* L&-v L J t' fi  a, r! {, r u tt{ L
t + ct fl , ),-dt ?1,,/
p L *v, vt 20 I 0 tj t t /
' -{x jG +g1,,,tfu F +ba, !V, gqJ  n U: Jtr

-C c t : -taf E *v r,/,! rf / X i- I ^u't 

,f {A u ( u i,->-,r,1  ctv ctt rr&,,r tF 6 d A 

(r')

(r)

(r)

'i

7.  This aspect has not been  rebutted  by respondent  in Exh.Dl

(represented  through  his father), who was cross-examined  at

length, wherein he did not disclose the date on which his son has

pronounced  Talaq upon the petitioner,  however, he acknowledged

that his son entered into second marriage on 08.04.2010.

8.  The minute scanning of pleading  of the parties reflects that

petitioner has claimed  that Chairman,  Arbitration  Council has

issued divorce confirmation certificate  on O2.O5.2OLO,  referred in

para-13  of the suit. Whereas respondent  No.1 has acknowledged  in

para-9 of the written statement (preliminary objections) that

Chairman Arbitration Council has issued divorce  conlirmation

certificate  on 02.05.2010, which was attached  as anne:nrre-D,

therefore,  nothing is left to contradict  the written stance taken  by

the respondent  No.1.

9.  The above  referred  stance was verified from the judgment of

the learned  Trial Court as well as learned Appellate Court, which

was rightly appreciated,  when the similar question  relating to

dowry articles has also been discussed  at length by both the

Courts below while appreciating  the stances and pleas taken by

the parties.

4

W.P No. 353012014
10.  In view of above reasons,  this Court is not persuaded by the

^:

arguments rendered  by the petitioner  side regarding  enhancement

of maintenance  rate as the evidence led by the parties had already

been critically appreciated  by the courts below  and same cannot

be altered,  varied in judicial review, therefore,  instant writ petition

is misconceived  and same is hereby dlsrnlssed.

JUDGE

RAMZAN

