ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

W.P  No.432 of 2020 

Faisal  Mehmood 
VS
District & Sessions  Judge, etc. 

Petitioners By: 

Malik Javed Iqbal Awan, Advocate 

Respondent No.2 by: 

Malik Mumtaz Ahmad, Advocate 

State by: 

Mr.  Zohaib  Hassan  Gondal,  State 
counsel. 

Date of decision: 

07.05.2020 

GHULAM  AZAM  OAMBRANI,  J.:-  The  petitioner  has  invoked the 

Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  by  filing  instant  petition  under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic of  Pakistan, 1973 

seeking  a  direction  to  the  SHO/  respondent  No.3  for  registration  of 

criminal case  against respondent No.2. 

2. 

Briefly  stated  facts  of  the  instant  petition  are  that  the 

petitioner  filed  an  application  under  Section  22-A  Cr.P.C.  before  the 

learned  (Ex-Officio  Justice  of  Peace),  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (West) 

Islamabad,  for  registration  of  F.I.R against  respondent  No.2 (hereinafter 

be  called  as  "respondent')  stating  therein  that  he  was  married  with 

respondent  No.2 on  10.01.2014, out  of  the  said  wedlock  a  baby girl  was 

born  on  30.10.2014,  who  is  alive  and  in  the  custody  of  the  respondent; 

that  the  respondent  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance allowance, 

which  was  decreed  on  the  basis  of  a  compromise;  that  thereafter  the 

respondent  filed  an  application  before  the  learned  Judge  Family Court, 

upon which  the  said  case  was  reopened wherein  the  respondent  levelled 

W.P  No.432 of2020 

2 

an allegation against the  petitioner that  he coarsely miscarriage the  baby; 

that  after  statement  of  the  doctor  and  LHV,  she  withdrew  her  suit  and 

application  on  31.07.2019.  Thereafter,  the  petitioner  filed  petition  under 

Section  22-A  Cr.P.C,  which  was  dismissed vide  order  dated  06.12.2019, 

hence, the  instant petition. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  the  petitioner 

filed  an application  before the  concerned police station  for  registration  of 

F.I.R  but  in  vain;  that  the  petitioner  approached the  Ex-officio Justice of 

Peace  by filing  a  petition  U/s 22-A of Cr.P.C.  which was dismissed without 

application of judicial  mind. 

4. 

Conversely, the  learned counsel for  respondent assisted by learned 

State  Counsel  strongly  opposed  the  contentions  raised  by  the  learned 

counsel for  the  petitioner  contending that  no offence  has  been committed 

by the  respondent and supported the  impugned order. 

5. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals that  the  petitioner  and  respondent 

No.2  are  husband  and  wife.  There  is  a  family  dispute  between  the 

spouses. As  per statement of the  Doctor Tehmina Sajjad Khan  (photocopy 

annexed  at  page  28  of  this  petition),  the  petitioner  Faisal  Mehmood 

brought  his  wife  on  24.07.2019  for  her treatment;  that  due  to  bleeding, 

miscarriage  was  occurred  and  it  was  done  with  the  consent  of  the 

petitioner  and his wife,  as  such, the  learned Additional Sessions Judge has 

rightly  dismissed the  petition  of  the  petitioner  holding that  "the  petitioner 

himself  is  signatory  of  the  permission,  so,  he  is  equally  liable  for  any 

offence,  if  committed".  In  view  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 

instant case,  there  is  no question of commission of any cognizable offence 

by  the 

respondent.  The  contents  of  the  petition  do  not  disclose 

W.P  No.432 of 2020 

3 

commission of  cognizable offence  which  would  warrant  interference  with 

the well  reasoned order of the  learned Ex-Officio Justice of  Peace. 

7. 

It  is  a  settled  principle of  law  that  the  Ex-Officio Justice of  Peace 

while  seized of  a  petition  under Section 22-N22-B  of  Cr.P.C  is  not  to  act 

mechanically  by  issuing a  direction  for  registration  of  a  criminal  case  in 

each and every  case, which  have to  be  decided on  its  own  peculiar facts 

and  circumstances.  In  any  case,  the  allegations  levelled  against  the 

respondent  by  the  petitioner  cannot  be  addressed  by  this  Court  while 

exercising its extraordinary  constitutional jurisdiction,  as  the  same entail a 

factual inquiry. 

8. 

For what  has  been discussed hereinabove, the  learned counsel for 

the  petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  or  irregularity  in  the 

impugned  order  calling  for  interference  by this  Court  in  its  Constitutional 

jurisdiction.  Resultantly,  the  instant  petition  having  no  force,  is  hereby 

dismissed. 

Rana. M.  lft 

Ghulam  Azam  Qamb{anl 
Judge 

