MENT SHEET.

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD.

CIAL DEP

Wfit P ention  N o. 2247 /2077 .

Bakht Ali Abro

VS

D.G. FGEHR  etc.

Petitioner:

In person.

Respondents by:  Raja M. Aftab  Ahmed, AAG.

Mr. Muhammad  Nazir Jawad,  Advocate.

Date of Decision: 17.06.2019

MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI- It Through  this writ petition,  the

petitioner  has prayed Ior the following  relief:-

Thrtt  contents of the earlier zorit  petitions, its enclosures and utritten

submissions  may kindly be considered  as integral part and appropriate

directions  to respondents  be kindly  issued for allotment  of Plot  ns per
earlier adaertisement  and deposit  of pay order draft ruhich rests tuitlt
respondents,  as the petitioner Toas superseded  fuu lo faoorite journalists
ruho  had the recomrtendations of big nanrc  nnd fame and merit  ktlled in
ofrrr.  Any  other  relief  zohich  this honorable Court  deem  proper'

2.  Petitioner in person  states that he has deposited  Rs.68,000/-  through

pay order on 31.03.2004  in the office of Director General  Federal  Government

Employees  Housing Foundation  against journalist  quota and he has not been

allotted  plot in Sector G-1-4,Islamabad;  that he filed W.P No.2838/201.4,  which

was disposed of vide order dated 18.11..201,6  with direction  to the Secretary,

Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Government of Pakistan  to determine

the eligibility  of petitioner  for allotment  of plot after affording  opportunity  of

W.P  No.2247120t7

2

hearing to him and pass speaking  order; that said order  was assailed through

ICA No.542/2016  before the Division  Bench of this Court,  which was

dismissed in limine vide order dated 08.12.201,6;  that despite retaining huge

amount since  2004, no plot has been allotted  to him.

3.  Conversely, learned  counsel  for Housing  Foundation  contends  that

petitioner  has availed the benefit  of plot and was allotted plot No.250,  Block-B,

Rawalpindi  Press Club  Housing Society  and is not entitled  for the benefit  of

present scheme/existing scheme launched  by the Housing  Foundation;  that

Ministry  of Information & Broadcasting has already decided  the case of the

petitioner vide letter dated 03.01,2017  and petitioner  was directed to get

refund  of Rs.58,000/- from FGEHF.

4. 

Arguments  heard, record  perused.

5.  Perusal of record reveals that petitioner  applied for the allotment  of

plot in Scheme  launched  by respondent  No.L  against 3% quota of journalist

and deposited Rs.68,000/- on 31.03.2004 for the allotment of plot in G-1'4,

Islamabad,  however,  he has not been considered  for the allotment  of plot

whereby he was constraint to file writ petition  which was disposed of with

direction to the Secretary, Ministry of Information  & Broadcasting  to consider

the eligibility  of the petitioner  and to decide  the case of petitioner  qua his

eligibility.  The petitioner  has assailed  the said order in ICA which was

dismissed  in limine.  However,  it has been observed  from the record that  case

of the petitioner has already  been turned  down by the Ministry of Information

& Broadcasting  and directed the petitioner  to get refund from FGEHF.  The

petitioner also approached the Wafaqi Mohtasib  who vide order dated

10.03.2008  has held that case of the petitioner be considered in the next

housing scheme of FGEHF.

W.P  No.2247l2OL7

3

6.  At this stage, I have asked  the petitioner  to substantiate the status of

any plot which has not yet been allotted, whereby  he states that it is the job of

Housing Foundation  to provide  such information. Learned counsel  for

respondent  No.L contends  that no plot is available  in Sector  G-1.4,Islamabad

and scheme  has already been completed, however,  he further  contends  that if

the petitioner will apply in the next scheme  he will be considered in the light

of order passed by Wafaqi Mohtasib,  if otherwise eligible.

7.  Keeping in view the above background,  the prayer made by the

petitioner  is not justified as the scheme has already been  closed and at the

most petitioner  can be considered  for any future scheme  subject to condition

that he fulfils  eligibility  criteria and on the recommendation of Secretary,

Ministry of Information & Broadcasting,  his case will be considered at

appropriate  level in accordance  with the criteria  fixed in the future scheme by

the competent  authority. The order dated  10.03.2008, passed  by Wafaqi

Mohtasib  also  substantiate  the similar relief wherein it has been  held that case

of the petitioner  will be considered  in the journalists  quota in the next housing

scheme of FGEHF.

8. 

The petitioner has failed to submit any valid reason in his favour as to

whether this Court can scrutinize the facts  qua his eligibility for the purpose  of

allotrarent  as it relates to a factual dispute,  which could only  be resolved  by the

Court  of plenary jurisdiction.  Even otherwise,  housing foundation  has taken

categorical stance that petitioner has already  availed the benefit of allotment

in other housing  society  and as such he is not shelter less, although  petitioner

has taken a stance  that there  is no bar in the eligibility  criteria that any person

or his family  members  if retained  any other plot or house are not eligible.

9.  Keeping  in view the above background,  prayer  made by the petitioner

at this stage could not be materialized  and if Ministry of Information &

W.P  No.2247l2OL7

4

Broadcasting  recorunends  name of the petitioner  for any future  scheme of

FGEHF his case would be considered  on priority  basis subject to condition

that petitioner  apply in the future scheme  afresh and fulfill the criteria as at

this stage scheme in which petitioner  has submitted application has already

been closed  and completed,  therefore,  this Court cannot enter into factual

dispute  qua the double  allotment  or eligibility  of other applicants  through

false information  as such kind of action  could only be taken by the concerned

quarters  of housing foundation.

10.  Be that as it may,  instant petition  stands  ilisposed  of with direction to

the petitioner to apply in the future scheme of FGEHF subject  to

reconunendation  of Ministry of Information &  Broadcasting  and after

fulfilling the other codal  formalities and requirement.  The amount earlier

deposited with the FGEHF by the petitioner  in the previous  scheme be

returned  to the petitioner  within30  days.

Zehid

(MOHSIN AKHTAR  KAYANI)
JUDGE

