,)

ORI)ER SHEET.

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P No.157012019.

Abdul Rehman

VS

Learned  Judge  Family  Court (EasQ Islamabad  etc

S. No. of
order/
nroceedinss

Date of order/
Proceedings

Order with signature of Judge  and that of parties or counsel
where necessarT.

30.05.2019

Mirza Hasib  Hussain Baig & Mr. Muhammad  Furqan Shabbir
Malik,  Advocates  for the petitioner.
Rana Abdul Qayyum,  Advocate for respondents  No.2 to 6.

Through the instant  writ petition,  the petitioner  has assailed

the order dated  13.03.2019,  passed  by learned Family  Judge

(East)  Islamabad,  whereby  right of the petitioner to file his

written statement  has been closed with costs  of Rs.10,000/-.

2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner inter-alia contends  that

the impugned  order has been passed in haste;  that  no opportunity

has been granted  to the petitioner as on previous  two dates of

hearing,  the District Bar  was on strike; that if the petitioner  is not

granted opportunity to file his written statement,  he will suffer

irreparable loss and the maintenance  claimed by the respondents

side for the minors will frrther  deprive the minors  from their

right of maintenance.

3.  Conversely, learned counsel for respondents No.2 to 6

contends that the petitioner  is guilty  of intentional  delay  in filing

of written statement  and  learned Trial Court  has rightly  closed

his right with costs of Rs.10,000/-; that if the petitioner is

burdened  with additional costs,  respondents  No.2  to 6 have no

objection for providing  one opportunity  to the petitioner for

filing of his written  statement.

4.  In the light of statement of learned counsel  for respondents

No.2  to 6, instant  writ petitionis g!!@,  impugned order  dated

?

a

2
W.P  No.157012019.

13.03.2019  passed by learned Judge  Family  Court  (East)

Islamabad is hereby set aside subject to condition that the

petitioner will submit  his written statement  on the next date of

hearing to be fixed by the learned  Family  Cor:rt  seized with the

matter subject to payment  of costs of Rs.20,000/- to be paid  to

the respondents  before the learned Trial Court,  failing which,

right of the petitioner to file his written  statement shall  stand

closed automatically.  Learned Trial Court is directed  to decide

the maintenance  suit on or before 31.12.2019  under  intimation  to

this Court.

R.Aoju

(MO

JUDGE

