ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

WRIT PETITION NO.1337/2001 

COL. ( R ) JAVED AGHA ETC.  

VS 

             ARSHAD MAHMUD, ETC.  

PETITIONER BY:         

       Syed Naeem Bukhari, ASC & Mr. Ijaz Janjua    
       Advocate in Writ Petition Nos.1337/2001,  
       1790/2011. 

       Mian Tahir Iqbal & Ms. Asma Shabbir Malik,    
       Advocate in Writ Petition No.2209/2008 & 2175 of  
       2009. 

Mr.  Samad  Mehmood,  Advocate  in  Writ  Petition    
Nos.1753,  1754,  1755,  1756,  1757,  1799,  1908, 
2038,      and  2744  of  2012,  1203,  2239  &  313  of 
2014. 
Mr.  Mussarat  Abbas  Siddiqui,  Advocate 
for 
petitioners in Writ Petitions No.  3249, 3250, 4360, 
4507 of 2013.    

       Mr. Naveed Malik, Advocate, in Writ Petition   
       No.2098/2013. 

Barrister  Saad  M.  Hashmi, 
No.2025, 2165 of 2014. 

in  Writ  Petition 

Mr.  Waseem  Abid,  Advocate  in  Writ  Petition 
No.313/2014. 

Mr.  Haseeb  Muhammad  Ch.  Advocate  for  CDA  in  Writ 
Petition  No.3249,  3250,  4360,  4507  of  2013  and  313, 
1203, 2165, 2238/2014. 

Mr.  Rehan  Seerat  legal  Advisor  &  Raja  Adnan  Aslam 
Advocate CDA. 

       Malik  Javid  Iqbal  Wains,  Advocate  in  Writ  Petition 

No.2274/2012. 

    RESPONDENTS BY: 

                                                     Mr. Ali Raza ASC,  Sardar  M. Ishaq Khan and Mr. Wasim 

Abid Advocate for petitioner in W.P No.4056/2014. 

Syed Husnain Ibrahim Kazmi, learned DAG 
Mr. Yousaf M. Qureshi, S.C 

DATE  OF  HEARINGS:                        08.09.2014  TO  11.0-9.2014  &  18.09.2014  in  Writ 

Petition No.4056/2014.  

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI; J:  Through this Single Judgment, Writ petitions detailed 

in the table given below are being disposed of together, having same subject matter i.e. 

regarding  use  of  the  residential  accommodations  for  commercial  activities  commonly 

known  as  Non-conforming  use  in  Islamabad.  Writ  petitions  No  with  title,  nature  of 

usage & business conducted by the petitioners is given as under:-  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

2 

Sr. No.  WRIT PETITION NUMBER WITH TITLE OF THE CASE 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

W.P No.1337 of 2001,  
Col. ® Javed Agha Etc.  VS Arshad Mehmud, etc.  
W.P No.2209 of 2008, 
Khawar Manzoor Atta etc.  
                VS  
Sajjad Hussain Shah and others 
W.P No.2175 of 2009 
Dr. Manzoor Hussain Chaudhry  
             VS 
Mohammad Najeeb Aslam & others 
W.P No.4032 of 2010 
Muhammad Yousaf  
             VS 
Capital Development Authority etc.  
W.P No.1790 of 2011 
Mian Naeem Afzal  
           VS  
Ajmal Bukhari, Deputy Commissioner, CDA 
W.P No.1753 of 2012 
Cristina Afridi  
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc.  

W.P No.1754 of 2012 
Muhammad Naeem Asmat 
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc.  

W.P No.1755 of 2012 
Attique Ullah Khan 
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc.  

W.P No.1756 of 2012 
Mobeen Nisar etc. 
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc.  

W.P No.1757 of 2012 
M/s Hang Chang Enterprisers,  
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc. 
W.P No.1799 of 2012 
Raja Fida Hussain 
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc. 

W.P No.1908 of 2012 
Baigum Nussrat Akhtar etc.  
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc. 

W.P No.2038 of 2012 
Mrs. Samina Malik Lakhani 
             VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc. 

W.P No.2744 of 2012 
M/s Kuch Khaas 
           VS 
Special Magistrate, CDA etc. 

W.P No.2098 of 2013 
Rizwan Ullah etc. 
           VS 

NATURE  OF  USAGE 
& 
OF 
DETAIL 
BUSINESS 
Guest Houses 

T.V 1 Channel 

Guest House 

Guest House 

Guest House 

Restaurant 

Restaurant  

Restaurant 
Catering Services 

& 

Club/Restaurant 

Resturant 

Resturant/K.C Grill 

Restaurant  

Restaurant 
Boutique 

& 

Association/centre 
for  arts,  culture  & 
dialogue etc.  

Guest Houses 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

3 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

Capital Development Authority, etc.  

W.P No.3249 of 2013 
Syed Basir Ali Shah 
           VS 
Capital Development Authority, etc. 

W.P No.3250 of 2013 
Muhammad Munir 
           VS 
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
W.P No.4360 of 2013 
Sikandar Ali  
           VS 
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
W.P No.4507 of 2013 
Tanveer Ahmed 
           VS 
Capital Development Authority, etc. 
W.P No. 313 of 2014 
Tanveer Akhtar 
           VS 
Special Magistrate CDA, etc. 
W.P No. 1203 of 2014 
Sameer Randhawa 
           VS 
Special Magistrate CDA, etc. 
W.P No.2025 of 2014 
Muhammad Shahid 
           VS 
Deputy Commissioner, CDA, etc. 
W.P No.2165 of 2014 
ALAYZ School 
           VS 
Deputy Commissioner, CDA, etc. 
W.P No. 2239 of 2014 
Attique Ullah Khan Khattak, 
           VS 
Special Magistrate CDA, etc. 
W.P No. 4056 of 2014 
K.C Grill & others  
           VS 
Federation of Pakistan,  etc. 

Student Hostel 

Student Hostel 

Guest House 

Boys Hostel 

Restaurant  

Restaurant 

Office 

for 

Architectural work 

School 

Restaurant  

Restaurants, 
Saloons, 
shopping 
centers,  Café,  Gym, 
etc.  

The petitioners have prayed for the issuance of similar nature of writs in their 

separate  writ  petitions,  so  the  prayer  made  in  the  writ  petition  No.1337  of  2001  is 

being reproduced as under:- 

A.  

A declaration that petitioners have a constitutional right to engage in any 

lawful  trade  or  profession  and  that  business  of  running  guest  houses  in 

residential buildings where short term residential facilities are provided is 

a  lawful  business  which  cannot  be  stopped  by  the  CDA  and  the  action  of 

the CDA of forcible closure of the guest houses is violative of Article 9, 12, 

14 and 18 of the constitution. 

B.  

A declaration that the summons issued by Respondent No.1 under section 

68  of  Cr.PC  to  the  petitioners  and  proceedings  taken  by  him  pursuant  to 

the same are without lawful authority and of no legal effect; 

C. 

A declaration that use of the residential premises for providing short terms 

residential  facilities,  is  neither  violative  of  any  provision  of  the  CDA 

 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

4 

Ordinance,  1960  nor  it  is  a  criminal  offence  and  the  action  of  the 

Respondents  to  treat  it  as  criminal  offence  or  to  lodge  criminal 

prosecution  of  the  petitioner  is  illegal,  malafide,  abuse  of  the  official 

authority, void and of no legal consequence. 

D. 

A  declaration  that  residential  buildings  are  being  used  for  non  residential 

purposes  by  scores  of  other  category  of  persons,  and  only  petitioners  are 

being  discriminated  and  forced  to  close  their  business  of  Guest  Houses, 

which  action  of  the  respondents  is  violative  of  Article  25  of  the 

Constitution,  is  malafide  in  law  and  facts  and  is  liable  to  be  declared  a 

nullity in the eye of law. 

E. 

A  declaration  that  respondents  No  1  is  not  "Magistrate"  appointed  under 

the  Cr.PC  and  does  not  have  any  judicial  powers  hence  he  cannot  try  the 

petitioner  for  any  criminal  offence  and  in  any  case  the  allegation  against 

the  petitioner  for  violation  of  any  Regulation  does  not  constitute  a 

criminal offence. 

F. 

A  direction  restraining  the  respondent  No  1  for  issuing  any  notice/ 

summons  to  the  petitioner  in  respect  of  the  running  of  their  business  of 

Guest Houses on the ground / allegation that the same constitutes a "non-

conforming  use"  or  that  activity  is  violative  of  the  Building  Control 

Regulations  1993  and  from  entertaining  any  complaint  of  CDA  official  in 

this behalf. 

G. 

A  declaration  that  cognizance  of  any  offence  under  the  CDA  ordinance 

1960,  can  only  be  taken  by  a  Court  and  that  Respondent  No  1  is  not  a 

criminal court constituted or governed under Section 6 Cr.Pc 

H. 

A  declaration  that  Respondent  No  1  is  not  a  duly  appointed  member  of 

"Bench  of  Magistrate"  for  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  not  vested  with  the 

powers  of  a  Magistrate  of  any  class  by  the  "Provincial  Government"  for 

purposes of "Islamabad Capital Territory" 

I. 

A  declaration  that  Respondent  no  1  who  is  receiving  salary  and  other 

facilities  from  the  CDA  is  not  a  Court  subordinate  to  the  High  Court  and 

that his appointment as a CDA Magistrate is violative of the Constitutional 

provisions relating to separation of judiciary from the executive. 

J. 

A declaration that the proceedings before Respondent No 1 being violative 

of injunctive orders of the Senior civil Judge, Islamabad are otherwise also 

without lawful authority and of no legal effect. 

K. 

A  declaration  that  Respondent  No.2  is  not  a  Deputy  commissioner  of  the 

District. Also, he has not vested the powers of District management and is 

not a court constituted under any law and notice dated 10.04.2001 issued 

by Respondent No.2 is absolutely without lawful authority, an abuse of the 

nomenclature  of  "Deputy  commissioner"  which  is  of  no  legal  effect  or 

consequence. 

L. 

A  direction  to  Respondent  No.2  to  refrain  from  passing  orders  of  similar 

nature, to any of the other petitioner. 

W.P No.1337 of 2001 

5 

M. 

A  declaration  that  section  49-c  of  the  CDA  (Amendment)  Act,  1966  ins 

ultra  vires  of  the  CDA  ordinance  1960,  the  constitution  and  a  declaration 

under  section  15,46b  &  51  are  simultaneously  tined  and  can  have  no 

application  qua  Building  Regulations  1993  made  by  capital  Development 

Authority itself. 

N. 

A  declaration  that  the  Building  Regulations  1993  have  not  been  made  "to 

carry out the purpose of" the CDA ordinance and the said Regulations have 

not been approved by the parliament nor made by the central Government 

hence the same have no legislative significance. 

O. 

A  declaration  that  so-called  "non-confirming  use"  is  not  an  offence  under 

the ordinance or the  Rules and cannot be treated as a criminal offence in 

exercise of general powers under the Ordinance. The notices issued by the 

Respondent by No.3 are without lawful authority and of no legal effect. 

P. 

A declaration that Regulation Nos. 2.15, 2.20, 2.21, 2.25, 2.38, 2.39, 2.44, 

5.01, 5.02 and 5.03 of the Building control Regulation 1993, are ultra-vires 

of the CDA ordinance, 1960, suffer from excessive delegation, are violative 

of  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  petitioners,  are  unreasonable  and 

irrational  and/or  use  of  residential  buildings  as  Guest  Houses  does  not 

constitute a non-conforming use. 

Q. 

A  direction  to  CDA  to  act  in  accordance  with  law,  justice,  fairness  and 

honesty to regulate the business of the petitioners under a uniform scheme 

without destroying their livelihood. 

R. 

A  direction  to  Respondent  No.2  through  its  chairman  to  refrain  from 

initiating  proceedings  of  any  sort  against  the  petitioners  for  alleged 

violation  of  Building  control  Regulation,  1993,  prohibiting  business  of 

Guest Houses as 'non-conforming use' of residential buildings. 

S. 

A  direction  to  WAPDA  and  SSP  Islamabad  to  refrain  from  acting  upon  any 

direction  from  CDA    qua  the  petitioners  based  on  'non-confirming  use  or 

commercial  activity'  and  refrain  from  disconnecting  electric  connections 

to  the  guest  houses  at  the  behest  of  CDA  or  to  forcibly  close  the  guest 

houses. 

T. 

Appropriate orders enforcing the fundamental rights (Articles 9, 14 and 18) 

of  the  petitioners  to  run  the  Guest  houses  in  the  residential  buildings 

without interference from CDA and its officials on the basis or grounds that 

the  same  constitutes  "non-conforming  use"  or  a  commercial  activity  and 

from disconnecting water supply to the guest houses on the above basis or 

ground. 

U. 

A declaration that  the  action  of CDA  qua  the petitioners business  activity 

of Guest Houses is  per se discriminatory  and appropriate  orders enforcing 

fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 25 of the constitution. 

V. 

Any  other  relief,  writ,  or  order  or  direction  deemed  just,  appropriate  or 

necessary by the honourable Court may be granted, issued or passed. 

2.  

Learned  Counsel  for  Petitioners  in  Writ  Petition  No.1337/2001,  Mr.  S. 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

6 

Naeem Bukhari, ASC, argued that Guest houses in Residential premises exist not only 

all over Pakistan but around the world. That CDA Ordinance 1960 defines a building 

but  not  a  residential  house  and  by  taking  in  guest,  the  nature  of  a  residential  plot 

does not change as there is no difference between a residence for rent for a month or 

for  a  week  or  a  night.  The  bar  is  created  by  CDA  Regulations  under  which  the 

authority can regulate an activity which per se is not illegal but cannot prohibit. The 

section 46 read with 49 C order ibid makes it an offence to contravene a Regulation, 

suffer  from  excessive  delegation  of  powers.  The  Regulations  are  unreasonable  and 

irrational  apart  from  exceeding  the  parameters  of  the  Ordinance;  therefore,  direction 

or challan or threat to close down the guest houses is in violation of Article 9, 14, 18, 

24, 38(b) of the constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. It is lastly contended that 

house  magistrate  is  being  paid  salary  by  CDA  but  exercise  judicial  powers,  which 

violates the doctrine of separation of powers. 

3.  

Learned Counsel for petitioners, in other connected Writ Petitions argued that it 

is  the  domain  of  the  Federal  Government  to  notify  Rules  viz  subject  matter  of  land 

required  to  be  used  with  respect  to  the  master  plan;  therefore,  in  absence  of  such 

rules, the CDA cannot exercise its power under section 51 of the Ordinance to frame 

Regulation  which  pertain  to  the  specific  issue  of  land  use.  The  impugned  Zoning 

Regulations  and  ILD  Regulations  on  account  of  the  subject  matter  of  the  impugned 

regulations  are  without  authority  and  issued  in  excess  of  powers  vested  in  the  CDA. 

Hence,  they  are  illegal  and  of  no  legal  effect.  The  impugned  Regulation  2.1.5  is  in 

conflict  with  the  apparent  unexceptional  and  prohibitory  provisions  of  the  earlier 

stated  regulations,  allows  for  an  exemption  and  vests  in  the  CDA  the  unfettered 

discretion  to  change  the  nature  of  land  use  on  request  of  allottees  provided  that  the 

layout and functional plan permits such changes. Therefore, the declared 'land use' at 

the time of allotment by CDA's own formulation is not written on stone and is capable 

of  being  altered  when  necessary.  By  virtue  of  CDA  Ordinance,  the  CDA  has  been 

vested  with  a  certain  discretion,  which  it  may  use  in  discharge  of  its  statutory 

functions. However, such discretion as per the judgments of the Superior Courts has 

to be reasonable and within the four corners of the law. That the Regulation 4.1.23 of 

the Zoning Regulations vests in CDA power to exempt any person, form any of these 

regulations  as  no  criteria  or  parameters  or  circumstances  are  defined  or  prescribed 

through which the discretion can be regulated. Resultantly, the same falls under the 

W.P No.1337 of 2001 

7 

domain  of  unfettered  discretion  and  is  liable  to  be  declared  as  unlawful  and  illegal. 

Similarly, in Regulation 2.1.7 the Authority has itself retained the power to exempt or 

permit resident professionals from using the residential premises for home occupation. 

Learned counsel further contended that such unfettered discretion can be nothing but 

a  patent  violation  of  the  Constitutional  guarantees  as  enshrined  under  Article  9,  18 

and 25 of the constitution and a gateway to corruption which has destroyed the fabric 

of our society. 

4.  

On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents/ CDA has contended that 

CDA  is  a  development  authority  which  is  focused  towards  taking  care  of  the  general 

public  of  the  Capital  and  important  community  interests.  Chapter  2  of  the  CDA 

ordinance  provides  the  duties  and  powers  of  CDA.  Section  11  provides  that  "the 

authority  shall  prepare  a  master  plan  and  a  phased  master-programme  for  the 

development  for  the  rest  of  the  specified  Areas  and  all  such  plans  and  programmes 

shall be submitted to the Federal Government for approval". This section is followed by 

section  12  which  provided  that  the  Authority  may,  pursuant  to  the  master  plan  and 

the master programme, call upon any local body or agency operating  in the Specified 

Areas to prepare, in consultation with the Authority, a scheme or schemes in respect 

of matters ordinarily dealt with by such local body or agency and thereupon the local 

body  or  agency  shall  be  responsible  for  the  preparations  of  the  scheme  or  schemes 

within a reasonable time. Such schemes may relate to:-  

 a) Land use, zoning and land reservation. 

 b) Public buildings.   

 c) Industry. 

d)  Transportation  and  communications,  highway,  road,  streets,  railways,       
     aerodromes. 

 e) Telecommunication, including wireless, television, radio, telephone. 

 f)  Utilization of water , power and other natural resources. 

 g) community planning housing slum clearance amelioration. 

 h) Community facilities including water supply, sewerage, drainage,  

sewage, disposal, electricity supply, gas supply and other public utilities. 

                     i ) Preservation of objects or places of historical, scientific interest or  

    natural beauty. 

The perusal of above schemes clearly shows that CDA is aimed towards 

protecting important community interest and the whole community of the capital and 

not  individual,  therefore,  restriction  on  non-conforming  use  provided  by  CDA  is  a 

restriction which is actually aimed at serving the interest of the whole community view 

 
       
 
 
     
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

8 

and  even  if  it  affects  the  constitutional  rights  of  a  few  individuals,  it  cannot  be 

considered as unreasonable but a reasonable restriction permitted by law. It has been 

held  through  number  of  pronouncements  by  the  superior  courts  of  the  country  that 

Fundamental rights are subject to law and reasonable restrictions can be imposed by 

law.  The  reasonableness  of  restriction  has  also  been  elaborated  upon  in  these  case 

laws  such  that  the  restrictions  are  reasonable  if  they  have  been  made  to  protect  the 

rights  of  other  persons  or  important  community  interest,  reliance  is  placed  on  PLD 

2011  SC,  44,  PLD  2013  Lahore  693  and  PLD  2007  SC  642.  It  is  further  contended 

that  Authority  may  make  regulations,  not  inconsistent  with  the  rules,  if  any,  on  all 

matters for which regulations are necessary or expedient; and such regulations shall 

be  published  in  the  official  Gazette.  Moreover,  Section  50  provides  that  the  Federal 

Government  may,  by  notification  in  the  official  Gazette,  make  rules  to  carry  out  the 

purposes  of  this  Ordinance.  Provided  that  no  rules  shall  be  made  on  any  of  the 

matters  specified  in  section  38  and  intention  behind  enacting  of  this  section  was  to 

allow  the  authority  to  make  regulations  so  as  the  effectively  dispose  of  the  policies 

provided for in the Act.  The question whether the Building  Control Regulations 1993 

suffer from excessive delegation is concerned, it is contended that excessive delegation 

takes  place  where  a  certain  piece  of  legislation  does  not  provide  any  policy  or 

framework and shifts the same to the executive to legislate but the policy framework 

for  non-conforming  use  has  already  been  provided  in  Section  49C  and  these 

regulations  are  simply  elaborating  the  same  for  effective  disposal,  therefore,  these 

regulations are not inherent of excessive delegation. 

5.             It is further contended that Special Magistrates and Deputy Commissioner, 

CDA are the employees of CDA for the purpose of acquisition proceedings and is not a 

court  under  section  4  of  the  Cr.P.C,  therefore,  cannot  pass  any  sentence  or  impose 

any  penalty  thereof  or  is  authorized  to  pass  judicial  order  or  have  the  power  to  pass 

any  sentence  order  under  the  CDA  Ordinance,  1960,  since  are  being  paid  from  CDA 

thus  is  not  a  Court  subordinate  to  High  Court.  Therefore,  the  appointments  as  CDA 

Deputy Commissioner or Magistrate is in violation of the constitutional provisions. So 

far  the  separation  of  judiciary  from  the  Executive  is  concerned,  the  Islamabad  High 

Court,  Islamabad  vide  its  judgment  reported  as  PLD  2011,  Islamabad  36  already 

observed that notice dated 23.05.2011 issued by the Deputy Commissioner CDA is in 

accordance with the CDA Rules and suffer from no legal infirmity on the grounds that 

W.P No.1337 of 2001 

9 

under  section  36-A(2)  of  the  Capital  Development  Authority  Ordinance,  1960,  the 

Deputy  Commissioner  or  the  Commissioner  exercising  powers  under  this  Ordinance 

shall be deemed to be a Court for the purposes of Section 480 and 482 of the Code of 

Criminal  Procedure,  1898.  A  proceeding  before  him  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  judicial 

proceeding  within  the  meaning  of  Section  193  and  228  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code, 

(XLV OF 1860). Moreover, clause 2.17.3 of the Islamabad Residential Sectors, Zoning, 

(Building  Control)  Regulation-2005,  empowers  the  Deputy  Commissioner  to  impose 

penalty on non-conformig use of a residential building which reads as under:- 

2.17.3 "A non-conforming use of a residential building may render the owner 

and  the  occupant  of  the  building  liable  on  first  conviction  to  pay  a  fine  of 

Rs.0.5  Million  and  in  the  case  of  failure  to  discontinue  to  non-conforming 

use  within 15  days  of  the conviction,  to an additional fine which  ay extend 

to  five  thousand  rupees  (Rs.5000/  -)  for  every  day  during  which  he  has 

persisted in the failure. After a persistent non-conforming use for a period of  

three  months, the  owner  or as the  case may  be the  occupant  shall  be liable 

to  be  evicted  from  the  building  summarily  and  the  allotment/conveyance 

deed of the plot may also be cancelled.  

2.17.4. The penalty mentioned above in this regard, shall be imposed by the 

Deputy commissioner only." 

In view of above, the court observed that, petitioner in the instant petition has 

not  denied  the  non-conforming  use  of  the  premises;  hence,  respondent  No.1  has 

rightly  issued  the  impugned  notice  dated  23.05.2011  to  the  petitioner.  The  notice 

dated 23.05.2011, issued by the Deputy Commissioner; CDA is in accordance with the 

CDA Rules and suffers from no legal infirmity. 

6.   

Learned counsel for Respondents further argued that although Article 18, of the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan provides the freedom to conduct lawful 

trade business or profession provided that nothing in this Article shall prevent, 

(a) The regulation of any trade or profession by licensing system; or 

(b)  The regulation of trade, commerce or industry in the interest of 

free competition therein;   or 

(c)  The  carrying  on,  by  the  Federal  Government  or  a  provincial 

government,  or  by  a  corporation  controlled  by  any  such 

Government,  or  by  a  corporation  controlled  by  any  such 

Government,  of  any  trade,  business,,  industry  or  service  to  the 

exclusion, complete or partial of other persons. 

The freedom of trade, business or profession is controlled by 

the said Article itself. The word lawful trade, business or profession 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

10 

is  sufficient  to  qualify  such  right.  A  profession,  trade  or  business 

can be hedged to the extent of a lawful prohibition imposed upon it 

by law where after such trade or business becomes unlawful." 

In  view  of  above,  the  word  lawful  trade,  business  or  profession  is 

sufficient  to  qualify  such  right.  The  right  to  life  and  liberty  of  a  citizen  can  only  be 

restricted  or  abridged  if  it  is  in  "accordance  with  law";  such  right  is  therefore,  not 

unfettered. It is lastly contended that comparison with such type of other wrongs by 

the Government itself in Islamabad and other individuals/corporations in other cities 

has no force as it cannot be made basis to justify further wrongs on the plea of equal 

treatment  or  non-discrimination.  In  view  of  above  submissions,  learned  counsel  for 

CDA prayed for dismissal of writ petitions. 

7. 

I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the 

parties and have gone through the available material with their eminent assistance. 

8. 

The perusal of pleadings of the parties reveal that there is no controversy 

about  the  fact  that  the  premises  which  are  in  the  use/occupation  of  the  petitioners 

were allotted to the petitioners or their predecessor in interest for residential purpose 

and  as  per  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  allotment  orders  these  premises  should 

only be used for residence and any other use of these premises would tantamount to 

non-conforming  use  which  is  not  within  the  mandate  of  the  allotment.  In  their 

petitions  the  petitioners  have  admitted  that  they  have  established  or  intend  to 

establish restaurants, schools, guest houses, offices and other commercial entities in 

the  premises  which  are/were  allotted  to  them  or  their  predecessors  in  interests.  The 

main  contention  of  the  petitioners  who  have  been  using  their  premises  as  guest 

houses is that even after the establishment of the guest houses, the nature and use of 

these premises had not been changed as the guest use the premises for residence.  

9. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners who have  been using  their  premises 

as  guest  houses  has  contended  that  concept  of  guest  house  is  well  established  not 

only in the developed countries of the West but also in the neighboring States as guest 

houses provide shelter to the persons visiting the Capital  City at a cheaper rate. It is 

the contention of the learned counsel for these petitioners that the guest houses were 

established  after  obtaining  the  license  under  the  Sarias  Act  1867  and  the  alleged 

interference  by  the  respondents  in  the  business  of  the  petitioners  is  violation  of  the 

fundamental rights of the petitioners enshrined in the Article 18 of the Constitution of 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

11 

Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  who  have 

established  the  schools  and  other  commercial  activities  in  the  premises  has  argued 

that  right  to  life  and  liberty  is  fundamental  right  enshrined  in  the  Constitution  of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  Learned counsel for the petitioners has further argued 

that  Article  9  gives  the  right  of  life  and  liberty  and  if  the  state  or  any  of  its  agency 

stops the source of livelihood from any person more so from the petitioners, this will 

be the attempt to take the right of life as no one can survive without source of making 

both ends meets.  

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  further  referred  to  Article  25  of 

the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  wherein  it  is  provided  that  all  the 

citizens will be equal before the law and Article 4 which provides that every citizen will 

be treated equally in accordance with law and contends that a number of government 

offices, courts and even the office of respondent No 1 are established in the residential 

premises  and  so  far  no  action  has  been  taken  against  them  but  the  petitioners  have 

been screened out by the respondents who are being targeted without any legal excuse 

and justification in the sheer violation of the Article 25 of the Constitution of Islamic 

Republic of Pakistan. Learned counsel for the petitioners has further argued that the 

most  of  the  commercial  activities  in  the  disputed  premises  were  established  prior  to 

the  making  of  the  Islamabad  Residential  Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulation 

1993  and  as  it  was  not  an  offence  before  1993  therefore,  it  cannot  be  made  offence 

through the above mentioned Regulation as it will be violative to the mandate of Article 

12  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioners has further questioned the authority of the Special Judicial Magistrate and 

Deputy Commissioner CDA with the contentions that these two officers are getting the 

salary from the CDA and cannot enjoy judicial powers which result in the violation of 

the  principle  of  separation  of  power.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  further 

argued that the respondents are estopped by virtue of principle of promissory estoppel 

and acquiescence to proceed against the petitioners, that Section 15, 46(b), 46 (C) and 

51  of  the  CDA  Ordinance  1960  are  unconstitutional  and  penal  Regulations  in  the 

Islamabad  Residential  Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulation  1993  are  also 

unconstitutional and illegal as these are phenomena of excessive delegation of power. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  further  argued  that  the  discriminatory 

treatment is being meted to the petitioner that there are 100 of guest houses, schools, 

 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

12 

offices etc functioning in the residential areas of Islamabad. 

10. 

I  have  considered  all  the  above  mentioned  contentions  of  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioner  in  the  light  of  the  relevant  provisions  of  Articles  of  the 

Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  CDA  Ordinance  and  Islamabad 

Residential Sector Zoning (Building Control) Regulation 1993 and have reached to the 

conclusion that these contentions of the petitioners are nothing but to conceal and a 

legal  cover  for  the  illegal  activities  of  the  petitioners  who  have  not  only  been 

committing  violation  of  the  provisions  of  the  CDA  Ordinance  and  Islamabad 

Residential  Sector  Zoning  (Building  Control)  Regulation  1993  (these  regulations  have 

been substituted by regulations of 2005) but have also broken the solemn undertaking 

given by them at the time of applying for the allotment of the residential plots in the 

Capital Territory. Contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the use of 

the  residential  building  for  commercial  activities  and  especially  for  the  purpose  of 

guest  houses  is  not  a  non-conforming  use,  is  not  well  founded  as  at  the  time  of 

establishment of Capital of Pakistan, the Federation decided to establish a State of the 

Art city, with full discipline and sense of security for its residents and a breathtaking 

splendid  and  arrogant  look  for  the  visitor.  For  this  purpose  the  authority  prepared  a 

master plan wherein the separate places / areas for business purpose were left and all 

the commercial activities were supposed to be carried out in those specific commercial 

areas. The residential portion was to be used only and solely for the residence of the 

families after fulfilling all the terms and conditions of the allotment for the residential 

building and the concerned Regulation reveals that the scheme was to give the plots to 

shelterless persons to live peacefully with their families and it was never meant to be 

given to the persons having some housing facility in this city or other cities and to use 

residential area for commercial purposes. 

11. 

The  concept  of  guest  house  as explained  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioners  is  not  acceptable  to  norms  of  state  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  as  no 

person in this society will be willing to share its residence with  a stranger even for a 

short period. The concept of the guest houses as has been prevailing in the west or the 

neighboring  country  is  concerned,  it  is  observed  that  the  guest  houses  are  being 

managed in compliance of the laws of the respective countries with the condition that 

the family lives in the very said house and one or two rooms are reserved to be offered 

to the guests for some rent. The whole of the pleadings of the petitioners do not reveal 

 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

13 

that the petitioners have been living in the disputed premises with their families and 

they  have  reserved  one  or  two  rooms  of  their  residences  to  be  used  as  guest  house. 

The concept of guest house is dependent upon the presence of host in the building but 

in  the  present  petitions  the hosts  are living  somewhere else  and  they  have employed 

some persons to run the guest houses in the full-fledged building. The contentions of 

the learned counsel for the petitioners that the guest houses have been registered in 

accordance  with  the  Sarias  Act  1867  and  the  petitioners    have  also  been  paying  the 

sales  tax,  it  is  observed  that  the  Registration  of  a  business  under  one  law  cannot 

defeat purpose of other law.  

12. 

The  basic  law  on  the  subject  which  is  regulating  the  reservation  of  the 

land, development of the land, allotment of the land, construction of the building and 

the  use of  the  building  in  the  Capital  Territory  under  Capital Development Authority 

Ordinance 1960 which provides no room for the establishment of the guest houses in 

the  residential  building.  Section  46  of  the  Ordinance  provides  that  whoever 

contravenes  any  provision  of  this  Ordinance  or  any  rules  or  Regulations  made  or 

Scheme  sanctioned  thereunder  shall,  if  no  other  penalty  is  provided  for  such 

contraventions, be punished with imprisonment which may extend up to 06 months or 

with  fine  or  with  both.  Section  49  (C)  of  the  said  Ordinance  provides  that  if  any 

building,  structure,  work  or  land  is  erected,  constructed  or  used  in  contravention  of 

the  provisions  of  this  Ordinance  or  any  Rules  &  Regulations  made  thereunder,  the 

Deputy Commissioner or any person empowers in this behalf may require any person 

in  control  of  such  building  or  user  to  remove,  demolish  or  so  alter  the  building 

structure  or  to  desist from  using  so  as  to  be  in  accordance  with the  said  provisions. 

Section 50 of the Ordinance provides that the Central Government may make rules to 

carry out the purpose of this Ordinance whereas Section 51 authorize the authority to 

make  the  Regulations  not  inconsistent  with  the  Rules,  if  any,  on  all  the  matters  for 

which regulations are necessary. This reveals that there is a check on the use of any 

property  in  contravention  of  the  Ordinance,  rules  and  regulation.  The  contentions  of 

the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  that  the  regulation  have  been  hit  by  the 

principle  of  excessive  delegation  is  concerned,  it  is  observed  that  it  is  without  any 

substance  as  the  offence  of  using  a  property  in  contravention  of  provision  of  any  or 

rules or regulations made therein has been made offence by the Ordinance itself and 

the disputed regulation only explain the above said provision of the Ordinance. 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

14 

13. 

It is the right of every person to be treated in accordance with law under 

Aticle 4 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, whereas Article 25 of the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan provides that every citizen is equal before 

the  law.  If  the  petitioners  want  to  protect  the  source  of  their  livelihood  they  have 

option to purchase the land from the commercial centers and to establish their hotels 

and  guest  houses  in  that  areas  and  then  the  state  would  protect  their  rights  to 

livelihood  and  nobody  will  be  supposed  to  interfere  in  that  process.  The  petitioners 

have  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  in  the  impugned  order  of  the  respondents  who 

have been proceeding in accordance with law to implement the rules and regulations. 

The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners have been 

discriminated and have been screened out is concerned, it is observed that one wrong 

cannot  justify  other  wrong  if  some  persons  who  have  been  using  the  residential 

buildings  for  commercial  purposes have  not  been  proceeded  against  no  advantage or 

concession can be extended in favour of the petitioners on this score. Learned counsel 

for  the  respondents  had  submitted  that  respondents  have  prepared  the  list  of  the 

residential  buildings  which  have  been  used  for  commercial  purpose  and  the 

proceedings  against  those  persons  /  buildings  is  in  pipeline.  The  version  of  the 

petitioners that the respondents are estopped on account of promissory estoppel and 

acquiescence to question the use of the building by the petitioners is concerned, it is 

observed that the petitioners / their predecessors in interest were also bound by the                              

promissory estoppel and acquiescence not to use the building for any commercial use 

which they had taken through allotment on the undertaking that they would only use 

the same for residential purpose.  

14. 

It is further observed that petitioners of some of the properties have been 

running restaurants, clubs, boutiques and schools and they have also questioned the 

action of the respondents on the grounds hereinbefore mentioned. It is observed that 

in  case  of  “Seeds  High  School  through  Project  Director  VS  Government  of  Pakistan” 

“PLD 2004 Lahore 305” the petitioner was running a school in the residential area and 

the  CDA  demanded  the  petitioner  to  stop  the  commercial  activity  in  the  residential 

building.  The  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court,  Lahore  was  pleased  to  dismiss  the  writ 

petition  of  the  petitioner  and  it  has  been  held  by  the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court, 

Lahore  that  form  of  true  business  or  profession  as  guaranteed  by  Article  18  of  the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan is qualified by the words lawful profession 

 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

15 

or  occupation.  In  the  case  before  this  court  the  petitioners  are  engaged  in  lawful 

business but the place of business is not, as the place is provided to the petitioners / 

or their  predecessors in interest for the purpose of residence only and the law, rules 

and  regulations  have  placed  restrictions  on  any  other  use  of  this  place  except  for 

residence  purpose  and  petitioners  violated  the  lawful  restrictions,  therefore,  they 

cannot  seek  the  help  of  Article  18  of  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  as 

they  have  no  right  to  establish  their  business  in  the  residential  area.  It  is  further 

observed  that  if  the  concerned  authorities  have  not  taken  actions  against  some 

similarly  placed  schools,  the  school  of  the  petitioner  has  accrued  no  vested  right  to 

operate  in  residential  area  as  it  is  prohibited.  In  the  petitions  before  this  court  the 

same  is  the  stance  of  the  petitioner  as  they  have  also  opened  a  school  in  the 

residential  area  and  now  want  to  protect  their  business in  the  garb  of  the  guarantee 

provided  in  Article  22  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan.  It  is 

observed that the businesses of the petitioners may be lawful but the places where the 

businesses have been started are not meant for business and this restriction imposed 

by  the  government  through  CDA  Ordinance  1960  and  the  regulations  framed 

thereunder are lawful restrictions in the supreme welfare of the inhabitants.    

15. 

Regulation 20 of the Islamabad Land Disposal Regulations 2005 provides 

the penalty of the cancelation of allotment in case of non-conforming use of building or 

plot.  Admittedly  the  petitioners  have  been  in  non-conforming  use  of  their  respective 

premises  and  they  have  become  liable  for  the  cancellation  of  their  allotments  if  they 

did not mend their ways and change the use of the premises. The respondent No 1 is 

proceedings with the complainant against the petitioners and petitioners are with the 

right to deny the charge and the complaint is to be decided in accordance with law on 

the basis of the facts produced by the prosecution. On the other hand the petitioners 

are also free to answer the notice issued by the Deputy Commissioner about the non-

conforming  use  of  the  residential  premises  and  thereafter  the  Deputy  Commissioner 

will proceed in accordance with the regulation and in this way  the  respondents  have 

already  provided  a  fair  opportunity  to  the  petitioners  and  they  have  not  been 

condemned  unheard.  Furthermore,  the  petitioner  may  take  the  objection  about  the 

alleged  jurisdictional  defect  of  Special  Magistrate  and  Deputy  Commissioner  which 

they  have  to  decide  in  accordance  with  law  and  any  findings  in  this  regard  can  be 

assailed by the petitioner. 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

16 

16. 

The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners on the basis of 

Article  25  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  also  does  not  advance 

the  case  of  the  petitioners.  Mere  differentiation  and  inequality  in  the  treatment  does 

not  perse  amount  to  discrimination  as  it  is  necessary  to  show  that  selection  or 

differentiation  is  unreasonable  or  arbitrary  and  in  this  regard  this  court  has  found 

support of its view by the dicta rendered in the case of “Ard Sher Kaus Gee & 9 others  

VS Muhammad Naqi Nawab & 05 others” PLD 1993 Kchi 631. It would not be enough 

to say that piece of legislation or a policy formulated thereunder is discriminatory but 

it is to be substantiated by applying certain well entrenched principles on the subject 

of discriminatory legislation which are as follows ; 

i. 

The expression “equality before law” or “equal protection of law” does not 

mean that it secures to all persons the benefit of the same laws and the 

same  remedy.  It  only  requires  that  all  persons  similarly  situated  or 

circumstanced shall be treated alike. 

ii. 

The  guarantee  of  equal  protection  does  not  mean  that  all  laws  must  be 

general  in  character  and  universal  in  application  and  the  state  has  no 

power  to  distinguish  and  classify  persons  or  things  for  the  purpose  of 

legislation.  

iii. 

The  guarantee  of  equal  protection  of  laws  forbids  class  legislation  but 

does  not  forbids  reasonable  classification  for  the  purpose  of  legislation. 

The  guarantee  does  not  prohibit  discrimination  with  respect  to  things 

that are different. The State has power to classify the persons or things 

and  to  make  law  applicable  only  to  the  persons  or  things  within  the 

class. 

iv. 

The classification, if it is not to offend the constitutional guarantee must 

be based upon some intelligible differential bearing a reasonable and just 

relation to the object sought to be achieved by the legislation.  

v. 

Reasonable classification is a matter for the court to determine and when 

determining  this  question,  the  courts  may  take  into  consideration 

matters of common knowledge, matters of common report, the history of 

times and to sustain the classification, they must assume the existence 

of  any  state  of  facts  which  can  reasonably  be  conceived  to  exist  at  the 

time of legislation. 

vi. 

The  classification  will  not  be  held  to  be  invalid  merely  because  the  law 

might  have  been  extended  to  other  persons  who  in  some  respect  might 

resemble the class for which the laws is made because the legislature is 

the best judge of the needs of particular classes and the decree of harm 

so as to adjust its legislation according to the exigencies found to exist. 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

17 

vii.  One who assails the classification must show that it does not rest on any 

reasonable basis. 

viii.  Where  the  legislature  lays  down  the  law  and  indicates  the  persons  or 

things  to  whom  its  provisions  are  intended  to  apply  and  leaves  the 

application  of  law  to  an  administrative  authority  while  indicating  the 

policy  and  purpose  of  law  and  laying  down  the  standards  or  norms  for 

the  guidance  of  the  designated  authority  in  exercise  of  its  powers  no 

question of violation of article 25 arises. In case however, the designated 

authority abuses its power or transgresses the limits when exercising the 

power,  the  actual  order  of  the  authority  and  not  the  state  would  be 

condemned as unconstitutional. 

ix.  Where  the  state  itself  does  not  make  any  classification  of  person  or 

things  and  leaves  it  in  the  discretion  of  the  Government  to  select  and 

classify  person  or  things  without  laying  down  any  principle  or  policy  to 

guide  the  Government  in  exercise  of  discretion  the  statute  would  be 

struck  down  on  the  ground  of  making  excessive  delegation  of  power  to 

the government so as to enable it to discriminate between the person or 

the things similarly situated ( Reference PLD 2011 SC 44)  

17. 

The  above  mentioned  conditions  were  laid  down  by  august  Supreme 

Court of Pakistan to strike down any law, rule or regulation on the basis of excessive 

delegation of powers but the ingredients mentioned in the case law are not available in 

the  cases  of  the  petitioners  as  the  petitioners  themselves  accepted  the  rules  and 

regulation  before  filing  the  application  for  the  allotment  of  residential  plots  in  the 

Capital Territory with the solemn affirmation that they would reside in the building to 

be  constructed.  It  is  further  observed  that  clause  2  k  of  Islamabad  Land  Disposal 

Regulation  2005  define  a  house  as  a  separate  dwelling  for  human  habitation  for  a 

family. The family has been defined in Clause 2 (I). In regulation No 3 the classification 

of  the  plots  is  provided  which  divide  the  plot  in  several  categories.  This  regulation 

provides  that  there  will  be  nine  classes  of  the  plot  only  one  class  is  reserved  for 

residence  whereas  remaining  08  classes  are  for  business  /  semi-business  activities 

and  if  the  legislature  has  provided  a  restriction  that  the  residential  plot  can  only  be 

used for the residence of a family, it has given free hand to the petitioners and other to 

avail the opportunity and to assert their constitutional right of free trade and business 

in the remaining nine classes of the plots. Regulation No 19 provides the penalty of the 

cancellation of the plot if used for any other purpose then for which these plots were 

actually  obtained.  These  regulations  have  been  made  in  accordance  with  the  powers 

conferred upon the Capital Development Authority u/s 51 of the Ordinance and these 

 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

18 

regulations  in  no  way  are  in  violation  of  the  Statute  itself  or  to  any  rules.  The 

Islamabad  Residential  Sector  Zoning (Building  Control)  Regulation  2005  provides  the 

penalty  for  the  non-conforming  use  of  the  property  which  is  also  in  accordance  with 

law  and  it  is  not  discriminatory  in  any  manner  whatsoever.  The  Islamabad  Land 

Disposal regulation 2005 in the classification of the plots have provided the plots for 

the  commercial  activities,  industrial  needs  and  business  concern including  the  guest 

houses  and  all  the  petitioners  have  the  right  to  obtain  those  properties  plots  and  to 

established the guest houses there.   Mess of non-conforming use has disrupted civic 

fiber  of  the  City,  manipulated  master  plan  of  the  capital  and  infringed  fundamental 

rights of inhabitants increasing violation posed serious security threats and enhanced 

diminishing law and order situation.  

18. 

 Before  parting  with  this  judgment  it  is  observed  that  the  Capital 

Development  Authority 

(CDA)  was  established 

in  1960  through  the  Capital 

Development  Authority  Act  1960  with  high  hopes  that  it  would  manage  the 

establishment of a state of art city in Pakistan but it appears that this authority has 

failed  or  is  reluctant  to  discharge  its  lawful  obligations  as  a  number  of  commercial 

activities have commenced right under the nose of the authority but nobody has taken 

strict  action  in  this  regard.  Only  when  some  matter  comes  before  the  courts  and 

direction  is  issued  then  authority  shows  some  fake  progress  and  thereafter  shuts  its 

eyes. It appears that either the authority is helpless to respond to the violation of the 

laws,  rules  and  regulations  or  it  has  given  the  consent  to  such  sort  of  activities  for 

ulterior motive. The petitioners have also questioned the conduct of the authority that 

it is proceedings in a discriminatory way. Being a civic body it is expected to discharge 

its  obligations  beyond  the  shadow  of  any  discrimination.  During  the  course  of  these 

proceedings  respondents  have  submitted  list  of  the  illegal  guest  houses  and 

commercially  used  residential  properties  in  the  Capital  Territory  which  shows  that 

havoc is being committed with the city as a large number of residential buildings have 

been changed / converted to commercial purpose and no strict action has been taken. 

The authority is creation of law and it is supposed to proceed in accordance with law. 

It is expected to discharge its legal obligations under the Ordinance and the regulation 

framed by itself without any fear and the iota of the discrimination.  

In view of the above discussion, it is held that 

 
 
 
W.P No.1337 of 2001 

19 

a.  No  declaration  is  required  to  be  issued  that  the  Special  Magistrate 
does  not  have  any  judicial  power  and  on  the  other  hand  he  is 
discharging  his 
lawful  obligations  and  any  objection  to  his 
assumption of jurisdiction should be agitated before him. 

b.  No declaration is required to be issued that Deputy Commissioner is 
not vested with the power of the court and the proceedings before him 
are  without  lawful  authority  and  any  objection  regarding  his 
jurisdiction should also be agitated before him. 

c.  No  declaration  is  required  that  Section  49  (a)  of  the  CDA  Ordinance 
1960 alongwith Section 15, 46 (b) & 51 and Building Regulation 1993 
are  ultra-vires  and 
illegal  as  the  Building  Regulations  1993 
substituted  by  the  Building  Regulations  of  2005  have  been  made  to 
carry out the purposes of the Ordinance. 

d.  The non-conforming use is certainly an offence provided in Section 46 
of  the  Ordinance  and  also  in  Regulation  2.17.3  of  the  Building 
Regulation. 

e.  No discretion lies with civic body to allow non-conforming use and if 
powers containing under regulations No.2.1. 1, 2.1.2, 2.1.7 and 4.1.7 
permit so, they lead to arbitrary exercise of authority, paving ways of 
corruption,  and  calling  questions  about  the  “Master  Plan”  therefore, 
same  are  declared  to  be  of  no  consequence.  CDA  is  not  vested  with 
powers  to  allow  commercialization  of  residential  buildings  offensive 
and invading to the Sector/Zonal and Master Plan of ICT.  

f.  CDA  immediately  take  steps  to  bring  the  residential  areas  into 
original  conditions  within  three  months  where  commercial  activities 
like  Guest  Houses,  Restaurants,  Display  Centers,  Show  Rooms, 
Beauty  Parlour,  Saloon,  offices  of  Government  departments,  private 
sector,  NGO’s,  educational  institutions,  offices  of  T.V  Channels, 
clinics etc. and in any other name and style are being carried out and 
falls within the definition of non-conforming use.  

19. 

The  crux  of  the  above  discussion  is  that  the  petitioners  have  failed  to 

make  out  a  case  for  the  issuance  of  the  writ  in  their  favour.  Therefore,  these  writ 

petitions  are  hereby  dismissed  with  the  directions  to  the  respondents  to  act  in 

accordance  with  law,  justice,  fairness  and  honesty  by  enforcing  the  laws  and 

regulations. No order as to cost.      

    (SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI)      
                   JUDGE 

Announced in Open Court on         21-01-2015. 

               JUDGE 

Approved for Reporting.  

 “Waqar Ahmad” 

 
 
 
 
     
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
