JUDGMENT SHEET

IS

HIGH COURT

ISLAMABAD

Crl.

No.649-8 t2oi2o

Alrnrraiz Khan.
VS
THE STATE, ETC.

Petitioner  bg:

Complainant  bg:

State by:

Mr. Ali Husain  Bha

Advocate.

Ch. Riasat  Ali Gondal, Advocate.

Mr. Farrukh Shahzad  Dall, AAG.
Mr. Naeem Khan  Niazi,  Inspector,  FlA.

Date of Heaing:

13.05.2020

LUBttlA SAIEEM PERVEZ: J. 
seeks bail after arrest in case FIR No.08 l2Ol8,
offences  under section  42O I 4681 471 I 4O9 I IO9 I
Police  Station  FIA (FIA Corporate Crime Circle),

Through

instant petition, the petitioner
24.12.2O18,  registered for
PPC and 5(1ll 47 PCA,  at

bad.

2.  The facts of the case  are that during  the
of hearfurg of Civil APPeal
No. lgt2ol4, before the Hon'ble Supreme  Court a scam  was unearthed
regarding fraudulent allotment  of Agro-Farm plot No. 36-8, measuring  2.29
acres in Orchard/Permanent  Nursery Scheme,  Muree  Road,  Islamabad by the
legal heirs of late Ghulam Rasool and Walayat Jan whose  agricultural land was
acquired by CDA, vide award dated 04.01.1963.  An eligibility certificate No.
Rasool and thereafter
AOOO051 dated 12.10.1965  was issued to late G
land measuring  100 kanal 02 marlas in village
No. L7819-L,  Tehsil
the said eligibilitY
Chicha Watni, District Sahiwal was allotted
by concealing  this fact
certificate, but the legal heirs of late Ghulam
the Rehabilitation  PolicY,
also got allotted plot No. 36-8 in Agro-Farm
not yet allotted  anY Plot
1996, approved by the CDA for the affectees  w
against the eligibility  certificate  issued by CDA  fqq comRulsory  acquisition of
their lands. The Hon'ble Supreme  Court ordlfed initiation of criminal
proceedings  against the persons accused in the F[h and also directed the FIA
and Auditor General of Pakistan  to submit inquiry  and audit report  before the
Honble Supreme Court  of Pakistan.  The FIA, thus lodged FIR bearing No.
OSl2OlS dated 24.12.2018 and initiated investigation  in  the matter by
nominating  (1) Khalid Mehmood (grandson  of Ghulam Rasool); (2) AmraizKhan
(grandson  of Walayat Jan); (3) Mehbood  Ahmed (forrrrer Deputy District  Officer,
District Sahiwal); (4) Falak Sher (former Deputy  Diltrict  Officcr  Revenlte, Tehsil

ho

2

Crl.Misc.ilo  .65.2-P  I 2O2O

Chicha  Watni, District Sahiwal);  (5) Akhtar  Hussain  (former Tehsildar,  Chicha
Watni); (6) Marrzoor Ahmed  (former Qanoon-go,  Daad Fatyana, Tehsil
ChichaWatni);  (71 Qamar Ali (former  Clerk Record Room, DC, Sahiwal);  (8)
Khalid Farooq (former  Patwari, Rehabilitation,  CDA, land and rehabilitation
Directorate,  Islamabad);  & (9) Ch. Muhammad

3.  Present bail application  has been moved by
Khan, grandson of
that he in collaboration
affectee Walayat  Jan, whose role as per the
forgery applied
with legal heirs  of the affectee Ghulam  Rasool,
for allotment of Agro Farm in Islamabad,  and also tremained a contesting  party
in the litigation  upto the Hon'lcle Supreme  Court of fhkistan.

3.  The Petitioner/accused  applied  for bail after fihrest  before Special Judge
Central CCC/FIA,  Islamabad  which was disrjrissed, vide order dated
t6.o4.2020

rl

Learned counsel  for the petitioner/accused

4. 
ted that the date  and
hour of occurrence  of offence mentioned in the FI
is for the period  2005 to
.L2.2O18  after a delay  of
2OIO,  however,  the FIR has been registered on
offences  under  section
about 8 years. Learned counsel  further submitted
s under  section 468
42ol47ll2ol  &, 109 PPC are bailable, whereas,
PPC & 5(iil47 PCA do not fall under prohibitory clhi.rse  of section 497 Cr.P.C.
Learned  counsel contended  that no specific role of submitting  any forged
document  has been attributed to the accused  Amraiz Kharr rather the only
allegation against  him is that he in collaboration  with the legajl heirs of Ghulam
Rasool affectee,  applied  for allotment of Agro Farm; that accused petitioner  ws
of the award being the legal heir
not allctted  any land anywhere in pursuance
that provisions of section
of affectee Walayat  Jan.  Learned counsel  con
on case tiled as "Abdul
409 PPC are not attracted in petitioner's case and
Muhammad Tahir VS The
Rashid Nasir VS The State" (2OO9 SCMR  517) &
State' (2010 YLR 2244). For delay in filing of FIR learned bounsel relied on
judgment titled "shahzad  Riaz VS The State" (2Otlg p Cr.LJ Note 8). Learned
counsel lastly contended that the entire record pertaining  to tle case is in the
custody of FIA, therefore, there is no chance  of tempering with the record; there
is no chance of absocondance  of the petitioner/accused  and the case is of
further inquiry and further placed reliance on the case law reported  as
"sameen  Jan (Naib Tehsildar) vs The State" (PLD 20ll  Supreme  Court  509),
"Farkhand Iqbal  VS The State" (2014  P Cr. L J 1223),  "Syed Mehmood  Ali Shah
VS The State" (2013 YLR 1411)  & " Saeed Ahmed VS The State" (1996  SCMR
tl32). Learned  counsel also relied on the order of Hon'ble Supreme  Court of
Pakistan  dated O7.O4.2O2O  passed in Criminal Petition No. 299 of 2O2O,

3

Crl.Misc.tro .652-B I 2O2O

whereby,  the Hon1ole Supreme Court of  Pakistan  under the present
cirqtmstances due to pandemic  of couid-lg, relatiltg to  grant of bail to the
acansed persons  charged. for offences under non prohibitory clause or under
uagrancA law or offences  carrying less than three (O3) gears  sentence ha.s
obserued that their cases be consid.ered for grant  of bail, uhqe the accused  is
suffering  from ailments  and. to und"er  UTPs who are 55 gears or older prouided
theg haue no history  of past conuiction Learned cllnsel thus submitted that
the accused  petitioner under the circumstances ib entitled  for concession  of
bail.

Learned  counsel  for CDA submitted that the accused/petitioner along
5. 
with other co-accused concealed the fraud  and contested  the litigation up to
Hon,lcle  Supreme Court of Pakistan,  where it was found out that entire process
of allotment of Agro Farm  was based on forgery, tempering  misappropriation  of
the original record. Learned  counsel submitted  that involvement  of the
accused/petitioner in commission  of fraud is also apparent  from the sale
agreement dated 10.11.2O1O  which he executed with Muhammad  Rafique
property  dealr and received sum of Rs. 10 Million and the Power of Attorney
dated  10.11 .2AlO which he executed in favor of said property dealer who is
also an accused in the present  case. Learned counsel submitted  that there is
enough incriminating material of fraud available  on record against the
accused/ petitioner, therefore, he is not entitled for grant of bail.

Learned  AAG  along with I.O of the case produced  record of investigation
6. 
and submitted that accused  petitioner  is actively involved in the forgery and
fraud committed by the accused persons and sufficient  material  in this regard
is available on record, therefore, instant bail petition is tiable to be dismissed.

I have heard the arguments  of learned Counsel for the parties as well as

T. 
learned  AAG  and have also perused  the record produced by the I.O.

8.  Perusal of the record  reveals  that the accused  petitioner  in collaboration
with the legal heirs of affectee  Ghulam  Rasool, through their property  dealer,
initiated  process for allotment of agro farm under the rehabilitation policy  1996
announced  by CDA for the affectees whose lands'  were cornlrulsorily  acquired
by CDA in Islamabad but were neither compensated nor allotted land in
exchange. Investigation  conducted by FIA primafarie shows  that the legal heirs
of affectees  Ghulam Rasool and Walayat  Jan qclncealed  the fact of earlier
allotment of land against  EC No. A000051  dated 12.10.1965 in Sahiwal and on
orders of irsuing  NOCs  bY
the original EC obtairgl
the pretext of misplacing
far as argument  of learned
farms in Islamabad.  ),S
CDA for allotment  of agro
petitiolrer is concerned  it
cor.rnsel  for petitioner  regarding innocence  of

crl.Mlsc'Ifo'662-8 I 20.2(J

is observed  that sale agreement, regarding  the fraudulently allotted  agro farm
plot No. 36-8, Orchard/Permanent  Nursery scheme,  Murree Road, Islamabad
measuring 2.2O Acres,  executed by the accused /  petitioner with ch.
Muhammad Rafique, property  dealer and an irrevocable  General Power of
of the said propertY
Attorney executed  by the accused /  petitioner in
are available on record
dealer,  who is also nominated  in the FIR as an
accused  /  petitioner  in
which prima-facie  hint towards involvement  of
t  from record  that he
commission  of offence.  Moreover, it  is also a
remained party in entire litigation along with legal heirs of affectee Ghulam
Rasool,  co-accused.  The investigation in the mattef is still under process and
the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner during  his
and reoord  of the case'
arguments  require deeper appreciation  of the
tions are to be decided
Whereas,  it is well settled principle  that the bail a
on the basis of tentative assessment  to be made j
to find out as to whether
of the alleged
the Petitioner  is prima facie connected  with the
, circumstances and
offence or not and the deeper appreciation  of the
can usefully  be made to
documents  is not permissible.  Reference  in this
Sta;fr (PLD 7978  Sc
the case law reported as Kho,ltd Jdtted @illo;nt
'c;nd, otlrltr (2017  SCMR
256), Aamlr Ba.shlr  o;nd, o;nother  VS The

2O60l.

10.  For what has been discussed above,  I
application  which  is accordingly dismissed. H
the observations  made  hereinabove are ten
prejudice  the proceedings  before the learned trial

no merits in this bail
, it may be clarified that
in natufe  and shall not

(r

PERVEZI

JUDGE

Adrusf

