ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

CRL.MISC. N0.927-B  /2020 

Serial  No. of 
order/ 
proceeding. 

FARHAD ALIAS  FAWAD  VS  The State  &  another 

Date of order/ 
proceedings 

Order  with  signatures  of judge,  and  that  of parties  or 
counsel,  where  necessary. 

02 

31.08.2020 

Ch.Nisar Ahmad Gujjar Advocate for petitioner. 
Mr.  Zohaib  Hassan  Gondal,  State  counsel  with 
Shamas Inspector & M.  Nawaz SI. 

GHULAM AZAM  QAMBRANI.  J. 

The petitioner [Farhad alias  Fawad] seeks post 

arrest  bail  in  case  FIR  No.  246,  dated  31.12.2017, 

under  sections  395,  412  PPC,  registered  at  Police 

Station Noon, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  the  written 

report  of the  complainant  [Tariq  Hussain  Shah]  F.l.R 

No.  246  was 

lodged  against  unknown  accused 

persons stating therein that when he opened the main 

gate of his house to see-off his  cousin Basharat Shah, 

suddenly  six  persons  armed  with  pistol  entered  into 

the  house  and  locked  all  persons  of  the  family  in  a 

room.  They  started  searching  his  house  and  took 

away  20  tolas  gold,  consisting  of  bangles,  necklace, 

ear  rings  etc  including  amount  of  Rs.1,25,000/-  on 

gun point.  They also snatched amount of Rs.12,000/  

from  his cousin. 

3. 

The  petitioner  applied  for  post  arrest  bail 

before  the 

learned  Court  of  Judicial  Magistrate 

Section-30,  Islamabad, which was  rejected vide order 

dated  08.07.2020. Thereafter,  the  petitioner/  accused 

applied 

for  bail  after  arrest  before 

the 

learned 

Additional  Sessions  Judge-West,  Islamabad,  which 

met  the  same  fate  vide  order  dated  23.07.2020, 

hence the instant petition. 

4. 

Learned  counsel 

for  the  petitioner  contends 

that  the  petitioner  is  innocent  and  has  falsely  been 

implicated  in  this  case; 

that  the  petitioner  has  not 

committed  any  offence  as  alleged  in  the  FIR;  that 

2 

CRL.MISC.  N0.927-B  /2020 

recovery of only  Rs.3000/- has allegedly  been shown 

as  recovery from the  petitioner; that  no other material 

has  been  recovered  from  his  possession;  that  the 

petitioner was  involved  in  the  case  on the  disclosure 

of  co-accused  Ahsanullah  and  one  Liaqat,  who  later 

on,  have been discharged from  the  case; that  on the 

same  set  of  evidence, 

the  co-accused  Namely 

Nawab  Khan  has  been  granted  bail  by  the  learned 

ASJ,  Islamabad, vide order dated 27.06.2020 and the 

petitioner  is  also  entitled  for  the  same  relief  on  the 

basis of rule of consistency; that  there  is  no evidence 

to  connect  the  petitioner  with  the  commission  of 

offence;  that  the  petitioner  is  previously  non-convict 

and case of present petitioner  falls within the ambit of 

further inquiry. Further contended that the petitioner is 

behind the bars since his arrest; that the  investigation 

of  the  case  has  been  completed  and  petitioner  is  no 

more  required for  further  investigation.  Lastly  prayed 

for acceptance of this bail petition. 

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  State  counsel 

vehemently opposed the grant of bail to the petitioner 

contending that the petitioner was identified during the 

course  of  identification  parade  by  the  complainant; 

that  the  offence  is  not  bailable  and  the  offence  falls 

within  the  prohibitory  clause  of  Section  497  Cr.P.C. 

Lastly urged for dismissal of the instant bail petition. 

6. 

I  have heard the arguments of learned counsel 

for  the  petitioner,  State  Counsel  and  have  perused 

the  material  available  on  record  with  their  able 

assistance. 

7. 

Perusal  of 

the 

record 

reveals 

that 

the 

complainant has mentioned six unknown culprits, who 

have allegedly entered  into  his  house and committed 

dacoity.  The  physical  features  and  specific  role  has 

not been attributed to any of the culprit. It  is transpired 

from  the  record  that  one  Ahsan  Ullah,  Liaqat  and 

Rehman  Ullah, who  were  arrested  in  case  F.l.R  No. 

66/2018  registered at  Police Station  Shamas Colony, 

Islamabad, they  made  disclosure  that  they  alongwith 

petitioner  have  committed  dacoity  in  the  house  of 

3 

CRL.MISC.  N0.927-B  /2020 

complainant,  but  later on  they  were  discharged  from 

the  case.  It  is  also  transpired  from  the  record  that 

recovery  of  Rs.  6000/-  have  been  shown  from  the 

possession  of  co-accused  Rehman  Ullah.  Similarly, 

Rs. 7000/- have also been shown as recovery from the 

custody  of  Ahsan  Ullah,  but  later  on  both  of  them 

were  discharged.  The  identification  parade  was  not 

held  in  accordance  with  the  principles  laid  down  by 

the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court,  therefore,  the  case  of 

petitioner  falls  within  the  ambit  of  further  inquiry  in 

terms of the Section 497 Cr.P.C. At this stage, deeper 

appreciation of  material available on  record is  neither 

desirable  nor permissible. The  guilt  of  accused  is  yet 

to  be  determined  by  the  learned  trial  Court  after 

recording  of  the  evidence.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court of Pakistan in  the case reported as  "Manzoor & 

four others  VS The State"  [PLO 1972  SC 81),  it  has 

held as under:- 

"  It  is  important to  remember that  bail 

is  not  to  be  withheld  as  a  punishment. 

There  is  no  legal  or  moral  compulsion  to 

keep  people 

in 

jail  merely  on 

the 

allegation 

that 

they  have  committed 

offences  punishable  with  death  or 

transportation, unless reasonable grounds 

appear to exist to disclose their complicity. 

The  ultimate  conviction  and  incarceration 

of  a  guilty  person  can  repair  the  wrong 

caused by a  mistaken relief of interim  bail 

granted 

to  him,  but  no  satisfactory 

reparation  can  be  offered  to  an  innocent 

man for his  unjustified incarceration at any 

stage of the case albeit his acquittal in  the 

long run." 

8. 

So  far  as  the  contention  of  the  learned  State 

counsel  that  similar  nature  of  other  cases  have 

already  been  registered  against  the  petitioner  is 

concerned, 

there 

is  no  previous  record  of 

the 

petitioner to have been convicted in  the said cases as 

such,  he  cannot  be  treated  as  hardened criminal and 

4 

CRL.MISC.  N0.927  -B  /2020 

it  cannot  be  a  ground  to  withhold  the  concession  of 

bail.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon the  case 

reported  as  "Babar  Hussain  VS  The  State  and 

another'  (2020  SCMR  871) wherein  it  has been  held 

as under:- 

As  far  as  the  contention  of  learned  Law 
Officer  that  the  petitioner  is  involved  in  six 
other  criminal  cases  would  not  disentitle  him 
from  the  relief  sought  for  as  learned  Law 
Officer  frankly  conceded  that  petitioner  has 
not  been  convicted 
in  any  case,  hence, 
mere  involvement  in  criminal  cases  could 
not  be  a  ground  to  withhold  the  concession 
of bail  in  the  given  circumstances.  Reliance 
in  this  regard  is placed  upon  cases  titled  as 
"Moundar  and  others  v.  The  State"  (PLO 
1990  SC  934)  and  "Muhammad  Rafique  v. 
The State"  (1997  SCMR 412). 

9. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  I  allow 

the petition and direct the petitioner to be released on 

bail subject to  his  furnishing  bail  bonds in  the  sum of 

Rs.2,00,000/-  (  Two  lacs)  with  one  surety  and  P.R 

bond of the  like amount to  the  satisfaction  of  learned 

trial Court. 

10. 

It 

is  needless 

to  mention  here 

that 

the 

observations  made  hereinabove  are 

tentative 

in 

nature and shall not design to influence the trial. 

S.Akhtar 

(GI IUl•  Al!AM QAM~ANI) 
JUDGE 

