HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET
IN THE SLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 

Writ Petition No.4089 of 2020 

Mst. Shama Kausar  
VS
Abdul Wahid & 02 others  

Petitioner by 

: 

Ms. Palwasha Tariq, Advocate.

Respondent No.1 by  : 

Qazi Rehan Shabbir, Advocate. 

Date of Decision 

: 

23.05.2022 

Babar  Sattar,  J:-  The  petitioner  has  impugned  (i) 

judgment  and  decree  passed  by  learned  Judge  Family  Court 

dated  24.07.2019 

through  which  suit 

for 

recovery  of 

maintenance allowance was dismissed and the suit for recovery 

of  dower  was  allowed  to  the  extent  of  Rs.50,000/-,  and  (ii) 

judgment and decree passed in appeal by the learned Additional 

District  Court  dated  02.12.2020  by  which  the  judgment  and 

decree of the learned Family Court was upheld. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  the 

impugned  judgments  and  decrees  suffer  from  misreading  of 

evidence.  She  submitted  that  the  learned  Courts  did  not 

properly  value  the  dowry  articles  and  only  granted  to  the 

petitioner  the  right  to  seek  return  of  the  dowry  articles  or 

Rs.50,000/- 

in 

lieu 

thereof,  which  amount  was  not 

commensurate  with  the  value  of  the  dowry  articles.  She 

submitted  that  a  list  of  the  dowry  articles  had  been  adduced 

before  the  learned  Family  Court.  That  there  were  contradiction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4089/2020 

in  the  position  taken  by  the  respondent  No.1  in  the  written 

statement  filed  before  the  learned  Family  Court  and  the 

testimony of DW-1  who admitted to having received the  dowry 

articles. She further submitted that there were two Nikahnamas 

produced in evidence one by the petitioner during her testimony 

which  identified  as  Mark-PA  and  the  second  by  respondent 

which  was  identified  as  Exh.D1/A.  That  the  dower  amount  in 

both  was  more  or  less  the  same,  except  that  the  Nikahnama 

produced  by  the  petitioner  did  not  state  that  the  dower  had 

been  paid  while  in  the  Nikahnama  produced  by  DW-1  stated 

that dower had been paid. That the learned Family Court did not 

frame an issue to determine which Nikahnama was authentic. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  submitted  that  the 

Nikahnama produced by the petitioner was correctly marked as 

Mark-PA  as  it  was  a  photocopy  and  not  an  original  document 

and  could  thus  not  be  adduced  or  read  in  evidence.  The 

Nikahnama  produced  by  the  respondent  as  DW-1  was  duly 

exhibited  and  read  into  evidence,  which  stated  that  the  dower 

amount  had  been  paid  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the 

Nikahnama.  That  such  fact  had  also  been  admitted  by  the 

petitioner  during  her  testimony  as  PW-1.  He  further  submitted 

that the list of dowry items was also not properly exhibited and 

was  identified  as  Mark-PB.  That  it  had  no  signature  of  the 

petitioner  and  the  petitioner  also  acknowledged  during  her 

cross-examination  as  PW-1  that  it  was  prepared  by  her 

brothers.  He  submitted  that  the  question  of  the  respondent 

receiving  a  motorbike  in  dowry  was  raised  and  denied  by 

respondent No.1. And it was in view of testimony of PW-2, who 

 
 
3 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4089/2020 

failed to produce any receipt or evidence in relation to provision 

of  a  motorbike  in  dowry,  together  with  the  evidence  of  DW-1 

and DW-2 who denied having received any motorbike in dowry, 

that  the  learned  Family  Court  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the 

items received in dowry did not include a motorbike.  

4. 

This Court has reviewed the impugned judgments as well 

as the evidence adduced before the learned Family Court and is 

not  convinced  that  the  judgments  of  the  learned  Family  Court 

and the learned Additional District Court suffer from misreading 

of  evidence.  The  learned  Family  Court  has  recorded  in  its 

judgment  after  appraising  the  evidence  adduced  before  it  that 

the  petitioner  neither  produced  the  original  Nikahnama  and 

dowry  list  that  she  relied  on  nor  sought  permission  to  adduce 

secondary evidence in relation thereto, subject to satisfaction of 

conditions prescribed in the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 for 

production of secondary evidence. The learned Family Court also 

took into account the evidence adduced by the petitioner herself 

wherein  she  admitted  having  received  the  dower  amount  as 

mentioned in the Nikahnama (produced as Exh.D-1/A). PW-1 in 

her  testimony  stated  that  while  she  had  received  the  dower 

amount  on  the  day  that  the  marriage  was  solemnized,  the 

dower was taken back by the petitioner. She, however, adduced 

no  evidence  in  relation  thereto  or  explained  the  circumstances 

in which the dower including Rs.52,000/- and gold bangles were 

taken back by the respondent. It was for these reasons that the 

learned Family Court concluded that the petitioner had failed to 

prove  her  claim  to  the  extent  of  non-receipt  of  dower  as 

mentioned in the Nikahnama. 

 
 
4 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4089/2020 

5. 

In relation  to the dowry articles the learned Family Court 

correctly appreciated that the list of dowry articles was not duly 

exhibited  and  had  not  been  proved  through  testimony  by 

plaintiff’s  witnesses.  It  did  however  take  into  account  the 

discrepancy  between  in  the  position  taken  by  respondent  No.1 

in  his  written  statement  and  his  testimony  as  DW-1  and 

concluded that there were certain articles that were received by 

the respondent in dowry. While in view of the evidence adduced 

the learned Family  Court did not come to the  conclusion that a 

motorbike  had  been  gifted  by  the  petitioner’s  family  to 

respondent  No.1,  it  accepted  the  petitioner’s  contention  that 

various household items had been received by respondent No.1 

as  dowry.  In  view  of  the  testimony  of  DW-1  and  DW-2  the 

learned  Family  Court  determined  the  value  of  dowry  articles  to 

be Rs.50,000/-.  

6. 

In  the  event  that  the  learned  Family  Court  had  come  to 

the  conclusion  that  respondent  No.1  had  received  a  motorbike 

as  part  of  the  dowry  received  from  the  petitioner’s  family  and 

had  still  granted  the  appellant  Rs.50,000/-  in  lieu  of  dowry 

articles,  one  could  possibly  conclude 

that 

the 

financial 

compensation granted in view of dowry articles was insufficient. 

That  is  not  however  the  case.  The  Court  in  view  of  evidence 

adduced  did  not  accept  the  petitioner’s  claim  that  respondent 

No.1  had  received  a  motorbike  as  part  of  dowry.  It  therefore 

ordered that respondent No.1 either return the household items 

received  as  dowry  or  pay  Rs.50,000/-  in  lieu  thereof.  The 

learned  Appellate  Court  then  reappraised  the  evidence  and 

upheld the judgment and decree of the learned Family Court. 

 
 
5 | P a g e  

W.P. No.4089/2020 

7. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  had  failed  to 

convince  this  Court  that  there  was  any  piece  of  evidence 

adduced  before  the  learned  Family  Court  that  was  either  not 

read or misread in granting the petitioner Rs.50,000/- in lieu of 

dowry  articles.  Short  of  such  misreading  and  non-reading  of 

evidence  this  Court  in  its  constitutional  jurisdiction  cannot 

undertake  evaluation  of  dowry  articles  afresh  and  reach  a 

conclusion  regarding  their  value  different  from  that  of  the 

learned Family Court.  

8. 

For  the  aforementioned  reasons,  this  Court  is  not 

convinced  that  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  suffer 

from material illegality that require the intervention of this Court 

in its constitutional jurisdiction. The petition is therefore without 

merit  and  dismissed  with  a  cost  of  Rs.5000/-  payable  by  the 

petitioner to respondent No.1. 

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

*M.A. Raza* 

 
 
 
 
 
        
