L

{W.P.No.2777  nol

Form  No: HCID/C-L}L.
ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

W.P.No.2L77 /2009

Mst. Khadija  Qurban
VS
Federal Government  Employees Housing  Foundation

PETITIONER  BY:

Mr. lmran Shafique,  Advocate

RESPO'VDEA'T BY:

Ms. Shahina  Akbar,  Advocate

DATE OF DECISION:

03.06.2015

2

N MER FAROOQ- t.  Through the  instant Constitutional
petition under Article 199 of the Constitution  of Islamic  Republic
of Pakistan, L973, the petitioner  seeks declaration  to the effect
that she is entitled to allotment of plot in Category-Ill,  Phase-IV
of Housing  Scheme,  launched  by the respondent.

The facts, in brief, are that the petitioner  being a teacher
in the Federal Government Institution retired from service  on
25.03.2006  after attaining  superannuation in BPS-16. The
petitioner's husband  was also a Federal Government  employee
and retired in the year 2004.  The respondent launched  a housing
scheme  and invited applications from the government  employees
for allotment of plots in different  categories.  The petitioner  and
her husband made  applications for allotment of the plots and
fulfilled all the requirements as provided  in the brochure. The
petitioner applied in Category-Ill by tendering  pay order in the
sum of Rs. 65000/- as seed money. The respondent directed the
petitioner to provide the specimen  affidavit and visit the office
for payment of two installments  to the tune of Rs.4,35,000/-
(Rupees  four lacs and thirty five thousand  only),  however,
despite needful  being done, no fufther response  was given by
the respondent. The respondent vide order dated 24.L2.2008
turned down the application for allotment made by the petitioner
on the ground  that her husband  has also been  provisionally
allotted Category-Il plot in Housing  Scheme, Phase-IV,  thus, she

2

lW.P.No.2777  t

is not eligible  for allotment of plot as mentioned  in clause  2.2 of
the brochure.

The learned  counse! for the petitioner inter a/ra submitted
that vide letter dated  29.09.2008,  the respondent considered  the
application  of the petitioner for allotment  of plot and despite
fulfillment  of all pre-requisites, her application has been turned
down without any justification  or basis. It was further contended
that under Article 24 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic  of
Pakistan,  L973, it is fundamental right of the petitioner to
acquire  and hold property and she cannot be deprived  of the
same in an arbitrary manner. It was further contended that
under the law, husband  and wife are two distinct  persons  and
cannot be termed as one for the purposes  of allotment of
property. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel
placed  reliance on case titled *Prof. Kazim  Hussain and others VS
Government of Pakistan through Secretary  M/o Law Justice &
Parliamentary Affairs and others" reported as (PLD 2013 FSC

18).

The learned  counsel for the respondent  inter a/ta submitted
that no provisional  allotment was made in favour of the
petitioner and her application  has been turned down on the basis
of terms and conditions  of the brochure which forms part of the
contract between  the applicant and the respondent.

The application  of the petitioner  has been turned down on
the basis of clause 2.2 of the brochure for Islamabad  Housing
Scheme, Phase-IV. The referred clause reads as under:

3

4

5

"Priority shall  be given to those applicants  who
or their spouse or family:
i)  Where not allotted a house/flat  or plot in
Islamabad by the Housing  Foundation,
CDA or any Government  Agency at any
time and whether it  was retained  or
disposed off.

ii)

Each applicant  shall have to submit  an
affidavit to the effect duly countersigned
by a First Class Magistrate. If at any
stage,  contents  of the Affidavit  are found
to be fictitious  or false or any material
facts,  found  to  have  been

t

I

6

3

{W.P.No.2777' I

concealed/misstated  or  suppressed
deliberately  and knowingly, the allotment
shall be cancelled  and the seed money
deposit shall be forfeited  and such legal
action as deemed  appropriate will also be
taken.'i

The brochure is paft of the agreement  between the parties
inasmuch  as in petitioner  clause 22 of the application  for
allotment an undertaking has been signed by the petitioner
whereby  he agreed to abide by the terms  and conditions  as
given in the brochure titled "Housing Scheme for Federal
Government  Employees" on ownership basis in Islamabad
Phase-IV. Under section  2.2 of the brochure,  priority is to be
given to the applicants whose spouse or family has not been
allotted a house/flat or plot in Islamabad  by the Housing
Foundation,  CDA or any Government Agency at any time. In
case titled "Ishrat  Jabeen Saeed VS Multan  Development
Authority'  (2007 MLD 1164), the Hon'ble Lahore  High Court,
Lahore, observed  that enforcement  of contract could not be
ordered through Constitutional petition. It was further  observed
that one of clauses  mentioned  in advertisement  was that if both
husband and wife were successfu! in draw, only one of them
would be entitled to  retain; object of scheme was to
accommodate  as many families  as possible and the petitioners
were bound by such condition.  Therefore,  in the instant case the
petitioner is bound by the undeftaking  and cannot  question
clause  2.2 at this stage.

7

Under  clause 15 of the above mentioned  brochure, there is
an arbitration  clause which provides  for settlement of all disputes
between the applicants/allotees  and the respondent  through
arbitration.  The relevant  clause reads as follows:

*ARBITRATION
All disputes  between  the Housing Foundation
and the allotees/applicants  shall be referred  to
the Executive  Committee for arbitration and
the decision of the Committee  shall be final
and binding on both the parties."

The plain reading of the above  said clause shows that the
Executive  Committee  of the respondent is to be the sole Judge in
the matter, in case any dispute arises between any applicant and

a

4

{W.P.No.2777 nl

the respondent. The petitioner, therefore,  has an alternate
remedy which is efficacious  in nature. It  is an established
principle of law that where an alternate  and efficacious  remedy is
available,  the petition under  Afticle 199 of the Constitution  is not
maintainable.  In this behalf, reliance is placed on case titled "M/s
Gandapur Construction Company VS Government of KPK &
others" (2014  CLD 400) wherein Hon'ble  Peshawar High Court,

Peshawar held as follows:

o7.  Undisputedly, there is  a  clause in  the
agreement  executed  between the parties  bearing
clause No.25 to the agreement.  According to this
clause,  in the event of any disagreement  arising out
of the contract,  the matter shal! first be referred to
the Superintending Engineer for decision who shall,
after making such enquiries as he may deem fit, give
his decision in writing not later than three months
after the reference is made to him.

8.  This clause No.25 of the agreement  provides a
forum to the parties to settle their disputes out of
court through  the process  of arbitration.  This is a
forum where all the disputed matters will be
discussed  by referring  to each and every aspect of
the case even by recording  pro and contra evidence
by the experts  on the subjects.
9.  When the agreement  itself provides  a forum
for resolving  a dispute  among the parties  to the suit
then without availing  such forum how a disputed
question  of fact can be placed before the High Couft
for its resolution. A High Court under Article 199 of
the Constitution of Pakistan L973  may issue a writ
only when facts are admitted  and when there is no
alternate remedy to the aggrieved person for
resolution  of his grievance.  Here in this case neither
facts of the case are admitted nor the petitioner is
divested of alternate  forum for the resolution of his
grievance  as the agreement itself provides him a
forum to settle his dispute with the respondent-
department.  So it is held that in view of clause  25 of
the agreement, the instant writ petition is not
maintainable."

In case titled "M/s N.A.A. Consulting  Engineers  & others VS
Karachi Metropolitan  Corporation"  (2014 MLD 1795), the Hon'ble

Sindh High Court,  Sindh  observed  as follows:

"We have also observed that the instant petition  is
not maintainable for the reasons  that it pertains to

L

5

|W.P.No.2777t20091

contractual  obligation between promisor and
promisee under an  "arbitration  agreement",
Expression  "arbitration  agreement" within the
contemplation of section 2(a) of Arbitration Act,
1940 means a written agreement to submit  present
or future differences to arbitration,"

In case titled "S.M.  Hashim Hussain VS Pakistan Defence
Officer's Housing Authority"  (2005 SCMR  L782), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of Pakistan held that in terms of clause  18
(arbitration  clause  of the condition  of agreement), it is obligating
upon the parties to refer the dispute  arising between them  to
arbitration  for its resolution.

In case titled "Haji Khalid Usman VS Secretary to the
Government of Punjab,  Agriculture  Department,  Lahore" (2008
CLC 1360), it was observed  as follows:

"To resolve the present controversy the best course
is to advert  to the plain reading of Article 199 of the
Constitution, which reveals that an aggrieved person
can invoke the jurisdiction  of the High  Court  under
Article  199 if he has no alternate remedy, whereas in
the present  controversy  undisputedly  clause  65 of
the Contract itself enables the parties to invoke  the
provisions of Arbitration Laws. The Arbitration Laws
are unambiguous in terms  and if some dispute  arose
in any controversy  as is contended in the present
petition, the only course is to approach  the Civil
Court for resolving the controversy and not to rush
to the High  Court invoking  the provisions of Article
799 of the Constitution."

In case titled *M/s Tauseef  Corporation  (Pvt.) Ltd. Lahore
VS Lahore Development  Authority and 02 others" (1999 CLC 26),

it was held as follows:

"The only remedy provided for such breach of
contractual liability entailed  the incident of damages
falling purely within  the ambit of civil action under
the plenary jurisdiction of Civil Couft. Lastly,  the
agreement itself contained a clause for arbitration
whereby the differences of opinion  between  the
parties  or any dispute  arising out of the impugned
agreement  could be referred  to an arbitrator  for
settlement instead of bringing legal action. It  iS,
thus, obvious that an efficacious  and effective
remedy was available to the appellants in the form of
arbitration or civil action under  the normal law. The
writ jurisdiction in such a situation could not be
invoked.

6

|W.P.No.2777t20091

B

In view of above,  the instant  Constitutional petition  is not

maintainable  and therefore is dismissed.

*M.AMIR*

(AAMER  FAROOQ)
JUDGE

Ar,,* \F-\ k  e<"%

