ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       C.R.No.307/2017 
Sofia Ashfaq 

VS          

Haseeb Ashfaq Bhatti and others 

Dates of Hearing: 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 

Ilyas 

20.04.2018 and 28.11.2018 
Mr. Sher Afzal Khan, Advocate, 
Barrister 
Talha 
respondents No.1 to 3. 
Mr. Shajjar Abbas Hamdani, Advocate for 
respondent No.4,  
Ms.  Hadiya  Aziz,  Advocate, 
Amicus Curiae. 

learned 

Sheikh 

for 

__________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB, J:- Through the  instant civil 

revision petition, the petitioner, Sofia Ashfaq, impugns the judgment 

dated  27.07.2017,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional 

District  Judge,  Islamabad,  allowing  respondents  No.1  to  3’s  appeal 

against  the  order  dated  17.05.2017,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the 

learned  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad.  Vide  the  said  order  dated 

17.05.2017,  the 

learned  Civil  Court  allowed  the  petitioner’s 

application  for  the  issuance  of  a  succession  certificate  regarding 

the legacy of her deceased husband, Muhammad Ashfaq Bhatti (“Mr. 

Bhatti”),  and  dismissed  the  said  respondents’  objections  to  the 

inclusion of the petitioner’s name in the succession certificate.  

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  the  instant  petition  are 

that  on  27.07.1997,  the  petitioner  got  married  to  one  Shahzad  Gul. 

The  petitioner  asserts  that  Shahzad  Gul  had  pronounced  oral 

divorce upon her on 14.04.2010. On 19.12.2012, Shahzad Gul is said 

to  have  obtained  a  stamp  paper  on  which  the  divorce  deed  was 

scribed.  On  07.01.2014,  the  petitioner  applied  to  the  Chairman, 

Arbitration  Council,  Islamabad,  for  the  issuance  of  a  certificate  for 

the  effectiveness  of  divorce.  This  certificate  was 

issued  on 

17.04.2014.  

3. 

On  26.01.2013,  the  petitioner  married  with  Mr.  Bhatti.  Mr. 

Bhatti  had  been  married  earlier and  had  two  sons,  namely,  Haseeb 

Ashfaq  Bhatti  (respondent  No.1)  and  Hassan  Ashfaq  Bhatti 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

2 

(respondent  No.4),  and  two  daughters  namely,  Javeria  Haroon 

(respondent No.2) and Maria (respondent No.3). Mr. Bhatti breathed 

his last on 03.02.2016. His first wife had predeceased him.  

4. 

In  order  that  the  petitioner  could  get  her  share  in  her  late 

husband’s  estate,  she,  on  18.03.2016,  applied  to  the  Court  of  the 

learned  Civil  Judge,  Islamabad,  for  the  issuance  of  a  succession 

certificate  under  section  372  of  the  Succession  Act,  1925.  On 

20.09.2016, respondents No.1 to 3 filed objections to the petitioner’s 

said  application.  The  essential  ground  on  which 

the  said 

respondents  objected  to  the  petitioner’s  application  was  that  her 

marriage  with  their  late  father  on  26.01.2013  was  not  valid  on  the 

ground that her earlier marriage with Shahzad Gul had not come to 

an  end  until  17.04.2014  when  the  certificate  of  effectiveness  of  the 

divorce had been  issued. It was asserted that in terms  of Section  7 

(3)  of  the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  (“M.F.L.O.”),  a 

divorce  does  not  become  effective  until  the  expiry  of  ninety  days 

from the day on which notice of divorce is delivered to the Chairman, 

Union Council. Furthermore, respondents No.1 to 3 had pleaded that 

although  the  divorce  deed  produced  by  the  petitioner  showed  that 

Shahzad  Gul  had  pronounced  divorce  on  14.04.2010  but  the  stamp 

paper  on  which  the  divorce  deed  was  executed  was  issued  on 

19.12.2012.  This,  according  to  the  said  respondents,  showed  that 

the divorce deed was a forgery. The petitioner’s right to inherit from 

the  legacy  of  the  late  Mr.  Bhatti  was  questioned  essentially  on  the 

ground  that  she  had  contracted  the  second  marriage  one  year  and 

three  months  before  her  first  marriage  ended  with  the  issuance  of 

the certificate of effectiveness of divorce.  

5. 

The petitioner appeared before the learned Civil Court as AW-

1  and  recorded  her evidence.  One  of  Mr. Bhatti’s  sons,  respondent 

No.4  appeared  as  AW-2  and  gave  evidence  in  the  petitioner’s 

support.  Shahzad  Gul  gave  evidence  as  AW-3  and  Muhammad  Asif 

as AW-4. Respondent No.2 appeared as RW-1 and had her evidence 

recorded.  

6. 

Vide order dated 17.05.2017, the learned Civil Court accepted 

the  petitioner’s  application 

for 

the 

issuance  of  succession 

 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

3 

certificate. It was ordered that a succession certificate be issued in 

favour  of  the  petitioner  and  respondents  No.1  to  4  subject  to  the 

filing  of  local  surety  bonds.  The  persons  in  whose  favour  the  said 

certificate  was  issued  were  held  to  be  entitled  to  withdraw  their 

respective shares from the legacy of the late Mr. Bhatti.  

7. 

The said order dated 17.05.2017 was assailed by respondents 

No.1  to  3  in  an  appeal  before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional 

District Judge, Islamabad. Vide judgment dated 27.07.2017, the said 

appeal was allowed and the order dated 17.05.2017, passed by the 

learned  Civil Court was set-aside. In the said appellate  judgment, it 

was  observed  that  since  the  petitioner’s  disputed  status  as  Mr. 

Bhatti’s  widow  could  not  be  adjudicated  upon  in  the  summary 

proceedings  for  the  issuance  of  a  succession  certificate,  the 

learned  Civil  Court  should  have  directed  that  the  petitioner’s  share 

be  kept  in  reserve  until  she  got  a  decree  from  a  Court  of  plenary 

jurisdiction  about  her  status  as  Mr.  Bhatti’s  widow.  Furthermore,  it 

was held that if she was unable to get a decree in her favour and the 

suit  was  decided  against  her,  the  share  kept  in  reserve  would  be 

distributed amongst Mr. Bhatti’s other legal heirs. In holding so, the 

learned Appellate Court placed reliance on the law laid down in the 

case of “Mst. Jamila Akhtar VS Public at Large” (2002 SCMR 1544). 

The  said  judgment  dated  27.07.2017  has  been  assailed  by  the 

petitioner in the instant civil revision petition.  

8. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  on  17.03.2016,  the  petitioner  filed  a 

suit  for  “declaration  (legal  heirship  certificate)  and  mandatory 

injunction”  against the respondents before  the  learned  Civil  Court, 

Islamabad. In the said suit, the petitioner had prayed for inter-alia a 

decree for declaration to the effect that she along with respondents 

No.1  to  4  are  Mr.  Bhatti’s  legal  heirs.  Respondents  No.1  to  3 

contested  the  said  suit.  On  12.11.2016,  the  learned  Civil  Court 

framed the issues.  The petitioner did  not produce evidence  despite 

having  been  granted  several  opportunities  by  the  learned  Civil 

Court.  Vide  order  and  decree  dated  27.02.2018,  the  learned  Civil 

Court  dismissed  the  said  suit  after  closing  the  petitioner’s  right  to 

produce  evidence  under  Order  XVII,  Rule  3  of  the  Code  of  Civil 

 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

4 

Procedure, 1908 (“C.P.C.”). The petitioner’s appeal against the said 

order  and  decree  has  been  allowed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned 

District  Judge,  Islamabad.  Consequently,  the  petitioner’s  suit  is 

presently pending before the learned Civil Court.  

9. 

It  may  also  be  mentioned  that  on  20.01.2018,  respondents 

No.1  to  3  filed  a  suit  for  “declaration, partition through separate 

possession and permanent injunction”  against  the  petitioner  and 

respondent  No.4  before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Court, 

Islamabad. In the said suit, respondents No.1 to 3 (i.e., the plaintiffs 

therein)  prayed  for  inter-alia  a  declaration  to  the  effect  that 

respondents No.1 to 3 and respondent No.4 are the only legal heirs 

of Mr. Bhatti; and that the petitioner is not his legal heir. This suit is 

still pending adjudication.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  THE 
PETITIONER:- 
10.  Mr.  Sher  Afzal  Khan  Marwat, 

learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner, after narrating the facts leading to the filing of the instant 

revision petition, submitted that the orders/judgments passed by the 

learned Courts below were at variance; that the petitioner had been 

divorced  by  her  former  husband 

in  the  year  2010;  that  the 

petitioner’s former husband had given evidence and had confirmed 

that he had divorced the petitioner in the year 2010; that during the 

subsistence of the petitioner’s marriage with Mr. Bhatti, no question 

was  raised  as  to  the  validity  of  the  divorce  pronounced  by  her 

former  husband;  that  the  reliance  placed  by  the  learned  Appellate 

Court  on  the  case  of  “Mst.  Jamila  Akhtar  VS  Public  at  Large” 

(supra),  is  misplaced  since  the  said  case  related  to  a  forged 

Nikkahnama,  whereas  in  the  instant  case,  the  petitioner’s  Nikkah 

with Mr. Bhatti is an acknowledged fact; that the civil suit instituted 

by  the  petitioner  was  with  respect  to  the  distribution  of  immovable 

properties  left by  the  petitioner’s  late  husband,  Mr.  Bhatti;  and  that 

the  order  dated  17.05.2017,  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  is 

strictly in accordance with the law and the evidence on the record, 

whereas  the  judgment  dated  27.07.2017,  passed  by  the  learned 

Appellate  Court  suffers  from  non-application  of  judicious  mind  and 

based on non-reading and misreading of the evidence on the record. 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

5 

Learned counsel for the petitioner prayed for the revision petition to 

be allowed by setting-aside the impugned appellate judgment dated 

27.07.2017 and by restoring the original order dated 17.05.2017.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  RESPONDENTS 
NO.1 TO 3:- 
11.  Barrister  Talha Ilyas  Sheikh,  learned  counsel for  respondents 

No.1  to  3,  submitted  that  the  petitioner’s  services  as  a  housemaid 

were engaged by their father in the year 2012; that over the time, Mr. 

Bhatti  became  increasingly  dependent  on  the  petitioner  who  had 

represented herself to be a divorcee; that on 26.01.2013, Mr. Bhatti 

and the petitioner  got married; that at the time of the marriage, the 

petitioner  was  34  whereas  Mr.  Bhatti  was  61  years  of  age;  that 

respondents  No.1  to  3  had  accepted  the  marriage  for  the  sake  of 

their father’s happiness; that in December 2015, Mr. Bhatti came to 

know that the petitioner’s first marriage was still subsisting; that the 

petitioner’s  CNIC  dated  09.06.2013  shows  her  husband’s  name  as 

“Shahzad  Gul”;  that  the  petitioner  was  a  married  woman  when  she 

contracted  marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti;  that  although  the  talaqnama 

produced  by  the  petitioner  shows  that  her  former  husband 

pronounced talaq on 14.04.2010, but the stamp paper on which the 

said  talaqnama  was  executed  was  issued  on  19.12.2012;  that  this 

clearly shows that the talaqnama is a forgery and, therefore, has no 

sanctity  in  the  eyes  of  law;  that  the  said  talaqnama  was  prepared 

one month and seven days prior to the petitioner’s marriage with Mr. 

Bhatti;  that  the  petitioner’s  marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti  cannot  be 

termed  as  valid;  that  on  07.01.2014,  the  petitioner  applied  to  the 

Chairman, Arbitration Council, for the certificate of effectiveness of 

divorce; that the said certificate was issued on 17.04.2014 (i.e., one 

year  and  three  months  after  the  petitioner’s  marriage  with  Mr. 

Bhatti);  that  in  terms  of  section  7  of  M.F.L.O.,  the  petitioner’s 

marriage  with  Shahzad  Gul  had  not  ended  when  she  married  Mr. 

Bhatti;  that  it  was  mandatory  for  the  petitioner  to  have  obtained  a 

certificate  of  effectiveness  of  divorce  prior  to  marrying  Mr.  Bhatti; 

that  the  petitioner  is  liable  to  be  punished  for  violating  section  7  of 

M.F.L.O.;  that  the  learned  Appellate  Court  has  not  committed  any 

jurisdictional irregularity in allowing respondents No.1 to 3’s appeal; 

 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

6 

and  that  in  the  event,  the  petitioner  is  able  to  prove  that  her 

marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti  was  not  irregular  or  invalid,  her  secured 

share would be given to her. Learned counsel for respondents No.1 

to 3 prayed for the revision petition to be dismissed.   

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  RESPONDENT 
NO.4:- 

12.  Mr.  Shajjar  Abbas  Hamdani,  learned  counsel  for  respondent 

No.4, submitted that respondent No.4 would have no objection if the 

instant  revision  petition  was  allowed  and  the  impugned  appellate 

judgment was set-aside. He further submitted that the petitioner had 

devoted  herself  to  Mr.  Bhatti’s  care;  the  petitioner’s  marriage  with 

Mr.  Bhatti  did  not  suffer  from  any  invalidity  or  irregularity;  and  that 

the  petitioner’s  former  husband  had  divorced  her  prior  to  her 

marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti;  and  that  respondent  No.4’s  siblings  were 

trying to deprive the petitioner of her due share of inheritance in Mr. 

Bhatti’s estate. Learned counsel for respondent No.4 prayed for the 

instant revision petition to be allowed.  

SUBMISSIONS OF THE LEARNED AMICUS CURIAE:- 

13.  Ms. Hadiya Aziz, the learned Amicus Curiae submitted that the 

three essential ingredients of talaq were; (i) pronouncement of talaq, 

(ii)  notice  of  the talaq  to  the  wife,  and  (iii)  notice  of  the talaq  to  the 

Chairman,  Arbitration  Council;  that  there  is  no  provision  in  the 

M.F.L.O. clearly setting out the pre-requisites of a valid Nikkah; that 

although  Section  5  of  M.F.L.O.  provides  for  the  registration  of  the 

Nikkah  but  does  not  specify  the  manner  in  which  it  is  to  be 

performed;  that 

if  a  marriage 

is  declared  to  be  void,  penal 

consequences will ensue; that marriage during the iddat period was 

irregular but not void; that in the instant case, the irregularity in the 

petitioner’s  marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti  stood  cured,  because  the 

certificate  of  effectiveness  of  divorce  was 

issued  after  the 

petitioner’s Nikkah with Mr. Bhatti but before his demise; that by the 

time,  Mr.  Bhatti’s  succession  opened,  the  petitioner’s  divorce  with 

Shahzad  Gul  had  come  through;  that  proceedings  for  the  issuance 

of  a  succession  certificate  are  summary  in  nature,  and  in  such 

proceedings,  questions  of  title  cannot  be  determined;  that  the 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

7 

learned  Civil  Court  correctly  called  upon  the  petitioner  to  furnish 

surety  bonds;  that  strict  compliance  with  the  requirements  of 

Section 7(3) of M.F.L.O. could be dispensed with in the instant case 

since  both  the  petitioner  and  Shahzad  Gul  are  in  unison  that  the 

divorce took place in the year 2010; that the learned Civil Court had 

passed  a  just  order  by  allowing  the  petition  for  the  grant  of  a 

succession certificate subject to furnishing of surety bonds; and that 

the  petitioner  could  not  be  deprived  of  her  inheritance  rights  until 

respondents No.1 to 3’s suit for declaration, etc., is not decreed. In 

support  of  her  submission,  the  learned amicus curiae  referred  to  a 

catena of case law.  

14. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting parties and learned amicus curiae and have perused the 

record with their able assistance.   

15.  The facts leading to the filing of the instant writ petition are set 

out  in  sufficient  detail  in  paragraphs  2  to  9  above  and  need  not  be 

recapitulated.  

16.  The  vital  question  that  needs  to  be  determined  in  these 

proceedings is whether the petitioner’s marriage with Mr. Bhatti  on 

26.01.2013  was  invalid  given  the  fact  that  although  the  petitioner’s 

former  husband  had  pronounced  talaq  on  her  on  14.04.2010,  the 

stamp  paper  on  which  the  talaqnama  dated  14.04.2010  was 

executed  was 

issued  on  19.12.2012,  and  the  certificate  of 

effectiveness  of  divorce  was  issued  by  the  Chairman,  Arbitration 

Council on 17.04.2014. 

17.  Section 7(1) of the M.F.L.O. provides that any man who wishes 

to divorce his wife shall, as soon as may be after the pronouncement 

of  talaq  in  any  form  whatsoever,  give  the  Chairman  of  the  Union 

Council a notice in writing of him having done so, and shall supply a 

copy  thereof  to  the  wife.  Section  7(3)  of  the  M.F.L.O.  provides  that 

unless a talaq is revoked earlier, expressly or otherwise, shall not be 

effective  until  the  expiration  of  ninety  days  from  the  day  on  which 

notice under Section  7(1)  is  delivered  to  the Chairman  of the Union 

Council.  

 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

8 

18.  Even  if  it  is  assumed  that  Shahzad  Gul  pronounced  oral talaq 

on the petitioner on 14.04.2010, it is an admitted position that he had 

not  given  any  notice  to  the  Chairman  of  the  Union  Council  as 

required by Section 7(1) of the M.F.L.O. It was the petitioner who on 

07.01.2014,  applied 

to 

the  Chairman,  Arbitration  Council, 

Islamabad,  to  issue  a  certificate  of  effectiveness  of  divorce.  This 

certificate  was  issued  by  the  Chairman,  Arbitration  Council  on 

17.04.2014.  Since  the  petitioner  and  Mr.  Bhatti  had  got  married  on 

26.01.2013  (i.e.,  prior  to  the 

issuance  of  the  certificate  of 

effectiveness of divorce) it would be safe to hold that said marriage 

had  taken  place  prior  to  the  divorce  having  become  effective  in 

terms  of  strict  and  literal  interpretation  of  Section  7(3)  of  the 

M.F.L.O.  As  mentioned  above,  the  question  that  needs  to  be 

determined  that  whether  the  petitioner’s  marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti 

would be rendered void on account of the said lapse.  

19. 

In the order dated 17.05.2017, the learned Civil Court referred 

to  the  case  of  Muhammad  Hanif  VS  Mukarram  Khan  (PLD  1996 

Lahore 58), wherein reference was made to judgments holding that 

since  notice  of  a  divorce  to  the  Chairman,  Local  Council  is  not 

mandatory under the injunctions of Islam, the failure to  send such a 

notice  to  the  Chairman,  Local  Council,  does  not  make  the  divorce 

ineffective  in  Shariah.  Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  a  second 

marriage  of  such  a  divorced  women  to  another  person  after  the 

expiry  of the iddat  period  is not invalid. On the basis of the law  laid 

down  in  the  said  case,  the  learned  Civil  Court  held  that  the 

petitioner’s  marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the 

certificate of effectiveness of divorce was valid. Additionally, it was 

held that even if it was conceded that the petitioner’s marriage with 

Shahzad  Gul  was  dissolved  with  effect  from  the  date  of  the 

execution  of  the  divorce  deed,  even  then  the  petitioner’s  second 

marriage with Mr. Bhatti could not be considered as void.  

20.  The  learned  Appellate  Court  differed  with  the  findings  of  the 

learned  Civil  Court.  The  view  taken  by  the  learned  Appellate  Court 

was  that  since  the  petitioner’s  status  as  Mr.  Bhatti’s  wife  was  a 

disputed  question  of  fact  which  cannot  be  resolved  in    summary 

 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

9 

proceedings  for  the  issuance  of  a  succession  certificate,  the 

learned Trial Court should have directed that  the petitioner’s share 

in  Mr.  Bhatti’s  legacy  be  kept  in  reserve  in  the  Court  account  until 

she  gets  a  decree  from  a  Civil  Court  regarding  her  status  as  Mr. 

Bhatti’s  widow.  Furthermore,  it  was  observed  by  the  learned 

Appellate  Court  that  after  the  petitioner  is  successful  in  getting  a 

decree in her favour, she would be entitled to receive her share from 

the  learned  Civil  Court,  and  in  the  event,  she  is  not  able  to  get  a 

decree  in  her  favour,  the  said  share  would  be  distributed  amongst 

Mr.  Bhatti’s  remaining  legal  heirs.  In  holding  so,  the  learned 

Appellate  Court  placed  reliance  on  the 

judgment  of  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Mst.  Jameela  Akhtar  VS  Public  at 

large (2002 SCMR 1544).  

21.  The  instant  case  is  not  the  first  one  in  which  a  woman  had 

contracted a second marriage prior to the issuance of the certificate 

of  effectiveness  of  divorce  with  respect  to  her  first  marriage.  The 

facts  in  the  case  of  Allah  Dad  VS  Mukhtar  (1992  SCMR  1273)  were 

that Mst. Rashida Akhtar was initially divorced orally by her husband 

and  later  through  a  divorce  deed  dated  17.05.1981.  Mst.  Rashida 

Akhtar  took  the  plea  that  she  contracted  a  second  marriage  with 

Mukhtar  after  she  had  been  divorced  by  her  first  husband.  This 

marriage  had  taken  place  prior  to  the  issuance  of  a  notice  to  the 

Chairman,  Arbitration  Council,  or  the  issuance  of  a  certificate  for 

effectiveness of divorce. The Hon'ble Shariat Appellate Bench of the 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  held  that  Mst.  Rashida  Akhtar’s  second 

marriage was not invalid. In paragraphs-19 and 20 of the said report, 

it was held as follows:- 

“19. Therefore, even if it is assumed that section 7 of the Family 
Laws Ordinance is a good law, the same cannot affect the validity of 
a marriage contracted according to Shariah at least to the extent of 
the criminal liability envisaged in the Ordinance. 

20. It is now evident that a notice of Talaq to the Chairman is not 
mandatory  under  the  Injunctions  of  Islam  and  any  divorce 
pronounced or written by a husband cannot be ineffective or invalid 
in Shariah merely because its notice has not been given to the 
Chairman, therefore, if a woman after obtaining a divorce from her 
husband and after the necessary period of ‘Iddat’ contracts a 
marriage with a third person, their marriage cannot be held as 

 
 
 
  
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

10 

invalid marriage, at least for the purpose of the Ordinance. In the 
instant case, the respondents have contracted Nikah after the 
petitioner had divorced Mst. Rashida Akhtar (respondent No.2), so 
even though the petitioner had not given a notice to the Chairman, 
the  divorce  became  effective  in  Shariah  and  the  marriage 
contracted thereafter is a valid marriage, especially for the purpose 
of the Ordinance and the cohabitation of the respondents cannot be 
held as ‘Zina’.” 

22.  Additionally, in the case of Mst. Zahida Shaheen VS The State 

(1994 SCMR 2098), it was observed that it had been generally found 

that people do not send a notice of talaq to the Chairman, Arbitration 

Council,  as  required  under  the  M.F.L.O.  Furthermore,  it  was  held 

that  failure  to  send  a  notice  of  talaq  to  the  Chairman,  Arbitration 

Council, does not render the divorce ineffective in Shariah.  

23.  Now the dicta in the case of Allah Dad VS Mukhtar (supra) and 

Mst.  Zahida  Shaheen  VS  The  State  (supra)  came  to  be  considered 

by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kaneez Fatima VS Wali 

Muhammad (PLD 1993 S.C. 901), wherein it was observed that in the 

fields  not  occupied  by  statutory  dispensation,  principles  of  Islamic 

common law or principles in conformity with injunctions of Islam can 

be  pressed  into  service.  Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  Courts  were 

not  vested  with  the  jurisdiction  to  declare  a  law  void  on  the 

touchstone  of  Article  2-A  as  distinguished  from  Article  8  of  the 

Constitution.  

24.  Article 8(2) of the Constitution provides that the State shall not 

make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by 

Chapter-I  of  the  Constitution  and  any  law  made  in  contravention  of 

the said  clause shall, to the extent  of  such contravention,  would  be 

void.  Article  8(3)(b)  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  the  provisions 

of Article 8 shall not apply to laws specified in the First Schedule to 

the Constitution. The M.F.L.O. is one of the laws which finds mention 

in  Part-II  of  the  First  Schedule  to  the  Constitution.  Accordingly,  in 

the case of Kaneez Fatima VS Wali Muhammad (supra), it was held 

that “under Article 8(3)(b) the provisions of Article 8 will not apply to 

the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 and cannot be declared 

void in so far as it is inconsistent with the fundamental rights.” It  is 

pertinent to bear in mind that the dicta in the cases of Allah Dad VS 

Mukhtar  (supra)  and  Zahida  Shaheen  VS  The  State  (supra)  have  to 

 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

11 

be  understood  in  the  light  to  subsequent  judgment  in  the  case  of 

Kaneez  Fatima  VS  Wali  Muhammad  (supra),  wherein  it  has  been 

unambiguously held that the M.F.L.O. was an existing law which had 

not  been  declared  by  the  Federal  Shariat  Court  or  the  Shariat 

Appellate  Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  to  be  in  conflict  with  the 

injunctions of Islam. It was also pointed out that the judgment in the 

case of Mirza Qamar Raza VS Mst. Tahira Begum (PLD 1988 Karachi 

169), declaring Section 7 of M.F.L.O. to be void on account of being 

against  the  injunctions  of  Islam,  had  been  set-aside  by  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court.  After  a  read  of  the  judgment  in  Kaneez  Fatima’s 

case (supra),  it is  safe to  conclude  that Section 7  of the M.F.L.O.  is 

very much an existing law, and is to be interpreted in the light of the 

law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the said case.  

25.  The  petitioner’s  first  husband,  Shahzad  Gul,  gave  evidence 

before the learned Civil Court as AW-3. In his evidence, Shahzad Gul 

had deposed that he had divorced the petitioner on 14.04.2010, and 

that the divorce deed was prepared on 19.12.2012. The petitioner’s 

testimony before the learned Civil Court was consistent with that of 

Shahzad Gul’s. Now if 14.04.2010 is taken to be date of the divorce, 

the  iddat  period  had  clearly  expired  prior  to  the  petitioner’s 

marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti.  This  Court  cannot  ignore  the  consistent 

evidence given by Shahzad Gul as AW-3 and the petitioner as AW-1 

that they had got divorced on 14.04.2010. The petitioner’s marriage 

with Mr. Bhatti was clearly after the expiry of the iddat period if the 

same is to be counted from 14.04.2010. In the case of Kaneez Fatima 

VS Wali Muhammad (supra), it was held as follows:- 

“In a case where with the consent of both the parties divorce 
effected  and  confirmed  in  writing  under  their  undisputed 
signatures, Section 7 should not be strictly construed particularly in 
cases where penal provision of Section 7(2) is to be enforced 
because in such cases the parties do not willfully commit breach 
and bonafide believe that they had been divorced with the consent 
of each other and sending of notice to the Chairman, Union Council, 
is a mere formality. The notice can be sent at any time thereafter to 
comply with the provisions of Section 7.” 

26.  Now  in  allowing  respondents  No.1  to  3’s  appeal,  the  learned 

Appellate Court placed reliance on the law laid down in the case of 

Mst.  Jameela  Akhtar  VS  Public  at  Large  (2002  SCMR  1544).  In  the 

 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

12 

said case, the deceased’s sister had filed a petition for the issuance 

of  a  succession  certificate  regarding  the  amount  lying  in  the 

deceased’s bank accounts. In the said petition, the deceased’s two 

widows  namely,  Mst.  Jameela  Akhtar  and  Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed, 

were  also  impleaded  as  parties.  Mst.  Jameela  Akhtar  objected  to 

Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed's  status  as  the  deceased’s  widow.  The 

Nikkahnama  produced  by  Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed  had  contained  a 

name different to hers. Nevertheless, the learned Civil Court issued 

the  succession  certificate  which  included  Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed’s 

name.  The  order  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  was  maintained 

by  the  learned  Appellate  Court  as  well  as  the  learned  Revisional 

Court.  Against  the  said  concurrent  orders,  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court  partly  allowed  Mst.  Jameela  Akhtar’s  appeal.  An  option  was 

given  to  Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed  to  file  a  civil  suit  to  establish  her 

status as the deceased’s widow. Furthermore, it was observed that 

if Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed  succeeded  in getting  a decree,  the amount 

already  received  by  her  under  the  succession  certificate  may  be 

retained  by  her,  and  in  case  the  suit  is  decided  against  her,  she 

would have to refund the amount so that it is distributed amongst the 

deceased’s legal heirs. The Hon'ble Supreme Court had passed the 

said order after holding that the Nikkahnama on which Mst. Umat-ul-

Hameed  placed  reliance  prima-facie  appeared  to  be  a  mutilated 

document. Furthermore, it was held as follows:- 

“4.      We  find  that  the  trial  Court  while  granting  succession 
certificate to respondent No.2, should have directed that no share 
of the said amount should be paid to Mst. Umat-ul-Hameed unless 
she gets a decree from the Civil Court about her status as widow of 
Muhammad Zafarullah Khan, deceased, for such a question could 
not be decided in summary proceedings.” 

27.  The facts in the instant case cannot be equated with the ones 

in Mst. Jameela Akhtar’s case. In the instant case, it is an admitted 

position  that  the  petitioner  had  got  married  to  Mr.  Bhatti  on 

26.01.2013, whereas in Mst. Jameela Akhtar’s case, the very Nikkah 

between  Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed  and  the  deceased  was  in  doubt. 

Additionally,  in  Mst.  Jameela  Akhtar’s  case,  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court had observed that the Nikkahnama produced by Mst. Umat-ul-

Hameed  prima-facie  appeared  to  be  a  mutilated  document.  In  the 

 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

13 

instant  case,  respondents  No.1  to  3  do  not  question  the  factum  of 

the Nikkah  between  the  petitioner  and  Mr.  Bhatti  but  they  take  the 

position  that  the  said Nikkah  was  void  on  account  of  having  taken 

place  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the  certificate  of  effectiveness  of 

divorce.  

28.  Even if it is assumed that petitioner’s marriage with Mr. Bhatti 

took place prior to the expiry of the iddat period, at best, it could be 

said  that  the  marriage  was  irregular  but  certainly  not  void.  In  the 

case  of  Muhammad  Sher  VS  Additional  Sessions  Judge/Justice  of 

Peace,  District  Khushab  (2016  CLC  717),  one  Mujahid  Iqbal  was 

accused of committing zina by contracting marriage with a divorced 

lady  before  the  completion  of  the Iddat  period.  The  Hon'ble  Lahore 

High  Court,  after  referring  to  Verse  No.228  in  Surah  Al-Baqarah, 

held as follows:- 

“It is settled Islamic law that the marriage entered into divorced 
lady before the completion of Iddat period would be irregular 
marriage and not void marriage as per law laid down in Mullah's 
Muhammadan Law. Marriage which is irregular cannot be treated 
as void marriage. The union of husband and wife in [an] irregular 
marriage cannot be regarded against un-Islamic or Shariah. Alleged 
female  accused having been divorced by previous husband if 
produced divorce-deed, would be valid when previous husband has 
not come forward to deny or dispute the validity of “Talaq-nama.” 

29.  Since the certificate of effectiveness of divorce was issued by 

the  Chairman,  Arbitration  Council,  Islamabad,  prior  to  Mr.  Bhatti’s 

demise,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  irregularity  (if  at  all  any)  in 

petitioner’s marriage with Mr. Bhatti, stood cured.  

30. 

It  ought  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  the  case  of  Mst.  Jameela 

Akhtar VS Public at Large (supra), it is only after a prima-facie view 

was  taken  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  that  the  Nikkahnama  in 

question  in  that  case  was  a  “mutilated document”  that  it  was 

observed that the Trial Court should not have released Mst. Umat-ul-

Hameed’s  share  until  she  got  a  decree  as  to  her  status  being  a 

widow of the deceased from a Civil  Court.  The peculiar  facts  of the 

instant case read with the law laid down in the case of Mst. Kaneez 

Fatima  VS  Wali  Muhammad  (supra),  does  not  lead  me  to  form  a 

prima-facie  view  that  the  petitioner’s  marriage  with  Mr.  Bhatti  was 

 
 
  
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

14 

invalid so as to deny the issuance of a succession certificate in her 

favour. 

31. 

It  is  an  admitted  position  that  the  petition  for  the  grant  of 

succession certificate was filed by the petitioner under Section 373 

of  the  Succession  Act,  1925,  and  that  the  proceedings  before  the 

learned  Civil  Court  were  summary  in  nature.  Intricate  questions 

could  not  be  resolved  in  such  proceedings.  Questions  of  title  to 

property  have  to  be  left  to  be  decided  in  a  suit  before  a  Court  of 

plenary  jurisdiction.  Reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the 

following case law:-  

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Malik  Muhammad  Rafique  VS  Mst.  Tanveer 

Jahan  (PLD  2015  Islamabad  30), 

it  was  held  that  the 

proceedings  under  the  Succession  Act,  1925,  were  of  a 

summary nature and intricate questions could not be resolved 

in such proceedings.  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Samina  Sikandar  VS  Public-at-Large  (PLD 

2011 Lahore 192), it has been held that summary proceedings 

under  section  373  of  the  Succession  Act,  1925,  are  to 

determine  whether  the  petitioner  had  a  right  to  a  succession 

certificate.  Furthermore, 

it  was  held  that  a  succession 

certificate is not a final adjudication of the question as to who 

is  the  next  heir,  and  the  grant  of  such  a  certificate  merely 

clothes  its  holder  with  an  authority  to  realize  the  debts  of  the 

deceased  and  to  give  an  authority  of  discharge.  The  Hon'ble 

Lahore  High  Court  also  quoted  with  approval  the  following 

passage  from  the  judgment  in  the  case  of  Banarasi  Dass  VS 

Tekka Dutta ((2005) 4 SCC 4491).  

“8.  Succession Certificate neither gives any general power 
of  administration  on  the  estate  of  the  deceased  nor 
establishes title of the grantee as the heir of the deceased. It 
only furnishes the grantee with authority to collect debts due 
to the deceased and allows the debtors to make payments to 
him  without  incurring  loss.  Thus  the  object  of  the 
said certificate is to facilitate the collection of the debts, to 
regulate the administration of Succession and to protect 
person who deals with the alleged representatives.” 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Allah  Nawaz  Khan  VS  Fareda  Fatima  Khanum 

(PLJ 1999 Lahore 662), it was observed that the procedure for 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

15 

dealing  with  the  disposal  of  the  petition  for  the  grant  of  a 

succession  certificate  was  given 

in  section  373  of  the 

Succession Act, 1925. The said section was interpreted in the 

following terms:- 

“…Court has to follow the summary procedure and if it cannot 
resolve  any  intricate  question  of  law  and  facts,  it  may 
nevertheless grant a certificate to the applicant if he appears 
to be a person having prima facie the best title thereto. 
However, while granting certificate to the person who has 
prima facie title, would leave the other person to establish his 
right by a regular suit. This means that the Court has to deal 
with the matter summarily leaving aside the intricate question 
of law and facts and only issue certificate to such party who 
has a prima facie case of entitlement to such certificate.” 

32.  The  learned  Civil  Court,  vide  order  dated  17.05.2017,  had 

allowed the petitioner’s application for the issuance of a succession 

certificate  in  favour  of  Mr.  Bhatti’s  legal  heirs,  including  the 

petitioner,  subject  to  the  “filing of local surety bonds in the equal 

amount to the satisfaction of [Civil] Court.”  All  the  legal  heirs  were 

held  to  be  entitled  to  withdraw  their  respective  shares  from  Mr. 

Bhatti’s  legacy  separately  and  independently.  The  requirement  to 

furnish  surety  bonds  is  in  conformity  with  Section  375  of  the 

Succession  Act,  1925,  which  empowers  the  Court  to  requisition 

security  from  the  grantee  of  the  succession  certificate.  The  said 

Section provides inter alia that the Court may require, as a condition 

precedent  to  the  granting  of  a  succession  certificate,  that  the 

person  to  whom  the  Court  proposes  to  make  the  grant  shall  give  a 

bond  with  one  or  more  sureties,  or  other  sufficient  security,  for 

rendering  an  account  of  debts  and  securities  received  by  him  and 

for  indemnity  of  persons  who  may  be  entitled  to  the  whole  or  any 

part of those debts and securities.  In the case of Muhammad Javed 

Akhtar  VS  Public-in-Large  (1987  CLC  262),  the  Hon'ble  Mr.  Justice 

Saeeduzzaman  Siddiqui 

(as  he 

then  was)  explained 

the 

circumstances  in  which  the  person  applying  for  the  issuance  of  a 

succession certificate is required to furnish a surety in the following 

terms:- 

“A careful examination of the provisions of section 373 will show 
that, under subsection (2) of section 373, where the Judge, dealing 
with an applicant for grant of Succession Certificate, reaches the 
conclusion that the right belongs to the applicant, he is bound to 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

16 

make an order for grant of Certificate to him. However, in cases, 
which are covered under subsection (3) or subsection (4) of section 
373, if the Judge is of the view that the right claimed by the 
applicant cannot be decided without determining intricate and 
difficult questions  of law  and  fact, or, where  there  are more 
applicants than one and it appears to the Judge that more than one 
of such applicants are interested in the estate of the deceased, the 
Judge may nevertheless grant the Certificate in both such cases to 
such of the applicants who appear to be having a prima facie best 
title and fitness to the grant of such certificate. However, in respect 
of these two classes of cases, which are covered under subsection 
(3) or subsection (4) of section 373, the power of the Judge to grant 
the Succession Certificate is circumscribed to the condition that, 
before granting such Certificate, he must require the person in 
whose favour he grants the Certificate to give sufficient security as 
a condition precedent for rendering the account of debts and 
securities received by him and for indemnity of the person, who may 
be entitled to the whole or any part of those debts and securities.” 
(Emphasis added)  

33.  The learned Appellate Court, by directing that the petitioner’s 

share  in  Mr.  Bhatti’s  legacy  be  kept  in  reserve  until  she  gets  a 

decree about her status as Mr. Bhatti’s widow appears to have been 

ignorant  of  the  mandate  in  Section  373(3)  of  the  Succession  Act, 

1925,  which  provides  that  if  a  Judge  cannot  decide  the  right  to  the 

certificate without determining questions of law or fact which seem 

to  be  too  intricate  and  difficult  for  determination  in  a  summary 

proceeding, he may nevertheless grant a certificate to the applicant 

if  he  appears  to  be  the  person  having  prima-facie  the  best  title 

thereto. Now as mentioned above, respondents No.1 to 3 have filed 

a civil suit praying for a declaration to the effect that the petitioner is 

not Mr. Bhatti’s legal heir. The basis on which respondents No.1 to 3 

seek  the  said  declaration  is  that  the  petitioner  had  contracted 

marriage with Mr.  Bhatti,  while  her first marriage with  Shahzad  Gul 

was  still  subsisting.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  or  not  the  said 

suit  would  be  decreed.  It  would  be  for  respondents  No.1  to  3  to 

prove  before  the  learned  Civil  Court  that  the  petitioner’s  marriage 

with Mr. Bhatti was not valid, or that she was not one of Mr. Bhatti’s 

legal  heirs.  Until  the  said  suit  is  decreed,  the  petitioner  cannot  be 

deprived of her share in Mr. Bhatti’s legacy. The learned Civil Court 

has  been  cautious  by  allowing  the  petitioner’s  application  for  the 

issuance of the succession certificate subject to filing of local surety 

bonds in equal amounts to the satisfaction of the Court. By ordering 

 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

17 

so, the interests of respondents No.1 to 3 have been secured by the 

learned  Civil  Court.  Furthermore,  the  said  order 

is  also 

in 

consonance with Section 373(3) of the Succession Act, 1925.  

34.  Recently,  in  the  case  of  Liaqat  Zaman  Khan  VS  Mst.  Tazeem 

Akhtar  (2017  YLR  150),  Mst.  Tazeem  Akthar,  claiming  to  be  the 

widow of the late Ahmed Zaman Khan, filed an application before the 

learned  Civil  Court  for  the  issuance  of  a  succession  certificate 

regarding 

the  deceased’s 

legacy.  The  deceased’s  siblings 

contested the said petition by taking the plea that the deceased had 

divorced Mst. Tazeem Akhtar during his lifetime. They had also filed 

a civil  suit praying  for  a declaration  to the effect that the deceased 

had  divorced  Mst.  Tazeem  Akhtar  during  his  lifetime.  After  the 

recording  of  evidence,  the  learned  Civil  Court  allowed  the  petition 

for  the  issuance  of  the  succession  certificate  subject  to  the 

furnishing of surety bonds in the sum of Rs.50,00,000/- with two local 

and  reliable  sureties  each  in  the  like  amount  to  the  effect  that  in 

case,  the  learned  Civil  Court  declared  Mst.  Tazeem  Akhtar  as  the 

divorcee  of  the  deceased,  she  would  be  bound  to  return  the  share 

collected  by  her  from  the  deceased’s  movable  legacy.  An  appeal 

against the order  of the learned Civil Court was filed on the ground 

that  the  deceased’s  siblings  had  filed  the  said  civil  suit  for 

declaration. The Hon'ble Peshawar High Court did not interfere with 

the order allowing Mst. Tazeem Akhtar’s petition for the issuance of 

a succession certificate. Furthermore, it was held as follows:- 

“It may not be out of place to also refer to the provision of section 
383 of the Succession Act, 1925 whereby a certificate may be 
revoked for any of the reasons enumerated in the section including 
a decree or order made by a competent Court in a suit or other 
proceeding with respect to effects comprising debts or securities 
specified  in  the  certificate  rendering  it  proper  to  revoke  the 
certificate. In addition to the above, there is a safeguard to the 
rightful claimant(s) and liability of holder of succession certificate to 
the former under section 387 of the Succession Act, 1925. 

4. In any case, when the law allowed the Judge to grant the 
certificate to the applicant who appeared to be a person having 
prima facie the best title thereto, notwithstanding a rival claim 
appearing to Judge too intricate and difficult to determine in a 
summary proceedings, there was nothing wrong with the impugned 
order of learned Senior Civil Judge, Haripur, after 'Nikah' between 
the deceased and respondent No.1 was proved and the so-called 
divorce, the onus of which was admittedly on the appellants who 

 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

18 

claimed the same, could not be proved on record in the summary 
proceedings for issuance of succession certificate. Needless to say 
that the appellants have already lodged a civil suit for declaration 
with regard to the factum of divorce which has been adjourned sine-
die on the application of the appellants; therefore, the proper 
course for the appellants would be to get proceedings in the said 
suit restored/revived for the desired purpose. It may not be out of 
place to point out here that in accordance with the letter and spirit 
of relevant provisions of law, the learned Senior Civil Judge has 
clearly held that respondent No.1 shall be considered as widow of 
the  deceased  unless  and  until  her  alleged  divorce,  which  is 
disputed, is established by the decree of a competent civil Court.”  

35. 

In the case at hand, the mere fact that  the learned Civil Court 

allowed  the  petitioner’s  application  for  the 

issuance  of  the 

succession  certificate  would  not,  in  any  manner,  prejudice  or  have 

any adverse effect on the abovementioned suit for declaration, etc., 

instituted  by  respondents  No.1  to  3.  At  this  stage,  it  would  be 

pertinent  to  reproduce herein below  Section 387  of the  Succession 

Act, 1925:- 

“387. Effect of decisions under this Act, and liability of holder of 
certificate  thereunder.  No  decision  under  this  Part  upon  any 
question of right between any parties shall be held to bar the trial of 
the same question in any suit or in any other proceeding between 
the same parties, and nothing in this Part shall be construed to 
affect the liability of any person who may receive the whole or any 
part of any debt or security, or any interest or dividend on any 
security to account therefor to the person lawfully entitled thereto.” 

36. 

In  the  event  respondents  No.1  to 3  succeed  in their  suit,  they 

would  then  be  in  a  position  to  apply  for  the  revocation  of  the  order 

dated  17.05.2017  to  the  extent  of  granting  a  succession  certificate 

to the petitioner and, upon such revocation, the petitioner will have 

to  return  the  amount  received  by  her  pursuant  to  the  order  dated 

17.05.2017,  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court.  In  this  regard, 

Section  383(e)  of  the  Succession  Act,  1925,  provides  that  a 

succession  certificate  granted  may  be  revoked  where  a  decree  or 

order made by a competent Court in a suit or other proceeding with 

respect  to  effects  comprising  debts  or  securities  specified  in  the 

certificate renders it proper that the certificate should be revoked.  

37.  As  mentioned  above,  the petitioner’s  suit for  declaration etc., 

is also pending before the learned Civil Court. The ultimate result of 

the said suit would also have a bearing on the question whether the 

 
 
 
                                                                                    C.R.No.307/2017 

19 

succession certificate granted to the petitioner would be liable to be 

revoked.  

38. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  allowed,  and  the 

impugned  judgment  dated  27.07.2017,  passed  by  the  learned 

Appellate  Court  is  set-aside,  and  the  order  dated  17.05.2017, 

passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  is  restored.  The  learned  Civil 

Courts  shall  decide  the  petitioner’s  and  respondents  No.1  to  3’s 

suits for declaration etc., independently and shall not be influenced 

by any observations herein. There shall be no order as to costs.  

39.  Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  I  deem  it  appropriate  to 

record  my  appreciation  for  the  invaluable  assistance  rendered  by 

the  learned  amicus curiae  as  well  as  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting parties.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2018. 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                                    (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
