ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

C.R. No.53/2019 
Syed Pir Ghulam Moin-ul-Haq Gillani & another 
VS
Bibi Aziz Fatima (deceased) through legal heirs & 12 others 

Petitioners by: 

Syed Muhammad Ali Bukhari, Advocate.  

Respondents by: 

Syed Ishfaq Hussain Naqvi, Advocate for 
Respondent No.1.  

Mr. Usman Ali Ch., Advocate for 
Respondent No.13.  

Date of Hearing: 

08.03.2021. 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J: Through the instant Civil Revision 

petition,  the  petitioners  have  called  in  question  order  of  the  learned  Civil 

Judge  1st  Class  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  20.10.2018,  whereby  application 

filed by the petitioners under Section 12(2) CPC has been dismissed.  

2. 

Succinctly,  Bibi  Aziz  Fatima  (deceased),  represented  through  legal 

heirs, had filed a civil suit for declaration, cancellation of documents along 

with  permanent  injunction  against  her  brother  Maqbool  Hussain  and 

others  with  respect  to  her  share  in  her  father’s  properties  i.e.  land 

measuring 26 Kanal situated in Golra Sharif and land measuring 11 Kanal, 

14  Marla, situated  in  Darek  Mohri,  Islamabad.  The  suit  was  decreed  vide 

ex-parte  judgment  and  decree  dated  09.04.2012,  as  such,  petitioners 

namely Syed Pir Ghulam Moin-ul-Haq Gillani and Syed Pir Ghulam Qutb-

ul-Haq Gillani were not impleaded in the suit, who otherwise claim to be 

bonafide  purchaser  of  suit  properties  against  certain  sale  consideration, 

which compelled them to file application under  Section 12(2) CPC, which 

has been dismissed vide impugned order dated 20.10.2018. Hence, instant 

civil revision petition.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R. No.53/2019  

            Page | 2 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioners  contended  that  ex-parte  judgment 

and  decree,  dated  09.04.2012,  were  obtained  by  misrepresentation,  fraud 

and concealment of facts as neither petitioners were impleaded in the suit 

nor had they been served any notice or summon, as such, petitioners have 

been condemned unheard, which is against the principle of natural justice 

but,  the  learned  trial  Court  has  not  appreciated  all  these  facts  and 

circumstances  of  the  case  and  decreed  the  suit  ex-parte,  even  otherwise, 

application  filed  thereto  under  Section  12(2)  CPC  has  also  been  not 

adjudicated  upon  in  accordance  with  law  and  dismissed  the  same 

defeating the very norms of justice.  

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondents No.1 and 13 contended 

that  after  the  demise  of  father  of  respondent  No.1,  her  brother  Maqbool 

Hussain Shah with malafide intention had not mentioned her name in the 

mutation of inheritance, which was later on added on an application filed 

by  respondent  No.1;  that  prior  to  said  correction  of  name,  the  said 

Maqbool  Hussain  Shah  had  illegally  sold  out  the  entire  land  to  the 

petitioners and others depriving respondent No.1 of her legal share to her 

father’s legacy; that the learned trial Court has rightly appreciated the facts 

and circumstances of the case and decreed the suit in accordance with law.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioners  are  mainly  aggrieved 

with  the  judgment  and  decree,  dated  09.04.2012,  passed  by  learned  Civil 

Court  in  favour  of  Bibi  Aziz  Fatima  (respondent  No.1),  whereby  she  has 

been allowed to get benefit of inheritance from her late father, Pir Ghulam 

Rasool Shah. After the demise of said Pir Ghulam Rasool Shah, inheritance 

mutation  No.442,  dated  23.06.1972,  revenue  estate  of  Golra  Sharif, 

Islamabad (Exh.P2) and inheritance mutation No.253, dated 18.12.1972, in 

revenue  estate  of  Darek  Mohri,  Islamabad  (Exh.P3)  were  sanctioned, 

 
 
C.R. No.53/2019  

            Page | 3 

whereby  share  of  respondent  No.1  was  omitted  allegedly  by  her  brother 

Syed  Maqbool  Hussain  Shah.  Accordingly,  Respondent  No.1  filed 

application  for  correction  of  mutation  before  the  Collector,  Islamabad, 

whereby the mutations were corrected vide inheritance mutation No.1531, 

dated 28.02.1998 (Exh.P4) of village Golra Sharif, Islamabad and mutation 

No.1294,  dated  28.02.1998  (Exh.P5)  of  village  Derik  Mohri,  Islamabad  by 

the Tehsildar, Islamabad, however prior to such correction the suit pieces 

of land were already sold by brother of respondent No.1.  

7. 

The present petitioners contended that they are bona fide purchasers 

of suit properties having been purchased from the first legal heir of late Pir 

Ghulam Rasool Shah and now they have further sold it out to subsequent 

vendees.  The  pleadings  of  the  petitioners  are  silent  qua  the  date  of 

knowledge  as  well  as  qua  the  date  when  they  have  attained  the  rights  in 

the  subject  property,  rather  the  application  under  Section  12(2)  CPC  had 

only been filed on one count that the petitioners had not been impleaded 

as parties in main civil suit, as such, they learnt about the ex-parte decree 

when  respondent  No.1  filed  execution  petition  before  the  learned 

Additional District Judge on 26.10.2013.  

8. 

The  above  mentioned  grounds,  if  considered  to  be  true,  even  then 

the  petitioners  have  no  direct  concern  with  the  correction  of  inheritance 

mutations,  which  otherwise  had  wrongly  been  incorporated  depriving 

respondent  No.1  of  the  legacy  of  her  father,  per  se,  the  same  could  be 

corrected  at  any  stage  inasmuch  as  such  mistake  surfaces  to  the  affectee. 

The  rights  of  petitioners  being  bona  fide  purchasers  are  considered  to  be 

protected  under  the  law  and,  as  such,  they  are  not  aggrieved  with  the 

judgment and decree passed in favour of respondent No.1, rather they can 

claim their rights against their vendor, if they have been deprived of any of 

their right qua the suit properties.  

 
 
C.R. No.53/2019  

            Page | 4 

9. 

At  last,  respondent  No.1  was  not  bound  to  implead  all  the 

subsequent vendees  in her suit qua the correction of her  legal heirship  in 

the  revenue  record,  which  is  only  against  her  rival  co-legal  heirs  i.e.  his 

brothers, who have deprived respondent No.1 of her father’s legacy, even 

otherwise, the petitioners have no direct right to become party in the main 

lis, which is within the family.  

10. 

The respondents have also raised objection that instant civil revision 

is time barred on the ground that the matter had initially been filed before 

learned  Additional  District Judge,  who  had  returned  it  on  04.02.2019  and 

later on, the petitioners have filed instant civil revision petition before this 

Court  on  19.02.2019  and,  as  such,  the  approach  of  petitioners  before  the 

wrong  forum  was  not  due  to  their  own  fault,  rather  the  jurisdiction  was 

exercised  on  the  basis  of  pecuniary  jurisdiction  /  valuation  fixed  by 

respondent No.1 in  the plaint, which reveals that the suit  was not valued 

for the purpose of jurisdiction in a proper manner, however when learned 

Additional  District  Judge  observed  that  the  valuation  has  neither  been 

fixed  in  the  plaint  nor  in  the  decree  sheet,  the  civil  revision  petition  was 

returned to be filed before the proper forum. In such eventuality, the time 

period consumed by the petitioners before the court of learned Additional 

District  Judge  is  protected  and,  as  such,  no  adverse  inference  could  be 

drawn in this regard.  

11. 

In  view  of  above,  no  question  of  fraud  or  misrepresentation  is 

reflected from the proceedings, rather the non-impleadment of petitioners 

in  the  civil  suit  filed  by  respondent  No.1  is  not  a  ground  to  set  aside  the 

ex-parte decree, especially when the concept of necessary party in terms of 

Order I Rule 10 CPC is that the person who ought to be joined as party to 

the  suit  and  in  whose  absence  an  effective  decree  could  not  be  passed  is 

called  necessary  party.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2013  SCMR  602  (Vidur 

 
 
C.R. No.53/2019  

            Page | 5 

Impex and Traders (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Tosh Apartments (Pvt.) Ltd.), 2005 SCMR 

564  (Allah  Dad  v.  Dhuman  Khan),  2003  SCMR  965  (Dr.  Saleem  Javed  v. 

Mst.  Fauzia  Nasim)  and  PLD  2002  SC  615  (Ghulam  Ahmad  Chaudhry  v. 

Akbar Hussain). It is also settled proposition that suit cannot be proceeded 

in  absence  of  necessary  party,  however  from  bare  reading  of  the  entire 

record, this Court  is  confident to hold that  the present petitioners are  not 

necessary  parties  to  be  impleaded  in  suit  unless  the  real  brothers  of 

respondent No.1 had contested the suit and claimed that land was sold out 

/ transferred by him, per se, such aspect is silent in the entire proceedings, 

though the petitioners contended that they are bona fide purchasers, who 

have already transferred the land to subsequent vendees, therefore, at this 

stage, petitioners have no case for interference by this Court.  

12. 

In  view  of  above  position,  the  instant  civil  revision  petition 

is DISMISSED. 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
 JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 17th March, 2021. 

JUDGE 

Khalid Z. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
