Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

R.F.A. No.163/2013 

Kaniz Fatima 

VS

Tamiz ul Haque & another 

Appellant by 

Respondents by 

: 

: 

Barrister Faisal Iqbal, Advocate. 
Barrister Salman Khan, Advocates. 

Mr Amir Latif Gill, Advocate. 
Mr Rizwan Ahmed, Advocate. 
Mr Muhammad Anwar Dar, Advocate. 
Syed Javed Akbar Shah, Advocate.  
Mr Abdul Razzaq, Director (EM-I), CDA. 

Dates of Hearing 

: 

17-02-2023 

Arbab  Muhammad  Tahir,  J.-    This  Regular  First  Appeal  is 

directed  against  judgment  and  decree,  dated  03-07-2013,  passed  by 

the learned Civil Judge 1st Class (West), Islamabad, whereby the suit 

seeking  specific  performance  instituted  by  the  appellant  has  been 

dismissed.  

2. 

The  facts  recapitulated  from  the  available  record  are  that 

Tameezul  Haque  son  of  Muhammad  Safiullah/defendant  No.1  (the 

“Owner”)  is  the  owner  of  House  No.6,  Street  No.64,  Sector  F-8/4, 

Islamabad  (the  “Property”).  As  per  conveyance  deed,  dated  

07-10-1991,  the  Owner  is  allottee  of  the  Property  since  22-03-1966. 

The  Property  remained  the  subject  matter  of  litigations  at  various 

forums.  The  Property  was  earlier  notified  as  “abandoned  property” 

under the Abandoned Properties (Taking Over and  Management) Act, 

1975 and subsequently de-notified  on  13-04-1977. The property was 

later  rented  to  one  Akbar  Alam,  who  firstly  tried  to  reopen  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page-2 
RFA No.163/2013 

concluded  proceedings  under  the  Abandoned  Properties  (Taking  Over 

and  Management)  Act,  1976,  and  secondly  claimed  ownership  of  the 

Property.  However,  the  issue  relating  to  “abandoned  property”  was 

ultimately resolved in favour of the Owner by the Supreme Court vide 

order,  dated  21-10-2010  passed  in  Civil  Appeal  No.1027/2009.  In 

respect  of  the  other  disputes  i.e.  litigations  with  Akbar  Alam,  the 

Owner  had  to  enter  into  a  compromise  deed  dated  18-03-1997,  with 

him.  

Kaniz Fatima widow of Anwarul Haque, sister-in-law of the 

Owner (the “Appellant”) instituted a suit for specific performance of 

sale  agreements/contract  dated  24-05-1993  and  07-10-2009, 

declaration,  permanent  and  mandatory  injunctions  in  respect  of  the 

Property  against  the  Owner  on  12.09.2011.  The  Appellant  asserted 

her claim on the basis of agreement to sell dated 24-05-1993 and sale 

agreement dated 07-10-2009 (the “Agreements”). The Owner did not 

join the proceedings during trial, therefore, he was proceeded against  

ex-parte, whereas, the Capital Development Authority/defendant No.2 

(the  “CDA”)  contested  the  suit.  The  learned  trial  court  vide  order, 

dated 19-07-2012, framed the following issues:- 

1.  Whether 

the 

plaintiff 
into 
and 
dated 
agreement/contract 
agreement/contract  dated  07.10.2009  regarding 
house  No.6,  street  No.64,  Islamabad  with  the 
defendant No.1? OPP 

entered 
24.5.1993 

2.  Whether the defendant No.1 has received lump sum 
sale  consideration  from  the  plaintiff  and  defendant 
No.1 refused to transfer the suit house in the name 
of the plaintiff? OPP 

3.  Whether  the  defendants  are  bent  upon  to  transfer 
the  suit  house  in  the  name  of  someone  else  except 
the plaintiff illegally and unlawfully? OPP 

4.  Whether the plaintiff has come to court with unclean 

hands? OPD 

5.  Whether  the  plaintiff  has  no  cause  of  action  to  file 

instant suit? OPD 

6.  Whether  the  suit  of  the  plaintiff  is  false,  frivolous 
and  vexatious,  hence  answering  defendant 
is 
entitled to get special costs U/S 35-A CPC? OPD 

 
 
 
 
Page-3 
RFA No.163/2013 

7.  Relief. 

3. 

The  Appellant/plaintiff  produced  three  witnesses  i.e. 

Muhammad 

Imran 

Irshad  (PW-1),  Alama  Azfar  (PW-2)  and 

Muhammad  Faisal  Saeed  (PW-3)  whereas,  Adil  Hussain,  an  official  of 

the  CDA,  deposed  as  DW-1.  The  Appellant/plaintiff  adduced  the 

following document in support of her claim:- 

1.  Affidavit,  dated  04-09-2012  (Exh.P1)  (i.e.  Ex-in-

Chief of PW-1). 

2.  Special  Power  of  Attorney,  dated  24-08-2012 

(Exh.P2) 

3.  Agreement to sell dated 24-05-1993 (Exh.P-3) 
4.  Receipt of Payment dated 24-05-1993 (Exh.P4) 
5.  Sale Agreement, dated 07-10-2009 (Exh.P5) 
6.  Receipt of payment dated 07-10-2009 (Exh.P6) 
7.  Compromise Deed (Exh.P7) (executed by the Owner 

with Akbar Alam) 

8.  Copy  of  judgment  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 
Civil  Appeal  No.1027/2009  (Exh.P8)  (in  matter 
relating to abandoned property)  

9.  Affidavit dated 13-10-2012 (Exh.P9) (i.e. Ex-in-Chief 

of PW-2). 

10. Affidavit  dated  13-10-2012  (Exh.P-10)  (i.e.  Ex-in-

Chief of PW-3). 

4. 

The  learned  trial  court,  after  recording  pro  and  contra 

evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  CDA  and  affording  an  opportunity  of 

hearing to the parties, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff/Appellant vide 

the  impugned  judgment  and  decree,  dated  03-07-2013,  impugned 

through the instant appeal.  

5. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  argued  that;  the 

ownership of the Owner in respect of the Property is undisputed;  the 

evidence  led  by  Appellant/plaintiff  is  un-rebutted;  the  impugned 

judgment  and  decree  are  result  of  misreading  and  non-reading  of 

evidence;  that  the  learned  trial  court  erred  in  concluding  that  the 

witnesses have deposed that the signatures were made with one and 

the  same  pen;  the  findings  of  the  learned  trial  court  are  based  on 

surmises  and  conjectures;  section  53-A  of  the  Transfer  of  Property 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page-4 
RFA No.163/2013 

Act,  1882  declares  the  agreements  as  exempted  from  registration 

under the Registration Act, 1908 wherein possession has been handed 

over  to  the  purchaser  as  part  performance;  the  CDA  was  a  proforma 

party  and  could  not  have  contested  the  suit;  the  CDA  was  not 

supposed to be an adverse party, hence not entitled to cross-examine 

the witness of the Appellant; the fact that the Owner preferred not to 

contest  the  suit  lends  support  to  the  case  of  the  Appellant;  non-

appearance of the stamp vendors in support of the claim of Appellant 

is not fatal;  that attorney of the Appellant (PW-1) appeared and duly 

testified the relevant facts on oath on behalf of the Appellant; nothing 

has  been  placed  on  record  to  show  that  the  Owner  has  passed  away 

and that the alleged legal heirs are entitled to contest the claim of the 

Appellant;  the  alleged  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner  have  not  yet 

approached  the  court  of  plenary  jurisdiction  to  get  themselves 

declared as such; this Court cannot issue a declaration with regard to 

inheritance  and  entitlement  of  heirs  in  appeal  summarily;  this  Court 

without  framing  of  issues  and  recording  of  evidence  cannot  address 

any  additional  question  in  appeal;  reliance  has  been  placed  on  the 

case  of  “Mst.  Jameela  Akhter  v.  Public-at-Large”  [2002  SCMR  1544], 

“Muhammad Amir v. Khan Babadur and another” [PLD 1996 SC 267], 

“Khalid  Hussain  and  others  v.  Nazir  Ahmed  and  others”  [2121  SCMR 

1986],  “Mst.  Shahnaz  Begum  and  others  v.  Additional  District  Judge 

and others” [PLD 2021 Lahore 69], “Narayana Bharatigal Alias v. Ittuli 

amma  and  Ors.”  [AIR  1918  Madras  1103],  “Inayat  ur  Rehman  and 

others  v.  Shah  Jehan  and  others”  [2014  YLR  1978],  “Rehana  Ahson 

and another v. Zulfiqar Mohammad” [2021 CLC Sindh 901].   

6. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  CDA  has  argued  that;  as  per 

available  record  the  Property  is  still  owned  and  possessed  by  the 

Owner; the learned trial court has correctly appreciated the evidence; 

the Appellant did not enter the witness box;  the agreements and the 

receipts are unregistered; the agreements and receipts were tendered 

in  evidence  by  PW-1  who  is  a  stranger;  his  statement  is  not 

admissible in evidence. 

 
 
Page-5 
RFA No.163/2013 

7. 

Syed  Javed  Akbar  Shah,  ASC  tendered  appearance  on 

behalf  of  the  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner  (though  not  party  to  the 

appeal).  He  preferred  an  application  i.e.  C.M.No.451/2020  to  file  his 

power  of  attorney  on  behalf  of  the  legal  heirs.  He,  however,  was 

allowed  to  argue  the  appeal.  He  has  argued  that;  the  Appellant  is 

reluctant  to  appear  before  the  Court;  the  reply  of  the  affidavit  is  no 

reply in the eye of law; the Appellant is the real widow of the Owner 

and despite knowledge that he has died the Appellant preferred not to 

implead  the  applicants  as  respondents;  Bashir  Ahmed  son  of 

Muhammad  Ali  is  valid  attorney  of  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner;  reliance 

has  been  placed  on  Articles  46,  64  &  95  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat 

Order,  1984;  the  statement  of  the  attorney  i.e.  PW-1  is  inadmissible 

in evidence; the attorney was required to give evidence to the extent 

of  his  personal  knowledge;  in  fact  the  attorney  was  stranger  to  the 

transaction, relevant facts and  even  the  lis  in hand; the suit was not 

filed through the attorney; the appeal has been filed with considerable 

delay;  the  appeal  is  liable  to  be  dismissed  solely  being  barred  by 

limitation;  the  Appellant  never  remained  in  possession  of  the 

Property;  in  fact  the  agreements  were  executed  at  Karachi  and  the 

Appellant  asserts  that  on  the  same  day  possession  was  handed  over 

to her, which is impossible and does not appeal to common prudence; 

there  was  no  justification  as  to  why  the  appellant  did  not  enter  the 

witness box and instead deputed an attorney to depose on her behalf; 

the  signatures  of  the  Owner  on  the  documents  are  not  genuine;  the 

agreements are fake; the stamp vendors and the notary public did not 

enter  the  witness  box;  the  onus  to  prove  her  claim  was  on  the 

Appellant and she miserably failed to discharge her onus;  the instant 

appeal as well as the civil suit before the trial court were not filed by 

the  Appellant  rather  filed  and  pursued  by  irrelevant  persons  for 

ulterior motives and extraneous considerations; there is no proof as to 

how the Appellant managed the huge amount of sale consideration in 

cash; the Appellant could not show on the basis of record that she had 

 
 
Page-6 
RFA No.163/2013 

disposed-of  any  property  or  had  withdrawn  the  amount  from  a  bank 

account  or  had  borrowed  the  amount  from  anyone;  the  sale 

consideration  is  not  sufficient;  the  case  is  based  on  false  and  forged 

documents; reliance has been placed on the cases of “Syed Haji Abdul 

Wahid  and  another  v.  Syed  Sirajuddin”  [1998  SCMR  2296],  “Mst. 

Shahnaz  Akhtar  and  another  v.  Syed  Ehsan  ur  Rehman  and  others” 

[2022  SCMR  1398],  “Aki  Habara  Electric  Corporation  (Pte.)  Ltd.  V. 

Hyper  Magnetic  Industries  (Pvt.)  Limited  through  Chief  Executive/ 

Director/Secretary”  [PLD  2003  Karachi  420],  “Muhammad  Aslam  v. 

Mst.  Gulraj  Begum”  [1989  SCMR  1],  “Shah  Nawaz  and  another  v.  

Nawab  Khan”  [PLD  1976  SC  767],  “Mst.  Asma  Naz  v.  Muhammad 

Younas  Qureshi”  [2003  YLR  Lahore  587],  “Lal  Baz  and  another  v. 

Gulab  represented  by  Legal  Heirs”  [1989  CLC  Lahore  8],  “Mst.  Rasul 

Bibi v. Qadar Dad  and another” [1991 MLD Lahore 2008], “Mulchand 

Hemraj v. Jairamdas Chaturbhuj and others” [AIR 1935 Bombay 287].   

8. 

9. 

Heard. Record perused.  

The  questions  of  law  which  have  emerged  from  the 

arguments  of  the  learned  counsels,  (i)  whether  the  unregistered 

agreements  (Exh.P-3  and  Exh.P-5)  confer  any  legal  right  on  the 

plaintiff/Appellant;  (ii)  whether  section  53-A  of  the  Transfer  of 

Property  Act,  1882  (Act  of  1882)  exempts  any  document  from 

mandatory 

registration  under 

the  Registration  Act,  1908 

(Registration  Act)  and,  (iii)  the  extent  and  admissibility  of  the 

evidence recorded on behalf of a principal  by a person holding power 

of attorney.  

10. 

I shall first answer the question, whether the unregistered 

agreements  (Exh.P-3  and  Exh.P-5)  confer  any  right  on  the  plaintiff/ 

Appellant and in this regard section 54 of the Act of 1882 and section 

49 of the Registration Act are relevant, which are reproduced below.-  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page-7 
RFA No.163/2013 

Sec. 54, Transfer of Property Act, 1882 

“54.  Sale  defined. 'Sale' is a transfer of ownership 
in exchange for a price paid or promised or part paid and 
part promised.  

Sale  how  made.  Such  transfer,  in  the  case  of 
tangible  immovable  property  of  the  value  of  one  hundred 
rupees and upwards, or in the case of a reversion or other 
intangible  thing,  can  be  made  only  by  a  registered 
instrument.  

Sec. 49, Registration Act, 1908 

“49.  Effect  of  non-registration  of  documents 
required  to  be  registered.  No  document  required  to  be 
registered  under  this  Act  or  under  any  earlier  law 
providing for or relating to registration of documents shall  

(a)  operate  to  create,  declare,  assign,  limit  or 
extinguish, whether in present or in future any 
right,  title  or  interest,  whether  vested  or 
contingent to or in immovable property or  

(b) 

confer any power to adopt, unless it has been 
registered.” 

11. 

It  has  been  observed  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 

Muhammad Iqbal’s1 case that “when questioned as to what is sale and 

how  a  sale  is  made,  though  the  provisions  of  section  54  of  the 

Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (the Act) have been read, but learned 

counsel  has  not  been  able  to  establish  if  the  property  could  at  all  be 

sold  in  favour  of  Allah  Rakha  through  an  unregistered  agreement  to 

sell.  It  is  also  mandated  in  the  second  part  of  section  54  of  the  Act 

that  such  an  agreement  would  not  confer  any  right  to  the  property. 

Moreover  the  provisions  of  section  49  of  the  Registration  Act,  1908 

read with section 17 of the Act also come in the way of the appellants 

as the agreement to sell of the property would not confer any title in 

favour  of  Allah  Rakha  allegedly  executed  by  Barkat  Ali  which  could 

further  confer  any  rights  in  the  immovable  property  unto  the 

appellants”. In the instance case, the documents tendered in evidence 

by  the  plaintiff/Appellant,  particularly  Exh.P-3  and  Exh.P-5,  are 

admittedly  unregistered.  Section  23  of  the  Registration  Act,  1908 

1 “Muhammad Iqbal and others VS Mst. Baseerat and others” [2017 SCMR 367]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Page-8 
RFA No.163/2013 

prohibits  registration  of  a  document  required  under  the  law  to  be 

registered after four months of its execution. In the case in hand, the 

plaintiff/Appellant  has  pleaded  that  possession  of  the  Property  was 

handed  over  to  her  by  the  defendant/Owner  on  07-10-2009.  The 

period  stipulated  in  section  23  was  to  lapse  on  07-02-2010.  The 

plaintiff did not produce any evidence that she insisted for compliance 

with section 23 of the Registration Act, 1908 in respect of  any of the 

agreements  (Exh.P3  and  Exh.P-5).  The  plaintiff/Appellant  could  not 

prove on the basis of evidence that there was any legal encumbrance 

in  registration  of  agreements  (Exh.P3  and  Exh.P-5).  The  documents 

(Exh.P-3 and Exh.P-5) being unregistered as mandated under section 

54  of  the  Act  of  1882  read  with  section  17  of  the  Registration  Act, 

cannot operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether 

in  present  or  in  future  any  right,  title  or  interest,  whether  vested  or 

contingent  to  or  in  immoveable  property  under  section  49  of  the 

Registration Act.  

12. 

Now I will advert to the second question, whether section 

53-A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 can cover the lapse of non-

registration  of  a  document  as  mandated  under  the  Registration  Act. 

The Supreme Court of India in Shrimant Shamrao Suryavanshi’s2 case 

has  explained  the  reason  behind  the  insertion  of  section  53-A  in  the 

Act  of  1882  as  “When  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act  was  enacted, 

Section 53-A did not find place in it. In the absence of Section 53-A, 

there  arose  difference  of  opinion  between  various  courts  in  India  as 

regards  the  application  of  English  doctrine  of  part  performance  of 

contract  as  it  was  then  prevailing  in  England.  Since  there  was  a 

difference  of  opinion  on  question  of  the  application  of  English 

equitable doctrine of part performance  in various courts of India, the 

Govt.  of  India  resolved  to  set  up  a  Special  Committee  for  making 

recommendations  amongst  others  whether  the  British  equitable 

doctrine  of  part  performance  be  extended  in  India  also.  The  Special 

2  Shrimant  Shamrao  Suryavanshi  and  another  VS  Pralhad  Bhairoba  Suryavanshi  (D)  by  Lrs.  &  Ors” 
[2002(2) ALL MR 267 (S.C.) = 2002(3) SCC 676] 

 
 
                                                           
Page-9 
RFA No.163/2013 

Committee  was  of  the  view  that  an  illiterate  or  ignorant  buyer  who 

had  partly  performed  his  part  of  contract  required  statutory 

protection.  The  Committee  was  of  the  further  view  that  where  a 

transferee  in  good  faith  that  lawful  instrument  i.e.  a  written  contract 

would  be  executed  by  the  transferor  takes  possession  over  the 

property,  the  equity  demanded  that  the  transferee  should  not  be 

treated  as  trespasser  by  the  transferor  and  subsequently  evict  him 

through  process  of 

law 

in 

the  absence  of 

lawful 

transfer 

instrument.……. In that view of the matter, Section 53-A is required to 

be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the  recommendation  of  Special 

Committee’s report and aims, objects contained in amending Act 1929 

of  the  Act  and  specially  when  Section  53-A  itself  does  not  put  any 

restriction  to  plea  taken  in  defence  by  a  transferee  to  protect  his 

possession under Section 53-A even if the period of limitation to bring 

a suit for specific performance has expired”. 

13. 

It  is,  therefore,  obvious  that  the  purpose  of  inserting 

section  53-A  in  the  Act  of  1882  was  to  protect  a  party  to  an 

agreement,  who  in  part  performance  of  the  agreement  has  been  put 

in possession of the property and subsequently could not initiate legal 

action  to make  the  title perfect. Section 53-A of the Act of 1882 is a 

defence of the party in possession of the property, in the proceedings 

ensued  against 

it 

for  “trespass”,  or  “other  consequences  of 

possession”  and  protects  him  from  “being  removed  from  the 

possession  without  resorting  to  the  process  of  law”.  It  is  the  period 

during  which  the  said  party  remained  in  possession  of  the  property 

that  is  protected  under  section  53-A  even  if  the  agreement  is 

unregistered. Section 53-A, therefore, can be used as a “shield” in the 

given  circumstances  and  not  as  a  “sword”  to  defeat  the  mandatory 

provisions  of  the  Registration  Act.  Section  53-A  of  the  Act  of  1882, 

therefore,  is  not  an  exemption  from  the  provision  of  the  Registration 

Act.  

 
 
 
Page-10 
RFA No.163/2013 

14. 

The  last  legal  question  is,  extent  and  admissibility  of  the 

evidence/statement  of  a  witness  (power  of  attorney  holder/agent) 

who  appears  as  witness  to  testify  facts,  which  are  in  personal 

knowledge  of  another  person  i.e.  principal.  The  Supreme  Court  of 

India has dealt with a similar question in Man Kaur’s3 case, wherein it 

was held that "Order III, Rules 1 and 2 CPC, empowers the holder of 

power  of attorney to "act" on behalf of  the  principal. In our view the 

word "acts" employed in Order III, Rules 1 and 2 CPC, confines only in 

respect of "acts"  done by  the power of attorney holder in  exercise of 

power  granted  by  the  instrument.  The  term  "acts"  would  not  include 

deposing  in  place  and  instead  of  the  principal.  In  other  words,  if  the 

power  of  attorney  holder  has  rendered  some  "acts"  in  pursuance  of 

power of attorney, he may depose for the principal in respect of such 

acts, but  he cannot depose for the principal for  the acts  done by  the 

principal and not by him. Similarly, he cannot depose for the principal 

in respect of the matter which only the principal can have a personal 

knowledge and in respect of which the principal is entitled to be cross-

examined”.  In  this  case  the  Supreme  Court  of  India,  after  examining 

the  relevant  provisions  and  precedent  law  had  summarized  the 

following  principles  relating  to  evidence  of  the  power  of  attorney 

holder.- 

a)  An  attorney  holder  who  has  signed  the  plaint  and 
instituted  the  suit,  but  has  no  personal  knowledge  of 
the transaction can only give formal evidence about the 
validity  of  the  power  of  attorney  and  the  filing  of  the 
suit. 

b)  If the attorney holder has done any act or handled any 
transactions,  in  pursuance  of  the  power  of  attorney 
granted  by  the  principal,  he  may  be  examined  as  a 
witness  to  prove  those  acts  or  transactions.  If  the 
attorney  holder  alone  has  personal  knowledge  of  such 
acts  and  transactions  and  not  the  principal,  the 
attorney  holder  shall  be  examined,  if  those  acts  and 
transactions have to be proved. 

3 Maan Kaur (Dead) by LRs VS Hartar Singh Sangha, 2010 ALL SCR 2511=(2010) 10 SCC 512 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
Page-11 
RFA No.163/2013 

c)  The attorney holder  cannot depose or give evidence in 
place of his principal for the acts done by the principal 
or  transactions  or  dealings  of  the  principal,  of  which 
principal alone has personal knowledge. 

d)  Where  the  principal  at  no  point  of  time  had  personally 
handled or dealt with or participated in the transaction 
and has no personal knowledge of the transaction, and 
where  the  entire  transaction  has  been  handled  by  an 
attorney  holder,  necessarily  the  attorney  holder  alone 
can  give  evidence  in  regard  to  the  transaction.  This 
frequently  happens  in  case  of  principals  carrying  on 
business 
authorized  managers/attorney 
holders  or  persons  residing  abroad  managing  their 
affairs through their attorney holders. 

through 

e)  Where  the  entire  transaction  has  been  conducted 
through  a  particular  attorney  holder,  the  principal  has 
the 
to  examine 
transaction, and not a different or subsequent attorney 
holder. 

that  attorney  holder 

to  prove 

f)  Where  different  attorney  holders  had  dealt  with  the 
matter  at  different  stages  of  the  transaction,  if 
evidence  has  to  be  led  as  to  what  transpired  at  those 
different stages, all the attorney holders will have to be 
examined. 

g)  Where the law requires or contemplated the plaintiff or 
other  party  to  a  proceeding,  to  establish  or  prove 
something  with  reference  to  his  `state  of  mind'  or 
`conduct', normally the person concerned alone has to 
give  evidence  and  not  an  attorney  holder.  A  landlord 
who  seeks  eviction  of  his  tenant,  on  the  ground  of  his 
`bona  fide'  need  and  a  purchaser  seeking  specific 
performance  who  has  to  show  his  `readiness  and 
willingness' fall under this category. There is however a 
recognized exception to this requirement. Where all the 
affairs  of  a  party  are  completely  managed,  transacted 
and  looked  after  by  an  attorney  (who  may  happen  to 
be  a  close  family  member),  it  may  be  possible  to 
accept  the  evidence  of  such  attorney  even  with 
reference  to  bona  fides  or  `readiness  and  willingness'. 
Examples  of  such  attorney  holders  are  a  husband/wife 
exclusively  managing  the  affairs  of  his/her  spouse,  a 
son/daughter exclusively managing the affairs of an old 
father/mother  exclusively 
and 
managing the affairs of a son/daughter living abroad. 

infirm  parent,  a 

 
 
 
 
 
Page-12 
RFA No.163/2013 

15. 

In  the  case  in  hand,  Appellant  herself  filed  the  suit, 

however, she did not enter the witness box. Instead, one Muhammad 

Imran  Irshad  entered  the  witness  box  as  PW-1  on  the  strength  of  a 

power  of  attorney  (Exh.P-2)  and  recorded  his  statement  on  behalf  of 

the  Appellant.  The  said  Muhammad  Imran  Irshad  never  remained 

associated  with  the  transaction  in  dispute  in  relation  to  the  Property. 

He is not a marginal witness to the agreements (Exh.P-3 and Exh.P-5) 

or  the  receipts  (Exh.P-4  and  Exh.P-6).  He  was  never  personally 

present  when  the  deal  was  struck  between  the  parties.  In  short, 

nothing  deposed  by  him  as  PW-1  was  within  his  personal  knowledge 

nor such acts were done by him either independently or pursuant to a 

power of attorney. He testified the facts which were exclusively in the 

personal  knowledge  of  the  Appellant/plaintiff.  He  admittedly  did 

nothing  as  attorney  of  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  the  Property.  He 

himself never witnessed anything during the long episode as asserted 

by the Appellant/plaintiff which commenced from 1993 and concluded 

in 2009. In the facts and circumstances of the case in hand,  PW-1 is 

an  alien  and  stranger  to  the  transaction,  therefore,  his  statement  is 

neither admissible nor can be relied upon.  

16. 

The plaintiff/Appellant could also not establish from record 

the  cash  payment  of  sale  consideration.  She  could  not  prove  as  to 

how  the  cash  was  managed,  from  which  bank  account  the  cash  was 

withdrawn, the statement of such bank account or the sale of any kind 

of  asset,  the  proceeds  of  which,  was  paid  to  the  defendant/Owner  in 

cash.  The  plaintiff/Appellant  did  not  adduce  in  evidence  any  title 

documents  in  respect  of  the  Property  that  were  handed  over  to  her 

alongwith possession of the Property. The plaintiff/Appellant claims to 

have executed agreement to sell dated 24-05-1993 (Exh.P3) and sale 

agreement,  dated  07-09-2009  (Exh.P5)  with  the  defendant/Owner. 

The reasons for delay in execution of the sale agreement (Exh.P5) i.e. 

after 17 years from the date of initial agreement to sell (Exh.P-3), the 

pendency  of  the  proceedings  before  the  august  Supreme  Court  and 

the  fact  that  the  Property  was  not  in  possession  of  the  Owner  in  the 

 
 
 
Page-13 
RFA No.163/2013 

meantime,  have  not  been  mentioned  in  both  the  agreements  i.e. 

Exh.P-3  and  Exh.P-5.  The  plaintiff/Appellant  did  not  advance  any 

cogent evidence to show that she insisted for transfer of ownership of 

the  Property.  The  plaintiff  had  tendered  in  evidence  the  judgment  of 

the  august  Supreme  Court  dated  21-10-2010  passed  in  Civil  Appeal 

No.1027  of  2009  (Exh.P8).  However,  both  the  Agreements  are  silent 

with  regard  to  the  proceedings  conducted  under  the  Abandoned 

Property (Taking Over and Management) Act, 1975. The suit was filed 

by  the  plaintiff/Appellant  herself.  However,  she  did  not  enter  the 

witness  box;  instead  her  attorney  Muhammad  Imran  Irshad  (PW-1) 

appeared and deposed on her behalf, which statement being made by 

an  alien  and  stranger  is  neither  admissible  nor  reliable.  In  the  given 

circumstances,  the  essential  elements  of  a  valid  contract  i.e.  free 

consent of the defendant/Owner for execution of the agreements and 

payment of “consideration”, remained unproved. 

17. 

The  agreement  to  sell  (Exh.P3)  and  sale  agreement 

(Exh.P5)  are  unregistered  documents.  The  person  who  had  notarized 

the agreements also did not enter the witness box. The date on which 

the  agreements  were  notarized  have  also  not  been  mentioned.  The 

mode  of  issuance  of  stamp  papers  for  both  the  agreements  is 

doubtful.  The  stamp  papers  are  not  properly  endorsed  by  the  stamp 

vendor. The purpose for which the stamp papers were issued, has not 

been mentioned. The stamp vendors were not produced as witness to 

depose in her favour of by the plaintiff/Appellant. The agreements are 

silent  with  regard  to  the  agreed  mode  of  payment.  As  per  statement 

of  Adil  Hussain  (DW-1)  the  Property  is  in  the  name  of  respondent/ 

defendant/Owner. Even in the absence of evidence to the contrary, in 

order  to  get  a  judgment  as  to  her  legal  rights,  the  plaintiff/Appellant 

was burdened with onus under Article 117 of the Qanoon-e-Shahadat 

Order,  1984  to  prove  on  the  basis  of  unimpeachable  evidence  that 

such right legally existed in her favour.  

 
 
 
Page-14 
RFA No.163/2013 

18. 

It  is  well  established  law  that  the  remedy  of  specific 

performance  is  discretionary  and  cannot  be  claimed  as  of  right4.  The 

august  Supreme  Court  in  Liaqat  Khan’s 5  case  has  held  that  “the 

things  as  regards  powers  of  the  Court  in  exercising  its  discretion, 

become even more clear that there is no two plus two, equal to four 

formula available with any Court of law for this purpose, which can 

be applied through cut and paste device to all cases of such nature. 

Conversely,  it  will  be  the  peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  of  each 

case, particularly, the terms of the agreement between the parties, 

its  language,  their  subsequent  conduct  and  other  surrounding 

circumstances  which  will  enable  the  Court  to  decide  whether  the 

discretion  in  terms  of  section  22  (ibid)  ought  to  be  exercised  in 

favour  of  specific  performance  or  not”.  In  Sheikh  Akhtar  Aziz’s 6 

case,  the  Supreme  Court  has  held  that  “there  is  no  cavil  with  the 

proposition  that  relief  of  specific  performance  is  discretionary  in 

nature  and  despite  proof  of  an  agreement  to  sell,  exercise  of 

discretion  can  be withheld  if  the  Court  considers  that grant of such 

relief  would  be  unfair  or  inequitable”.  A  similar  view  has  also  been 

taken the cases of Arif Shah7, Mussarat Shaukat8 and Rab Nawaz9. 

19. 

The  evidence  brought  on  record  does  not  discharge  the 

burden  of  proof  as  to  existence  of  a  relationship  of  seller  and 

purchaser  between  the  parties.  The  plaintiff/Appellant  failed  to  make 

out  a  case  for  grant  of  the  discretionary  equitable  relief  of  specific 

performance.  The  impugned  judgment  and  decree,  therefore,  do  not 

call for interference. 

20. 

For  what has been  discussed above, the instant appeal  is 

without merit and is, therefore, accordingly dismissed.  

4 Muhammad Riaz Hussain v. Zahoor Ul Hassan (2021 SCMR 431) 
5 Liaqat Khan v. Falak Sher (PLD 2014 SC 506) 
6 Sheikh Akhtar Aziz v. Mst. Shabnam Begum and others  (2019 SCMR 524) 
7 Arif Shah v. Abdul Hakeem Qureshi (PLD 1991 SC 905) 
8 Mussarat Shaukat Ali v. Safia Khatoon (1994 SCMR 2189) 
9 Rab Nawaz v. Mustaqeem Khan (1999 SCMR 1362) 

 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                           
Page-15 
RFA No.163/2013 

21. 

Before  parting,  this  Court  considers  it  appropriate  to 

record  its  observation  regarding  conduct  of  the  parties  during 

proceedings. The questions, whether the Owner has died and whether 

he  is  survived  by  heirs,  are  unresolved.  During  the  proceedings,  the 

applicants have filed an application i.e. C.M. No.451/2020 for filing of 

wakalatnama  of  Syed  Javed  Akbar  Shah,  ASC  on  their  behalf.  They 

claim  to  be  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner.  The  applicants  i.e.  Marium 

Gulshan Haque, Saleha Khanum have leveled serious allegations. They 

have  not  approached  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to  get 

themselves  declared  as  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner.  The  question 

whether  they  are  all  the  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner  and  resolution  of 

their inter-se disputes, warrants a full-fledged trial, for which they will 

be at liberty to approach the court of competent jurisdiction. 

22. 

The learned counsel for parties in their written arguments 

and the CDA in its written report have  highlighted instances whereby 

many  persons  have  attempted  to  grab  the  Property  through  various 

modes. I am of the considered opinion that in a situation like this, it 

is the duty of the Court to invoke the provisions of Article 24 of the 

Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  to  remove  the 

illegal  occupant  and  handover  it  to  the  state  to  protect  the 

immoveable  property.  It  is  indeed  the  duty  of  the  State  to  protect 

all  such  properties  of  the  citizens  in  terms  of  Article  24  of  the 

Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  and  takeover 

possession of such property under Article 24 clause 3(b) and (d) of 

the  Constitution  of  1973  for  a  limited  period  to  protect  it  for  the 

benefit  of  its  Owner.  Therefore,  keeping  in  view  of  the  facts  of  the 

case in hand that the plaintiff/Appellant has unlawfully occupied suit 

property  of  a  citizen  whose  whereabouts  are  not  immediately 

traceable  and  the  property  is  at  risk  of  loss  or  damage  by  the 

plaintiff/Appellant,  therefore,  to  protect  the  Property  from  further 

damage  as  an  immediate  measure,  the  CDA  is  directed  to  depute 

responsible  official  to  visit  the  suit  property  within  48  hours  and 

take  photographs  from  inside  the  suit  premises  to  preserve  the 

  
 
 
Page-16 
RFA No.163/2013 

status of the fitting and fixtures of the suit property. The  CDA shall 

takeover possession of the suit property from the plaintiff/Appellant 

within 15 days and ensure that all the dues of electricity and sui-gas 

bills/charges are cleared by the occupant. In case of any resistance 

or  if  the  suit  property  is  found  locked  the  CDA  is  authorized  to 

remove locks and prepare an inventory of all the items lying therein 

and place his locks and seal on each door of the suit property. The 

area  police  should also  be  informed  in  advance  so  that if  police aid 

is needed, it should be available readily and no fresh order to break 

open  the  locks  or  police  force  to  evict  the  plaintiff  from  the  suit 

property is required. The CDA is directed to take-over the Property by 

making  proper  arrangements  to  preserve  it  from  any  damage.  These 

are  interim  arrangements  to  protect  and  preserve  the  Property  from 

any  damage.  The  CDA  is  directed  not  to  change  the  title  of  the 

Property  till  the  legal  heirs  of  the  Owner  declare  themselves  as  such 

from the Court of competent jurisdiction. The legal heirs, declared as 

such  by  a  competent  court,  shall  be  free  to  obtain  possession  and 

exercise  their  ownership  rights  in  respect  of  the  Property.  The  CDA 

shall hold and freeze the Property for a period of three years, or till a 

date  the  legal  heirs  get  themselves  declared  as  legal  heirs  of  the 

Owner  from  a  competent  Court,  whichever  is  earlier.  In  case  no  one 

on the basis of a valid legal document claims the Property after three 

years,  then  the  CDA  shall  proceed  under  Article  172  of  the 

Constitution  in  respect  of  the  Property.  The  office  is  directed  to 

transmit a copy of this order to the Chairman, CDA for compliance.   

(ARBAB MUHAMMAD TAHIR) 
JUDGE 

Announced in the open Court on 20.03.2023. 

Luqman Khan/* 

Approved for reporting. 

JUDGE 

   
 
 
 
 
 
