JUDGMENT 

FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM  JANDRAN,  J  ---  Through  this  single  judgment,  we  intend  to 
decide listed Murder Reference and criminal appeals, which have arisen out of judgment dated 
02.05.2019,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-IV  Islamabad-East,  whereby 
appellants (Abdul Hassan, Syed Sajjad Hussain and Haider Abbas) were convicted in FIR No. 
60,  dated  05.06.2013,  under  sections  302,  324/34,  337-F(ii),  337-F(iii),  337-C,  119,  P.P.C, 
Police  Station  Banni  Gala,  Islamabad  and  sentenced  as  under  (under  Section  395  P.P.C 
appellants were acquitted):-- 

Under section 302(b) 
P.P.C. 

Under section 324 P.P.C. 

Under section 337-F(ii) 
P.P.C. 
Under section 337-F(iii) 
P.P.C. 
Under section 337-D 
P.P.C. 

death on three counts each with fine of Rs.3,00,000/- each as 
compensation to the legal heirs of every deceased, in default 
to undergo six months S.I. 
seven years R.I. with fine of Rs.1,00,000/- each as 
compensation to the legal heirs of every deceased, in default 
to undergo six months S.I. 
one year R.I. with Daman of Rs.50,000/- each to be paid to 
every injured. 
one year R.I. with Daman of Rs.50,000/- each to be paid to 
every injured, 
seven years R.I. with 1/3rd share of Diyat to every injured. 

2.  The  law  in  the  case  was  set  in  motion  by  PW-12/  complainant  Zubair  Akhtar  vide  a 
written application dated 05.06.2013, Ex.PA, on the basis of which formal FIR Ex.PC/1 was 
registered wherein it was alleged that he is resident of village Jigiot, Police Station Banni Gala, 
Islamabad; that at about 09:30 am, he along with nephew Adnan was heading towards their 
jeweler shop situated at Athal Chowk Bharakahu, on Toyota Corolla GLI No. RIA 1270; that 
ahead of them was his elder brother Gulzeb aged about 50 years with three sons Gul Safeen 
aged 25/26 years, Shahzeb aged 20/21 years, Jahanzeb aged 20/21 years and gunmen Mushtaq, 
Tufail, Amir Hussain, aged 60, 30 and 24/25 years respectively on their Toyota Land Cruiser 
Swat-B/ 1081 being driven by Shahzeb; that when they reached at Sewra bridge, a white colour 
Toyota XLI bearing No.821 intercepted the car of his brother out of which three persons armed 
with  Kalashnikov  and  .30  bore  pistol  alighted  and  started  reckless  firing  due  to  which  his 
brother Gulzeb and the two guards Mushtaq and Tufail died at the spot while his three nephews 
and guard Amir Hussain sustained injuries; that the assailants then fled away on their c ar; that 
besides  the  complainant,  the  occurrence  was  witnessed  by  his  nephews  Shahzeb,  Jahanzeb, 
Gul Safeen, Adnan and Amir; that he can identify the assailants and that they have bloodshed 
enmity in the village. After due investigation, appellants were challaned to face the trial. 

3. 

In order to prove its case, the prosecution produced twenty witnesses in all that includes 
injured/eye-witnesses  Gul  Safeen  Zargar  PW-9,  Jahanzeb  Gul  Zargar  PW-10,  Shahzeb  Gul 
Zargar PW-11 and complainant Zubair Akhtar PW-12 while PW-13 Dr. Tanvir Afsar Malik 
had given the details of medical examination of the injured Jahanzeb, Shahzeb, Amir Abbas. 
The said witness also conducted autopsy on the dead bodies of deceased Gulzeb, Tufail Khan, 
Mushtaq Hussain. PW-18 Abdul Sattar SI had given the details of investigation conducted by 
him. After the recording of prosecution evidence, appellants were examined in terms of Section 
342 of the Criminal Procedure Code wherein they denied the allegations/prosecution evidence. 
The  learned  trial  Court  after  hearing  arguments,  convicted  and  sentenced  the  appellants  as 
mentioned in para No.1 supra. 

4. Learned counsel for the appellants contended that the occurrence is blind and no one is 
nominated in the FIR, when one Mazhar who was acquitted by the trial Court alleged to be 
facilitating the accused then on the same analogy, appellants were also liable to be acquitted. 
That motive has been shifted by assertion that accused looted  amount from the vehicle a bag 
wherein gold ornaments and cash was there while no such recovery is on record, impugned 
judgment  is  liable  to  be  set-aside.  That  from  record,  it  could  be  safely  suggested  that 
complainant was not at the crime scene. 

 
 
  
  
5.  On the other hand, learned counsel for the complainant has argued that brutal incident 
was reported wherein three individuals lost their lives. That PWs. 9, 10 and 11 are the injured 
witnesses  who  saw  the  occurrence  with  their  naked  eyes  and  there  was  sufficient  time  to 
recognize  them  and  on  the  basis  of  said  recognition,  said  witnesses  identified  the 
accused/appellant in identification parade. There is no room for acquittal of the appellants. At 
the end, learned counsel argued that if at all, this Court comes to  the conclusion that case for 
awarding death penalty is not made out, then at least lessor punishment could be granted but 
there is no yardstick which could suggest that case of the acquittal is made out in favour of the 
appellants/ accused. 

6.  Heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants,  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant, 

learned State Counsel and examined the record with their able assistance. 

7.  Careful judicial examination of the available material/ evidence has been made and it 
has  been  noticed  that  case  at  hand  is  a  broad  daylight  occurrence  which  took  place  on 
05.06.2013 at 09:30 a.m., same was reported to the police by way of an application Ex.PA at 
12:30 noon, wherein formal FIR, Ex.PC/1 was registered at 01:00 p.m., deceased and injured 
were  shifted  to  the  hospital  by  PW  12  Zubair  Akhtar,  in  the  same  vehicle  Land  Cruiser 
No.SWAT-B  1081  Ex.PD  in  which  deceased  were  done  to  death  and  remaining  sustained 
injuries, distance from the place of occurrence to hospital is 22 km, keeping in view the time 
of  occurrence,  the  place  of  occurrence,  duration  of  occurrence,  distance  from  the  place  of 
occurrence to the hospital and initial formalities regarding dead/injured persons in the hospital, 
we hold that in peculiar circumstances FIR was promptly lodged and there was no delay in 
reporting  the  matter  to  the  police,  injured  witnesses  were  the  natural  witnesses  of  the 
occurrence,  whose  presence  could  not  be  doubted  in  any  manner  while  one  injured  witness 
remained hospitalized for ten days. 

8. 

It is noticed that brutal firing was made by the accused/appellants where three persons 
lost their lives and assailants remained there for 5/7 minutes, said duration was sufficient to 
recognize  the  accused/appellants.  The  witnesses  Gul  Safeen  Zargar  (PW -9),  Jahanzeb  Gul 
Zargar  (PW-10)  and Shahzeb  Gul  Zargar  (PW-11)  are  injured/eye-witnesses  who were  also 
severely injured due to reckless firing by the accused persons. 

9.  The factum of the statement of the injured/eye-witnesses i.e. PWs 9, 10 and 11 is duly 
supported  by  the  important  piece  of  evidence  i.e.  test  identification  parade  duly  conducted 
under the magisterial supervision. Said Magistrate appeared as PW-17 who fully testified the 
test identification parade. No major discrepancy was pointed out. There is no flaw which cou ld 
shatter  the  authenticity  and  genuineness  of  the  said  test  identification  parade.  Mere  an 
objection had been taken, that  too  as  objection for  the  sake  of  objection, that  accused  were 
previously shown to the witnesses by the I.O., but there is no piece of evidence which could 
substantiate the assertion of the accused/appellants. This important piece of evidence could not 
be brushed aside. 

10.  Relevant law on the subject of identification parade is Article 22 of the Qanun Shahadat 

Order 1984, which for ease of reference is reproduced hereunder:- 

"22. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts: Facts necessary to explain 
or  introduce  a  fact  in  issue  or  relevant  fact,  or  which  support  or  rebut  an  inference 
suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything 
or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue, 
or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any such fact 
was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose." 

The above reproduction explicitly provides that necessary facts for the purposes of explaining 
or  introducing  a  fact  in  issue  or  to  rebut  an  inference  suggested  are  always  considered  as 
relevant insofar as they are necessary for the required purpose. 

11.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a  recent  judgment  reported  as  "Tasar 
Mehmood and another v. The State and others" (2020 SCMR 1013) has held in paragraph-4 as 
under:- 

 
 
 
 "Spot  inspection  confirmed  the  incident.  Integrity  of  initial  investigation  is  beyond 
doubt and it is through investigative process that the police reached out the petitioners; 
they were kept in judicial lock up and remitted into police custody only after they had 
been  identified  by  the  injured  in  the  test  identification  parade.  Weapons  recovered 
pursuant to disclosures were forensically matched with the casings dis-patched earlier 
than petitioners' arrest. These formidable pieces of evidence were relied upon by the 
trial  court  to  unhesitatingly  return  a  guilty  verdict.  Composition  of  murder  of  co-
accused by Tasar Mehmood in the High Court has been nothing less than a last straw 
in  the  episode.  In  this  backdrop,  criticism  of  alleged  flaws  in  the  test  identification 
parade  sounds  a  far  cry.  Reference to omission  of  assailants'  features and  respective 
roles played by them during the occurrence is beside the point in circumstances . 

Juridical  wisdom,  legislated  with  ingenious  brevity  par  excellence,  is  nonetheless 
widely spaced to meet diverse situations as calamities seldom come about under ideal 
or identical circumstances; same applies to the responses by those who encounter such 
situations as crisis impacts differently upon individuals' faculties and nerves to sustain 
and  endure  themselves  during  the  ordeal,  therefore,  it  would  be  unrealistically 
inexpedient to apply dogmatic standards with empirical exactitude to settle the question 
of assailant's identity. There may be situations where witnesses are expected to be more 
expressive  and  descriptive  but  there  may  well  be  contra  situations  as  well.  The 
underlying  purpose  behind  High  Court  Rules  and  Orders,  Volume  III,  Part-C,  based 
upon a circular issued by the Punjab Government way back on 19th of December, 1936 
is primarily to ensure that the accused confronting the witnesses in a test identification 
exercise is least embarrassed or handicapped. Similarly, Rule 26.32 of the Police Rules, 
1934, inter alia, provides as under:- 

(a)  "The  proceedings  shall  be  conducted  in  the  presence  of  a  magistrate  or  gazetted 
police officer, or, if the case is of great urgency and no such officer is available, in the 
presence of two or more respectable witnesses not interested in the case, who should 
be  asked  to  satisfy  themselves  that  the  identification  has  been  conducted  under 
conditions precluding collusion." 

The survey of above provision of law renders it abundantly clear that the process of test 
identification parade has to be essentially carried out, having regard to the exigencies 
of  each  case,  in  a  fair  and non-collusive manner,  free  from  the taints  of  prejudice; a 
contra claim must rest upon evidential basis; the exercise is not an immutable ritual, 
inconsequential  non  performance  whereof,  may  cause  failure  of  prosecution  case, 
otherwise  structured  upon  clean  and  probable  evidence.  In  the  present  case,  the 
assailants surprised the witnesses and soon thereafter started snatching the valuables; 
upon resistance, one of them resorted to firing; a colleague fell to death on spot at the 
hands  of  his  own  accomplice  and  as  such  their  identification  by  the  witnesses 
constituted valid and reliable proof to drive home the charge beyond reasonable doubt. 
The complainant or the witnesses in their statements did not point out specific features 
and  as  such  they  were  not  required  to  improve  upon  their  case  during  the  test 
identification parade. An effective regime of administration of criminal justice has to 
be  pivoted  on  a  balance,  correlating  fair  trial  for  an  accused  with  a  meaningful 
opportunity  to  the  prosecution to  drive home  the  charge  on  the  strength  of  available 
evidence.  Since  corporal  consequences  are  irreversible  and  freedom  once  forfeited 
cannot  be  restored  or  recompensed  with  retrospect,  the  Court  must  insist  for  "proof 
beyond doubt" to rule out possibility of error or hypothesis of innocence, nonetheless, 
at  the  same  time,  prosecution  cannot  be  saddled  to  come  forward  with  details  hyper 
technical, artificial or illusory. Indictment structured on macro foundations of truthful 
evidence can sustain the charge." [Emphasis added] 

12.  Similarly, the Hon'ble Apex Court of the land in another recent judgment reported as 
"Muhammad Siddique and others v. The State" (2020 SCMR 342) has expounded the law on 
the subject in the following terms:- 

"The  above  framework  provides  enough  space  to  admit  evidence  in  prosecution  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
offenders  previously  unacquainted  with  the  victims  of the  witness;  appraisal of such 
evidence  is  subject  to  same  principles  as  are  universally  applicable  to  any  piece  of 
evidence, under consideration in a criminal trial; there are no additional barricades as 
is  evidence  from  the  plain  reading  of  the  Article  ibid;  without  prejudice  to  the 
safeguards available to an accused at each stage of trial, essentially fair as guaranteed 
under the Constitution, nonetheless, it does not cast an artificially heavier onus on the 
prosecution to meet standards of proof beyond human capacity." 

13.  The facts of the case at hand are examined in the light of referred recent law, expounded 
by the Hon'ble Apex Court of the land, along with statement of injured witnesses, who duly 
identified the accused/appellants during the test identification parade. It is observed that there 
is nothing available on record which could lead to frame the view that before test identification 
parade accused/ appellants remained in police custody and were duly shown to the witnesses 
rather sufficient material  is there  which  suggests  that  accused  were  given  in  police  custody 
after conducting the identification parade test, meaning thereby judicial custody is prior in time 
as of police custody for physical remand. 

14.  When examined proceedings of the identification parade, it is noticed that accused were 
offered if they want, to change their sitting arrangements, they can and at some occasions, they 
changed their sitting arrangement against the one arranged by the concerned jail authorities. 
Despite  of  that  they  were  correctly  identified  by  the  witnesses.  No  plausible  objection  was 
raised by the accused at that time when identification parade was being conducted. Every care 
and  caution  was  exercised  by  the  Magistrate  and  the  concerned  jail  authorities  while 
conducting  the  test  identification  parade.  It  is  duly  incorporated  in  the  proceedings  of  the 
identification parade that dummies were in resemblance and identical to the accused in respect 
of their height, features, body and physical structure. 

15.  Record further shows that all possibilities/codal formalities which humanly could be 
possible were duly exercised by the Magistrate while conducting the test identification parade 
including that witness be not acquainted/ familiar with the accused before the test identification 
parade. 

16.  Every criminal case is required to be decided in the light of its own peculiar facts. While 
available material of the case at hand suggests that many questions were put to the witnesses 
of  test  identification  parade  regarding  duration  of  the  firing,  how  and  in  which  manner 
witnesses were in position to see the accused, which kind of weapons accused were carrying. 
The  question  regarding  showing  of  picture  of  the  accused  to  the  witness  was  explicitly 
responded in negative. The replies tendered by the witnesses were quite straight, unambiguous 
and natural, besides consistent and could not be shattered. 

17.  The medical evidence is fully in consonance with the ocular account. The statement of 
Dr. Tanvir Afzal Malik (PW-13) who conducted autopsy on the dead bodies of the deceased is 
also  to  the  effect  that  deaths  of  the  deceased  were  due  to  firearm  injuries.  In  this  respect 
guidance is sought from the recent judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan reported 
as "Sarwar and another v. The State and another" (2020 SMCR 1250). 

18.  PW-13  Dr.  Tanvir  Afsar  Malik  tendered  his  professional  opinion  by  stating  that 
deceased Gulzeb sustained ten firearm injuries, Tufail sustained seven firearm injuries while 
deceased Mushtaq sustained twelve firearm injuries. It is also matter of record that firing was 
so indiscriminative and in brutal manner that regarding all the three deceased it has been opined 
by the said PW that deceased died within less than five minutes after sustaining the injuries 
because duration between injuries and the death has been mentioned as 03 to 05 minutes . 

19.  PW-13  Dr.Tanvir  Afzal  Malik  also  tendered  his  opinion  regarding  the  four  injured 
persons amongst whom three are real sons of the deceased Gulzeb. It is demonstrated from 
record that statement of the said PW is corroborated by the Medico Legal Report (MLR) of the 
said  injured  witnesses  regarding  firearm  injuries  on  their  bodies  and  they  remained 
hospitalized for considerable period. 

20.  On 15.07.2013, Tahir Javed Constable (PW-8) submitted three different samples to the 
Punjab Forensic Science Agency (PFSA) containing blood stained pieces of seat cover of the 

 
 
vehicle  in  which  occurrence  took  place,  blood  stained  cloth  lastly  wearing  by  the  three 
deceased at the time of occurrence, cotton with the blood stained earth where occurrence took 
place, report of the PFSA Ex.PAAV confirmed that human blood was identified on all these 
samples. 

21.  On 15.07.2013, said Tahir Javed (PW-8) also submitted 27 cartridge cases which were 
collected  from  the  crime  scene  having  22  (C-1  to C-22)  of  7.62 x  39 caliber,  02  44  caliber 
rifles and 03, 30 caliber pistols. On 04.10.2013 said witness submitted 7.62 x 39 caliber rifle 
and 30 caliber pistol to the PFSA. Report of the PFSA Ex.PAAW certified that said 22 cartridge 
cases  (C-1  to  C-22)  were  wedded  with  the  weapon  sent,  while  of  30  bore  pistol  were  not 
matched and as far as 02 cartridge cases of 44 caliber, no weapon was sent to the PFSA . 

22.  Despite  careful  judicial  scrutiny  of  the  record,  not  a  single  piece  of  evidence  is 
witnessed in the terms that what malice injured witnesses of the occurrence had agains t the 
accused/ appellants which compelled them to label the accused with the allegation of murder 
of their real father including two gunmen. Record is silent regarding any evidence of enmity 
of the witnesses against the appellants. It is beyond the imagination that why real sons (PWs 
9, 10 and 11) of deceased father can use dead body of their father as a tool to falsely implicate 
the appellants. The statements of the accused/ appellants under section 342, Cr.P.C have been 
examined but view is the same as mentioned supra. Mere blood relation of witnesses is not a 
ground to disbelieve their version. 

23.  In "Farman Ali and another v. The State and another" (2020 SCMR 597) the Hon'ble 
Supreme  Court  has  held  that  eye-witnesses  of  the  occurrence  have  no  ill-will  or  motive  to 
falsely implicate the accused persons. Said witnesses remained consistent on each and every 
material point despite lengthy cross-examination and both the courts below after appraisal of 
the  evidence  found  them  truthful  and  reliable  witnesses.  Relation  of  the  witnesses  with  the 
deceased was held of no legal embargo for awarding the punishment. 

24.  Similarly, in another judgment reported as "Raza and another v. The State and 2 others" 
(PLD  2020  SC  523)  held  that  eye-witnesses  had  no  prior  enmity  to  falsely  implicate  the 
accused hence their testimony could not be discarded merely because of their relationship with 
the deceased especially when their presence at the scene of the crime was not unnatural and 
unusual. Likewise same principle was reiterated in precedent reported as "Ali Bux and another 
v. The State" (2018 SCMR 354). 

25.  In  this  respect  guidance  is  also  sought  from  the  case  law  reported  as  "Sarwar  and 
another v. The State" (2020 SCMR 1250) wherein it was held that place of occurrence was 
never disputed by the defence, presence of the witness at the place of occurrence cannot be 
doubted and crime was reported to the concerned police on the same day. 

26.  The statements of the injured witnesses PWs 9, 10 and 11 have been examined with 
every possible care and it is found that they remained consistent regarding their stance qua the 
appellants/ accused by approaching them from left side of their vehicle and reckless firing due 
to which they got severely injured and three individuals were done to death. Despite lengthy 
cross-examination by independent counsel of each appellant, they could not shatter their stance 
to  that  extent.  It  is  further  noticed  several  questions  were  put  to  PW -10  regarding  that  his 
statement under section 161, Cr.P.C., was not recorded in the hospital rather was recorded in 
the police station but could not shatter and shake the stance of the said PW . 

27.  It  is  further  noticed  that  despite  lengthy  cross-examination  by  each  appellant  on  the 
injured  witnesses  i.e.  PWs  9,  10  and  11,  the  material  portion  of  their  statements  regarding 
murder  of  three  persons  at  the  hands  of  appellants  was  not  cross-examined  and  if  some 
questions were put, same remained an unsuccessful attempt. In the light of these facts, there is 
no option except to believe the version of said injured witnesses. Hon'ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in a recent judgment reported as "Muhammad Shabbir and others v. The State" (2020 
SCMR 1206) wherein three persons were done to death in a brutal manner by reckless firing 
and one person was seriously injured who appeared as PW, autopsy of the dead bodies revealed 
firearm injuries upon the dead bodies of deceased, held that no discrepancy of such a nature 
that could shatter salient features of the prosecution case, accused were awarded death penalty 

 
 
by the trial court which was converted into life imprisonment by the High Court and Hon'ble 
Apex Court upheld the judgment of Hon'ble Lahore High Court. 

28.  It is also matter of record that questions were put to the PWs by the counsel of different 
appellants wherein difference stances, defences were taken like one appellant tried to establish 
that there was a dispute between PW-12 complainant of the case and the deceased Gulzeb, that 
there  were  family  disputes  amongst  their  father  and  their  uncles,  that  from  how  many 
generations you are doing the business of jewelry, that weapon you were carrying were whether 
licensed  or  otherwise, why  your  uncle  complainant had  not  hired  gunmen for  himself,  your 
father was murdered due to fire of his/your gunman, subject incident is a result of your previous 
enmity  etc.  It  is  noticed  that  different  stances  have  been  attempted  to  be  established  but  all 
remained just assertions without their further corroboration or material available on record . 

29.  It is also noticed that accused tried to build a defence by way of putting the questions 
to  the  prosecution  witnesses  that  complainant  Abdul  Sattar  SI/SHO  and  Zulfiqar  Inspector 
involved the present appellants to settle their score with the accused persons havi ng a dispute 
upon share of amount in another FIR. It was further cross-examined that for completion of said 
design said two officials have used PWs as a tool in the case. Very surprisingly when cross -
examination is looked into upon the said I.O. Abdul Sattar SI wherein he was confronted with 
the question that you on the behest of the complainant of the case have planted false case upon 
them. This alleged defence is a self-contradictory. It is also case of the appellants that they are 
innocent and have been implicated by the police authorities falsely by converting it as a case 
of dacoity. But admittedly, no one has been convicted/ sentenced in the said offence and all 
accused in that charge have been acquitted and no appeal has been filed against said acquit tal, 
hence to that extent matter has attained finality. 

30.  This is also matter of record that neither said stance was ever proved nor any defence 
evidence was produced rather a contradictory position is on record in a way that on the one 
hand  appellants  are  asking  the  PWs  that  you  have  been  used  by  Abdul  Sattar  SI/I.O.  and 
Zulfiqar  Inspector  while  on  the  other  hand  said  Abdul  Sattar  has  been  confronted  that  you 
acted on the advice of the complainant i.e. PW-12 Zubair Akhtar. In the light of these factual 
aspects, contradictory defence pleas and the law on the subject, what rests with the court to 
believe which version of the accused/appellants is correct? 

31.  Now adverting to the quantum of sentence of death awarded to the appellants. In this 
respect first important factor required to be considered is the motive which as per narration of 
the FIR is in the following words: 

This  is the  only  line  in FIR  which is in  respect  of  the motive.  All  record  has  been scanned 
judicially but failed to find out any material which could suggest that the accused/appellants 
are the persons to whom said enmity is attributed. Evidence of the prosecution witnesses have 
been thoroughly evaluated but none of them had alleged any incident regarding enmity with 
the present accused/appellants. 

32.  This  motive  was  thereafter  changed  by  way  of  supplementary  statement  of  the 
complainant in terms that appellants committed robbery/dacoity. The motive remained only an 
assertion. There is nothing available by way of tangible evidence which could substantiate this 
assertion. Needless to mention that when motive changed with another and that too remained 
an assertion, such vague and non-specific motive in an offence of capital punishment would 
be considered a mitigating factor. In a judgment reported as "Mst.Nazia Anwar v. The State 
and  others"  (2018  SCMR  911),  it  was  held  that  motive  asserted  by  the  prosecution  had 
remained utterly unproved. The law is settled by now that if the prosecution asserts the motive 
but fails to prove the same then such failure on the part of the prosecution may react against 
the sentence of death passed against a convict on the charge of murder. Court found although 
it is proved beyond doubt that appellant was responsible for the murder of deceased yet the 
story of the prosecution has many inherit obscurities ingrained therein and it was viewed that 
without  any  doubt  that  real  cause  of  occurrence  was  something  different  which  had  been 
completely  suppressed  by  both  the  parties  to  the  case  and  the  real  cause  of  occurrence  had 
remained shrouded in mystery. The Hon'bel Apex Court in the given circumstances, converted 
the death sentence into imprisonment for life. 

 
 
33.  It  is  also  noticed  by  this  Court  that  there  are  discrepancies  in  the  statement  of  the 
complainant  Zubair  Akhtar  (PW-12).  The  said  witness  during  the  course  of  identification 
stated that four persons came out from the vehicle and started firing upon the deceased and 
injured persons while all other witnesses in their statements mentioned number of the assailants 
as three. Some other discrepancies are also witnessed. In existence of these discrepancies in 
the  statements  and  the  fact  that  few  cartridge  cases  were  not  matched  with  the  recovered 
weapon, case of the appellants/ accused deserves alteration of punishment in order to meet the 
ends of justice. The real cause of occurrence had remained shrouded into mystery. 

34. In line with above discussion/ findings, it is safely held that due to brutal firing of the 
accused/appellants three individuals namely (Gulzeb, Mushtaq and Tufail) were done to death, 
presence of the injured witnesses  at  the  crime  scene  is  natural, postmortem  report  confirms 
that death of the deceased were result of firearm injuries, duration between injuries and death 
was 03 to 05 minutes, occurrence took place at broad daylight, one injured witness (PW-10) 
was severely injured and remained hospitalized for ten days, his MLR confirms firearm injuries 
upon his body, present appellants/accused were duly identified by the injured witnesses in the 
test identification parade conducted under the magisterial supervision, no evidence is available 
on record which could shatter/weaken the substantial portion of the test identification parade, 
judicial custody of the accused was first and they were given to the police custody after holding 
test identification parade, no malice or enmity  to falsely implicate the appellants/accused is 
surfaced. No previous enmity of any nature with the accused/appellants even asserted during 
the  course  of  evidence.  Spot  inspection  confirmed  the  incident,  medical  opinion  is  in 
confirmation  of  ocular account,  cartridge-cases  C-1 to C-22  collected from the  crime scene 
were duly wedded with the recovered weapon, therefore, case against the present appellants 
has been established beyond reasonable shadow of doubt. In this respect further guidance is 
sought from the pronouncement of the Hon'ble Apex Court of the country reported as "Qurban 
Hussain v. The State" (2017 SCMR 880), "Muhammad Aslam v. The State" (2012 SCMR 593), 
"Mehr Ali Shah v. The State" (2011 SCMR 116). 

35.  However, as an abundant caution and for safe administration of criminal justice, when 
motive  is  shrouded  into  mystery,  non-specific,  vague,  not  proved  one  and  remained 
unsubstantiated  by  any  material,  discrepancies  in  the  statements  of  PWs  are  available, 
particularly of PW-12, report of the PFSA to some of the cartridge cases regarding recovered 
pistol  is  negative,  therefore,  the  sentence  of  death  is  required  to  be  altered  into  the 
imprisonment for life, hence same is altered into imprisonment for life on each count while 
rest of the punishments, compensations are maintained, further guidance is sought from the 
case  laws  reported  as  "Khalid  Naseer  and  another  v.  The  State  and  another"  (2020  SCMR 
1966),  "Muhammad  Iqbal  v.  The  State"  (PLD  2001  SC  222),  "Nawaz  Khan  and  another  v. 
Ghulam Shabbir and another" (1995 SCMR 1007), "Ghulam Hussain alias Guloo v. The State" 
(2020 MLD 1736). 

36.  Resultantly, appeals of the appellants (Abdul Hassan, Syed Sajjad Hussain and Haider 
Abbas)  bearing  Nos.129,  130,  131,  164  of  2019  and  118  of  2020  are  hereby  dismissed. 
However, their sentence of death is altered into the imprisonment for life, on each count while 
rest  of  the  punishments,  compensations  are  maintained.  Murder  Reference  (M.R.  No.08  of 
2019) is answered in negative. Benefit of section 382(b), Cr.P.C is also extended to them. All 
the sentences shall run concurrently. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
