ORDER SHEET

T]\I T]Jtr Tq! AMAFIAN  HT IJ 

IDT  TCI AMARAN

JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

'AI 

Writ Petition  No. 87U2019

Abdul Rouf
VS
Learned Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad  etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedings
(03) 

Date of
orderl
Proceedinqs
03.04.2019  Mr. Muhammad  Afza! Janua, Advocate  for petitioner.

Order with signature  of Judge and that of pafties
or counsel where  necessary.

Ms. Saima Naqvi, State Counse!.
Petitioner  and minor Aisha Zumar  in-person.
Mushtaq,  S.I. with record.

Through this writ petition, the petitioner  has
assailed order dated 02.03.2019,  passed by learned
District Judge (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  petitioner

was  directed  to hand over the custody  of Aisha Zumar

(minor)  to her mother/respondent  No.2.
2. 
Brief facts as referred in the instant  writ
petition are that marriage between  Abdu!
Rouf/petitioner  and Mst. Sadaf Ameen/respondent No.2
was solemnized  according to Muslim Family [aws
Ordinance, 1961 on 26.01.2001 and have been  blessed
with a son Muhammad Hazma and daughter Aisha
Zumar,  however respondent  No.2 was divorced on
24.05.2004,  which resulted into litigation up to Hon'ble

Supreme Court between  the pafties regarding  custody
of minors, whereby custody of minors were given to
respondent No.2. When  minors attained the age of
L2lL3  years, petitioner again filed petition under
Section  25 of the Guardian  and Wards  Act, 1890 for
custody of minors  before the learned Guardian  Judge,
Taxila, which was rejected, however  an appeal was

filed before learned Additional  District Judge, Taxila,
which  was decided in his favour. During pendency of
the said petition, respondent  No.2 moved an
application  before learned Sessions Judge  (West),
Islamabad,  whereby the Court vide order  dated
02.03.2019  directed  the petitioner to hand over custody

W.P. No.871120L9

Paoe  [2.|

of minor to respondent  No.2 despite the fact that
guardian appeal preferred before learned  Additional
District Judge, Taxila  was decided in his favour, but
learned  Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad  refused  to
hear the petitioner and directed the petitioner vide
order  dated 07.03.2019 to hand over custody of minor

to respondent  No.2.  Hence,  the instant writ petition.
3. 
Learned  counsel'  for petitioner,  inter alia,
contends that learned  Sessions Judge  (West),
Islamabad refused to record the statement  of Aisha
Zumar, who herself  requested the Coutt to record  her

statemenU  that despite the fact that the minor, who is
sui juris now, the learned Sessions  Judge  (West),
Islamabad  did not record her statemenU  that the
orders dated 02.03.2019 and 07.03.2019  are against

the law and facts  of the case,  therefore,  the same liable

to be set-aside.
I  have heard the arguments advanced  by
4. 
learned  counse! for petitioner  as well as of the State
Counsel and perused  the record with their able

assistance.
5. 
Perusa!  of record  reveals  that notice  has been
serued  upon respondent No.2 through  the Coutt  of

learned District & Sessions Judge  (West),  Islamabad'on

26.03.2019 and the same was received by respondent

No. 2/Mst.  Sadaf Ameen (mother),  but no one has put

appearance  on her behalf.
6. 
In view of above, this Court has no other
option but to proceed  ex-parte  against  respondent

Minor Aisha Zumar present  before the Coutt

No.2.
7. 
states that she is living  with her father/petitioner  with
her own free will. She further  states that she  has
telephonically  contacted her mother/respondent  No'2,

but her mother is not willing to resolve the dispute  with
petitioner. She also conceded that she was not
abducted  by anyone and her father is looking  her day

to day affairs in proper manner.

W.P. No.871120L9

Paqe  [3.|

8. 
At this stage, learned  counse! for petitioner
contends that petitioner is aggrieved with the order

dated 02.03.2019,  passed by the learned District  Judge

(West),  Islamabad,  whereby custody  of the minor Aisha
Zumar  was handed over to her mother/  respondent

No.2. He further contends  that such  order could not be
passed on mere application of the respondent No.2,
whereas the minor is presently  sui juris and can
understand entire dispute. He fufther contends that

minor is mature enough and can decide  to live with  her

father  or mother with  her own choice.
9. 
Perusal of record reveals that the learned
District  Judge  (West), Islamabad has directly passed

the order against  the petitioner  without considering  the
statement  of minor  (daughter), even  otherwise,  the
matter could only be adjudicated  by learned Guardian

Court, under the law.
10.  In view of above, this Court is fully convinced
that minor Aisha Zumar  wants to live with her
father/petitioner,  as she has expressed her willingness
in her statement  before  this Couft,  even she has
attained the age of pubefi and fully understands  the
nature of her parents' family  dispute. The learned
District Judge (West), Islamabad  has no jurisdiction to
pass the order in question without  adopting the
provisions  of Guardian  and Wards  Act, 1890, therefore,
the instant writ petition is allowed, order  dated
02.03.20L9,  passed by learned  District Judge,
Islamabad is hereby set-aside.  However, respondent
No.2 is at tibefi  to approach  concerned  Guardian Coutt

for redressal of her grievance,  if any.

(MOHSTN

JUDGE

Khalld  Z.

