ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 
WRIT PETITION NO. 1806 OF 2021 

USMAN ALI 

VERSUS    

ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE (WEST), ISLAMABAD and 
others  

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

Date of Decision   

: 

: 

: 

Hafiz Naimat Ullah, Advocate. 

Nemo. 

29-01-2024. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:- 

1. 

Through  the  instant  Writ  Petition,  the  Petitioner  [Usman  Ali]  has 

assailed  the  (i)  Order  and  Decree  dated 30-11-2020 (“Impugned Order”) 

passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  (“Family Court”) whereby the 

Petitioner’s  right  to  defense  was  struck  off  and  the  suit  filed  by  the 

Respondents No.3 to 5 was decreed and the (ii) Judgment and Decree dated 

14-04-2021  (“Impugned  Judgment”)  whereby  the  Petitioner’s  appeal 

against  the Impugned Order was dismissed.  

2. 

The  brief  facts,  as  per  the  Memo  of  Petition,  are  that  the 

Respondents  No.3  to  5  [Sumera  Khaliq,  Abiha,  and  Aima]  filed  a  Suit 

against  the  Petitioner  for  Recovery  of  Maintenance  and  Dowry  Articles. 

The  Petitioner  filed  his  written  statement  whereafter  issues  were  framed. 

Thereafter  vide  the  Impugned  Order  dated  30-11-2020  the  learned  Family 

Court  struck  off  the  defense  of  the  Petitioner under Section 17-A of West 

Family  Courts  Act,  1964  and  decreed  the  suit.    Being  aggrieved  of  the 

Impugned  Order  the  Petitioner  filed  an  appeal  before  the  learned 

Additional  District  Judge-West,  Islamabad  which  was  dismissed  vide  the 

Impugned Judgment.  Hence, the instant petition. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  submitted  that  although  the 

Petitioner’s  defence  was  struck  off  pursuant  to  Section  17-A  of  West 

Family Courts Act, 1964, however, the mandate of the said provision is not 

for  the  Family  Court  to  blindly  allow  the  plaint  as  prayed  for.  Even if the 

defendant  is  not  present  in  the  Family  Court,  the  Family  Court  is  liable  to 

 
 
 
 
 
independently  assess  whether  the  claim  of  the  plaintiffs/Respondents  is 

made out or not.  He submitted that in the instant case the Respondents did 

not even disclose the source of income of the Petitioner.  He submitted that 

the  Petitioner  is  a  labourer  and  therefore,  he  cannot  be  saddled  with  the 

burden  of  paying  Rs.35,000/-  per  month  per  child.    He  further  submitted 

that  the  amount  of  interim  maintenance  fixed  by  the  Family  Court  i.e. 

Rs.4,000/-  was  reasonable  and  the  final maintenance granted should be the 

same.    Lastly,  he  prayed  on  behalf of the Petitioner that the Petitioner may 

be  given  a  chance  to  clear  all  the  outstanding  and  for  the  matter  to  be 

decided on the merits.  The learned counsel relied upon Marriam Bibi and 

others  VS Azhar  Iqbal  and  others,  PLD  2022  Lahore  840,  Khurram 

Shahzad  VS Naseem  Akhtar  and  2  others,  2021  CLC  1300,  and 

Muhammad Shakir VSAdditional District Judge, Islamabad-West and 

5 others, 2021 CLC 809. 

4. 

No  one  is  in  attendance  on  behalf  of  the  Respondents  No.3  to  5.  

Same  was  the  position  on  the  last  date  of  hearing  i.e.  28-11-2023  and  10-

05-2023,  therefore, Respondents No.3 to 5 are proceeded against ex-parte.  

5. 

I have heard the learned counsel for the Petitioner and gone through 

the available  record.  

6. 

First  and  foremost,  it  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  Court  in 

exercise  of  Constitutional  jurisdiction  does  not  act  like  a  Court  of  appeal.  

As  such,  the  Court  cannot  embark  upon  a  reappraisal  of  evidence.  It  is 

settled  law  that  a  High  Court  in  such  jurisdiction  cannot  substitute  the 

concurrent  findings  of  the courts below with its own findings solely on the 

ground  that  another  view  was  possible  on  the  same  evidence.  A  party 

approaching  the  High  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  has  to 

demonstrate  that  there  is  a  gross misreading or non-reading of evidence or 

jurisdictional  error  or  such  legal  infirmity  that  has  caused  miscarriage  of 

justice.  With  that  in  mind  I  endeavor  to  see  whether  interference  by  this 

Court in exercise of its Constitutional  jurisdiction  is warranted in  this case.  

7. 

 As  far  as  the  Petitioner’s  objection  is  concerned  that  the 

Respondents  did  not  even  disclose  his  source  of  income,  I  agree with the 

judgments  rendered  by  the  Lahore  High  Court  in  the  cases  of  Tanveer 

Salamat VSAdditional Sessions Judge and others, 2019 YLR 1862, and 

 
 
Tariq Mehmood VSMst. Farah Shaheen, 2010 YLR 349 whereby it has 

been  held  that  the  onus  to  prove  financial  capability  is  upon  the 

husband/father.  A  wife  cannot  be  expected  to  have  documentary  proof of 

her  former  husband’s  income.    No  person  can  be  burdened  to  prove  the 

income  of  another.      There  is  no  cavil  to  the  proposition  that  children  are 

the  financial  responsibility  of  a  father.    A  minor’s  maintenance  cannot  be 

denied  on  account  of 

the  wife/mother’s 

inability 

to  prove 

the 

father/husband’s  financial  capability.    Therefore,  it  is  the  father/husband 

who has the burden to prove his financial capability in order for the learned 

Family  Court  to  decide  the  quantum  of maintenance of the minor children. 

In  case  of  his  failure  to  do  so  the  learned  Family  Court  may  draw  a 

negative  inference  on  account  of  withholding  of  evidence  and  determine 

the  quantum  of  maintenance for the minor on the basis of available record.  

The  father/husband  in  such  case  is  not  justified  in  claiming  that  such 

amount exceeds his capability when he himself bypassed the opportunity of 

informing  the Family  Court of his financial  position.   

8. 

In  the  instant  case,  the  Petitioner’s  right  to  defense  was  struck  off 

due  to  his  failure  to  pay  the  interim  maintenance  as  fixed  by  the  learned 

Family Court.  The Petitioner has failed to point out any misreading or non-

reading  of  evidence  or  any  jurisdictional  error  or  other  infirmity  which 

would  warrant  interference  in  the  exercise  of  Constitutional  jurisdiction.  

As such, the instant petition  is hereby dismissed as being devoid of merit.   

(SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
 JUDGE 

Junaid 

 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
   
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
