MENT  SHE

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT.

W.P No. 322llOl2Ol9

Mst. Fatima Sheikh VS S.H.O P.S Sabzi Mandi, Islamabad  etc.

Pedtioner by:

State by:

Ch. M. Farrukh  Javed,  Advocate alongwith
petitioner.

Barrister Ayesha  Siddique Khan, State
Counsel.
Muhammad  Arif, ASI.

Complainant

In person.

Hassan  Mujeeb  and Jabeen, co-accused  are
present.

Date of Hearing:

26.11.2019.

MoHsrN  AKTITAR  KAYANI. J. Through  this writ petition, the

petitioner has prayed for quashing of F.I.R No. 333, dated o4.o9.2olg,

registered U/s 365, PPC,  P.S Sabzi Mandi,  Islamabad.

2.  Brief facts referred in the instant FIR registered  on the complaint of

Salman Muz,afar/respondent  No.2 are that on o3.o9.2olg, his real son

namely Zimral Salman has gone to meet his real mother/petitioner in her
oflice situated at Sector l-lt/4,  Islamabad, however,  when he did not

return,  he was contacted  on his phone, but his phone  (son's phone)  was

off and same was the position with the mobile  phone  of his ex-wife, Mst

Fatima Sheikh and the minor zilrlral Salman was abducted by his ex-

wife with t.l.e help of her brothers,  despite  the fact that Fatima  Sheikh

has lost his litigation  from Civil Court to High Court  level regarding

custody  of the son.

3. 

Learned counsel  for the petitioner contends that the petitioner has

not abducted  the minor Zimral  Salman as alleged in the instant FIR and

the same was registered with malafide  even from the bare perusal  of the

contents  of FIR, the same does not disclose  commission  of any cognizable

offence  as the petitioner is the real mother of Zimral  Salman  (alleged

abductee), who was born on L2.L2.2o01  and approximately, he was 17

2 

Writ  Petition  No.  3221le/2019

years and 09 months  at the time of alleged occurrence.  He further

contends  that the minor is grown  up man, who came to see his mother

by his own free will, even  otherwise, his statement  U/s 164 Cr.P.C before

learned Judicial Magistrate  has been recorded, which further  clarify the

entire situation and as such the minor  was not removed  from the lawful

guardianship  of the father/respondent  No.2.

4.  Conversely,  Salman Muzaffar/respondent  No.2 in person submits

that his ex-wife  has filed the case for custody of the minor daughter

Rashail  Muzaffar and Zimral Salman before the Guardian Court at

Rawalpindi,  but she was not succeeded  to get the custody up to the High

Court level, whereafter the matter has attained  finality and as such the

minors  are residing with him. He further submits  that the minor Zimral

Salman was kidnapped  by the petitioner  with the help of his brothers

and any statement  of Zimr,al Salman recorded  before the learned  Judicial

Magistrate is obtained under duress and influence, which  could not be

considered valid at this stage and even the challan  has been submitted

in the Court.

5.  Arguments  heard, record perused.

6.  From  the  perusal of  record, it 

reveals that  the

complainant/respondent  No.2/father  of the minor Zimral  Salman,  who

was born on 12.L2.2OO1,  aged about 17 years and 09 months alleged in

the FIR that minor has been allegedly  abducted  by the petitioner/Fatima

Sheikh,  real mother on 03.09.2019 in the vicinity of Sector l-LLl{,

Islamabad,  when  the minor  son Zimral Salman has gone to meet his

mother in her office. The investigation  report reveals that the Zimral

Salman has recorded his  statement  before the learned Judicial

Magistrate U/s 164 Cr.P.C, in which  he has specifically stated that he

was not abducted  and has gone to see his mother and he remained with

his mother with his own free will and choice as his father usually  abused

him on different occasions,  due to which  he was not interested to live

with him. The statement U/s t64 Cr.P.C was recorded  on 16.09.2019.

3 

Writ  petition N o.321ttet2ot9

The alleged abductee  was a student of A-Level and matured enough  to

understand his real issues  including  dispute  between his parents.
7.  Record further reflects  that numerous criminal cases have been
registered by the parties  against  each other as well as against  family
members in different courts, even litigation is pending,  which further

confirms that parties are locked in different kind of litigation,  whereby

the malalide  could not be ruled out.
8.  while considering  the mahrrity of the Zimral salman, who is 17
years and 09 month old, it is not possible that a boy of approximately S

feet and 10 inches  could  have been abducted  by his real mother by force,

even the statement  U /s 164 Cr.P.C reflects that he was not abducted,

although the Investigation Officer submitted the chaltan U/s 173 Cr.P.C,

who has been confronted  regarding any incriminating  evidence, which

has been collected by him during the course of investigation,  through
which it could be justifred that Zimrat  Salman  was abducted  by the

petitioner, especially  when the statement U/s 164 Cr.p.C was recorded

by the alleged abductee  by his own free will, whereby the Investigation

oflicer was speechless  having no answer to t]:e query made  by this

Court.  The ingredients  of offence  U/s 365 PPC are not visible  from the

record as the alleged minor  is more than 17 years of age and as such the

ingredients of use of force or inducement or a wrongful  confinement  are

lacking and bare reading of the entire case as well as the record does not

reflect the commission of offence  U/s 365 PPC and mere submission of

challan by the Investigation  Officer before the Court does not preclude

this court from exercising  the jurisdiction u/s 561-A Cr.p.C. as the

entire trial against the real mother  for abduction  of her real son is just

an abuse of process  of law and even the conduct of the Investigation
officer is not aboveboard, who became instrumental  for causing  an

irreparable loss to the relationship  of father and son as well as with the

mother  as such this type of FIR could not be registered in terms  of

Section 365 PPC.  Reliance  is placed upon reported judgment PLD 2075

slndh 382 (*rst. Dranlum To;t{rq qlnd others VS s.H.o. p.s Defence

4

Writ  Petition  N o. 3221  lQl20l9

and, othersl.
9. 

In view of above background  and the facts and circumstances

argued before this Court, especially  the alleged  minor Zimral Salman,

whose  age is about 17 years and 09 months,  time and again  confronted

before this Court regarding his alleged  abduction,  who categorically

stated that he was not abducted and he was given time alongwith  his

parents to settle  the issues on 20.LL.2O19,  who has again  reiterated  his

stance that he was not abducted,  therefore, in the light of the above

overurhelming evidence and statement of Zimral  Salman recorded  tJ /s l6a

Cr.P.C before learned  Judicial  Magistrate as well as before this Court, this

Court has no other option but to quash the instant FIR, as no offence is

made  out against  the petitioner (mother for kidnapping  and abduction of

real son Zirnral Salman).
10.  In view of above, instant writ petition is ALLOWED and F.I.R
No. 333, dated  O4.O9.2O19,  registered  U/s 365, ppC, p.S Sabzi Mandi,

Islamabad  is hereby  OUASIIED.

(MOHSTN

JI'DGE

RAUZAII

