ORDER SHEET

IN THE IST,AMABAD  HIGH COURT,

ABAD

AR

S. No. of
otde{

Date of
orde{
Proceedings
20.12.2019

Criminal Misc. No. 778/8/2019.

Muhammad  Amir

VS

The State,  etc

Order with signature  of Judge and  that
counsel  where necessary

of parties or

Mr. Imran Shaukat Rao, Advocate for pefitioner.
Barrister  Ayesha  Siddique Khan, State Counsel.
Arshad Mehmood  Warriach, Inspector,  P.S. Koral,
Islamabad.

Through  this Crl. Misc. petition, the petitioner

has applied for post-arrest  bail in case FIR No-458, dated

26.09.2019,  IJ / S 392  PPC, Ir.S. Koral, Islamabad,  lodged

on the complaint  of Zulliqar  Ali.

2. 

Brief  facts referred in the above  mentioned  FIR

are that complainant/respondent  No.2 was informed  by

his family members on 15.09.2019  at about  08:40  a.m'

when he reached  his office  that four persons armed  with

pistol entered  into his house,  assaulted  his wife and

children and snatched cash Rs'9,500/-,  four mobile

phones, one laptop and one hand bag and fled away

from the scene on Honda CG 125 motorcycle  without

number plate  and car Wagon  R white colour  No.FU-382

however, they were  restrained  from exit from main  gate

of street  which  was locked  by security guard. One of the

accused person  pointed  pistol uPon  the guard who

closed  the gate and forced  him to oPen the same, where-

atter, accused persons  fled awaY.

Crl. Misc.  No.778lB/2019

2

3. 

Learned  counsel for the petitioner contends  that

petitioner is innocent and has falsely been implicated  in

this case  as no direct evidence is available to connect  the

petitioner with the alleged crime;  that no recovery  was

effected from the petitioner  to link the petitioner  with

the offence of armed robbery; that identification  parade

was conducted  in illegal  manner and the case of

petitioner  is one of further inquiry.

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State Counsel  contends  that

petitioner  has been  identified by the witnesses during

the course of identification parade  conducted in Adyala

Jail Rawalpindi and challan  has been  submitted in the

Court, therefore, he is not entitled  for concession  of bail.

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.

Tentative  assessment of record  reveals  that

petitioner was arrested in case FIR No.458,  dated

26.09.2019,TJ/S392PPC,  P.S. Koral, Islamabad  with the

allegations  that he alongwith others committed  armed

robbery in the house  of complainant and robbed  cash,

mobile  phones, taptop  and hand  bag. The identification

parade was conducted in District lall, Rawalpindi in

which petitioner  has been identified  as one of the

accused  in this case. Although  no recovery has been

effected  from the petitioner but this does not iustify  or

exempt  him from criminal tiability. It has also observed

that motorcycle  used in the alleged  crime was recovered

on the pointation of petitioner and  as such  he is linked

with the hideous  offence  of armed  robbery.

Crl. Misc.  No.778lB/2019

3

7. 

The Courts are bound  to assess the available

record and consider  the role of each accused  tentatively,

whereas  in this case petitioner is pima-facie  linked with

the hideous crime of committing  armed robbery  and as

such alleged offence  falls within the ambit of

prohibitory  clause of Section  497 Cr.P.C.

8. 

In view of above, instant post-arrest  bail

application is hereby  dismissed. However,  challan  has

been submitted  in the Court, therefore,  while relying

upon 2077 SCMR 7332 (Rehmat  Ullah  VS The  Stater.

learned trial Court seized with the matter  is directed to

conclude the trial within period of six (06) months

under intimation to this Court.

Zehid

(

IUDGE

