ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

W.P  No.443 of 2020 

Zeeshan Younis 
VS 

Shakeela Bibi & others 

Petitioner By: 

Malik Saqib Mahmood, Advocate 

Respondent No.1 by: 

lftikhar Hussain Khan Advocate 

Date of Hearing: 

24.07.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J:  Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  assailed  the  Judgment  and  decree  dated:  04.10.2019 

passed  by  learned  Additional  District  Judge-I/  Judge  MCAC  (East), 

Islamabad, whereby  appeal filed  by the  petitioner was  dismissed  and the 

Judgment  and  decree  dated:  06.07.2019  passed  by  the  learned  Senior 

Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad-Ill 

(Guardian)/Judge  Family  Court, 

(East), 

Islamabad, filed by respondent No.1/plaintiff was partly decreed. 

2. 

Brief facts of the petition are that the petitioner and respondent No.1 

got married on 23.03.2017 at Tarlai Kalan, Islamabad, according to Muslim 

Family Laws Ordinance, 2001 with a dower amount, which was paid at the 

time  of  Nikkah.  After  some  time, 

respondent  No.1 

filed  a  suit  for 

dissolution of marriage, recovery of maintenance and for recovery of dowry 

articles  or  in  the  alternative  of  recovery  of  its  value  of  Rs.5,61,400/-  , 

before the learned Family Court at Islamabad. The petitioner contested the 

suit  by filing  written  statement.  Pre-trial  reconciliation  efforts  between the 

parties  were  made,  however,  failed.  Out  of  pleadings  of  the  parties, 

following issues were framed;- 

1. 

Whether  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  for  maintenance, 
if yes at what rate and for what period? OPP 

2 

W.P  No.443 of 2020 

2. 

3. 

Whether  the  plaintiff  is  a  "Nasheeza"  and  so  not 
entitle for  the post maintenance?  OPP 

Whether  the plaintiff is entitled for  recovery of dowry 
articles  as  per  list  attached  with  the  plaint  after 
deleting  items  mentioned  in  the  list  of  defendant? 
OPP 

4. 

Relief. 

Parties  were  directed  to  produce  their  respective  evidence.  Respondent 

No.1/plaintiff  appeared  and  got  recorded  her  statement  as  PW.1, 

statement  of  one  Sufyan  Ali  through  affidavit  as  Ex.P1,  statement  of  one 

Mst.  Hafeeza  Begum  through  affidavit  as  Ex.P2,  statement  of  one 

Mst.  Jameela  Bibi  as  Ex. P3.  In  documentary  evidence,  respondent 

No.1/plaintiff  produced  list  of  dowry  articles  Ex.P1/1-12,  list  of  dowry 

articles  as  Ex.P4,  application  of  jirga  Ex.PS,  receipt  of  dowry  articles 

Ex.P6 (13  pages),  and  closed  her oral  as  well  as  documentary  evidence. 

On the other  hand, defendant/petitioner recorded his statement as OW .1, , 

Special  Power of Attorney  as  Ex. D 1,  copy of  nikahnama as  Mark  DA and 

closed  his  oral  as  well  as  documentary  evidence.  After  recording  the 

evidence and  hearing the  parties, learned Trial  Court partially decreed the 

suit  under  Section  10  sub-section  (4)  of  Family  Court  Act,  1964  in  the 

following terms;- 

1.  Plaintiff shall be  allowed  to  receive  Rs.  8000/-  per  month 
as maintenance  for  period of iddat  making  the  total  of Rs 
iddat  period.  Claim  of  past 
24,000/- 
maintenance  is declined. 

for  entire 

2.  Plaintiff shall be  entitled  to  receive  her  remaining  dowry 
articles as per list which plaintiff has attached  with plaint. 

Being  aggrieved,  the  petitioner/defendant  filed  appeal  before  learned 

Additional District Judge,  East, Islamabad, which was dismissed vide order 

dated 04.10.2019.  Hence, this  petition before this Court  praying for setting 

aside  of  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  dated  06.07.2019  & 

04.10.2019, respectively. 

3 

W.P  No.443 of 2020 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned 

Judgments  and  decrees  are  against  the  law  and  facts;  that  the  learned 

Trial Court as well as Appellate Court has failed to appreciate the evidence 

available on record; that the learned Trial Court has failed to follow law and 

the dictums laid down  by the superior Courts and committed illegality while 

passing  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees.  Next  contended  that  the 

learned Trial Court as well as learned First Appellate Court has passed the 

impugned judgments  and  decrees  without  applying judicial  mind.  Further 

contended that  subsequently,  another  list was  filed  which  was  not signed 

by  the  respondent  and  the  same  was  not  got  exhibited.  Also  contended 

that  no  other  articles  exist  with  the  petitioner  and  all  the  dowry  articles 

were  handed  over  to  respondent  No.1, through  local  commission.  Lastly, 

prayed for setting aside of the impugned Judgments and decrees. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel for  respondent  No.1  has  opposed  the 

submissions  made  by  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  and  contended 

that the  respondent  at the time  of filing  of the  suit  had annexed the  list of 

the  dowry  articles  and  value  of  the  same  was  also  mentioned  as 

Rs.561400/-  in  the  subject  of  the  suit  as  well  as  the  same  value  in  the 

prayer  clause;  that  respondent  through  her  evidence  has  proved  her 

contention by recording the statements of the witnesses. 

5. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 

have perused the material available on record with their able assistance. 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  respondent  lived  with  the 

petitioner  for  about  one  and  a  half  year.  Dissolution  of  marriage  on  the 

basis  of  khula  has  been  allowed  by  Court  on  statement  of  respondent. 

Petitioner  has  clearly  established  that  respondent  is  a  "Nasheeza"  and  is 

not  entitled  to  past  maintenance.  She  was,  however,  entitled  to  receive 

Rs.24,000/-  as  maintenance  for  iddat  period.  Perusal  of  record  further 

reveals that  to  the extent  of  recovery of dowry articles,  petitioner has also 

annexed  list  of  dowry  articles  and  admitted  that  he  is  in  possession  of 

articles  reflecting  in  his  list.  The  respondent  has also  produced  separate 

list  in  evidence,  but  had  not  annexed  with  plaint;  it  is  also  pertinent  to 

4 

W.P  No.443 of 2020 

mention  here  that  no  question  was  put  to  the  petitioner  about  the  items 

which  were  received  by  her,  whereas,  in  the  suit  the  respondent  has 

claimed the dowry articles or their value  in the sum of Rs.561400/-. 

7. 

The  power of this  Court  under Constitutional  Jurisdiction  in  a  family 

matter  has  been  elaborately  set  out  by the  Division  Bench of the  Hon'ble 

Peshawar  High  Court  in  the  case  reported  as  [2005  CLC  54  Peshawar] 

"Hadvat Ullah VS  Amna Bibl',  in the following terms:- 

"Powers  of  High  Court  in  constitutional  jurisdiction  are  not 
analogous  to  those  of  an  Appellate  Court.  Constitutional 
jurisdiction  can  only  be  exercised,  if  the  lower  Court  has 
exceeded  its jurisdiction or acted  without jurisdiction. Finding of 
fact  recorded  by  a  Court  possessing  jurisdiction  cannot  be 
disturbed merely on the ground that  another  view is possible on 
the same  evidence,  unless that finding  is based  on no evidence, 
is fanciful  or arbitrary. The object of taking away right of appeal 
is  meaningful.  If  the  constitutional 
in  the  family  matters 
jurisdiction  takes  the  place  of  appeal,  then  the  intent  and 
purpose of legislature would be frustrated.  Impugned judgment, 
if passed  with  competence  and  jurisdiction  conferred  on  the 
Court  of  law,  then  it  cannot  be  adjudged  in  Constitutional 
jurisdiction of High Court." 

8. 

In  the  case  in  hand,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  partially 

decreed  the  suit  of  the  respondent  vide  judgment  dated  06.07.2019, 

whereas  the  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  was  dismissed  vide  judgment 

dated  04.10.2019,  as  such,  there  are  concurrent  findings  of  the  courts 

below which  cannot  be interfered with  by this  Court while  exercising of  its 

Constitutional  Jurisdiction.  In  the  case  reported  as  "Muhammad  Bakhsh 

and another  VS Sagheer Ahmad  and another" (2010  SCMR  537)  it 

has been held as under:- 

"The concurrent findings  of facts  recorded by  the  learned 
courts  below  and  maintained  vide  impugned  judgment 
could  not  be  interfered  with.  Therefore,  we  are  of  the 
opinion that  the  impugned judgment  does  not  suffer from 
any infirmity or impropriety factual  or legal." 

Reliance in  this  regard  is  also  placed upon the  cases  "Muhammad Ashraf 

and  seven  others.  VS  Muhammad  Waris  and  two  others".  (2008  CLC 

5 

W.P  No.443  of 2020 

1466)  and  "Shahbaz Gui and others  VS  Muhammad Younsa Khan" (2020 

SCMR 867). 

9. 

In  view  of  the  above,  I  find  the  order  dated  06.07.2019  passed  by 

the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  to  be  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  law 

and  not  suffering  from  any jurisdictional  infirmity.  The  instant  writ  petition 

having been bereft of substance is dismissed. 

-erru1am ~am  Qa"'b'anl 

Judge  V 

Announced  in Open Court, on this 29th  day of July, 2020. 

