JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Civil Revision No. 378/2018. 

Capital Development Authority 

VS

Ejaz Mehmood. 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Amir Latif Gill, Advocate.  

Respondent by: 

Raja Rizwan Abbasi and Ch. Gulfam Ashraf Goraya, 
Advocates. 

Date of Decision: 

09.03.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through  this  Civil  Revision,  the 

petitioner  CDA  has  assailed  the  judgment  &  decree  dated  28.05.2018,  passed  by 

learned Civil Judge, 1st Class  (East), Islamabad and order dated 05.09.2018, passed 

by learned Additional District Judge (East), Islamabad, whereby suit for declaration, 

permanent and mandatory injunction filed by respondent was decreed concurrently. 

2. 

Brief facts referred in the instant civil revision are that respondent filed a suit 

for  declaration,  permanent  and  mandatory  injunction  on  the  ground  that  he  is 

entitled for plot No.320, Chak Shehzad, Islamabad which was approved by CDA to 

be  allotted  to  the  respondent  against  his  claim  for  built-up  property  under 

rehabilitation  scheme/policy,  issued  by  the  CDA  but  the  allotment  letter  was  not 

issued to him. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  CDA  contends  that  respondent  is  not 

eligible  for  allotment  of  plot  under  Rehabilitation  Policy,  1984  as  well  as  under 

Rehabilitation  Policy,  1996  but  despite  this  fact  his  case  has  been  considered  in 

connivance with CDA official i.e. the then Deputy Director Land, who appeared as 

DW-1/Taimoor  Ahmed,  Deputy  Director  Land,  CDA  and  while  appearing  before 

the  Court  during  trial  conceded  the  claim  of  plaintiff/respondent  and  extended 

undue benefit to the respondent for allotment of plot; that Tairmoor Ahmed, Deputy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

2 

Director Land, CDA when recorded his statement before the trial Court he was not 

in  possession  of  any  record,  nor  any  such  record  has  been  prepared  by  the  CDA 

under  any  process  and  trial  Court  has  blindly  passed  the  impugned  judgment  & 

decree  without  any  record;  that  at  that  time  counsel  for  CDA  was  also  part  and 

parcel  of  entire  fraud  with  officials  of  CDA  as  well  as  respondent  and  gave  his 

opinion not to file any appeal against the said judgment & decree of the trial Court, 

however, when the said fraud has been surfaced on record, appeal was already time 

barred and as such the entire chain in the claim of respondent including respondent, 

CDA officials as well as counsel for CDA were in league with each other to commit 

this  fraud  in  the  Court  through  technical  maneuvering;  that  this  Court  in  civil 

revision  has  ample  powers  to  consider  the  evidence  and  record,  where-after  this 

Court  may  condone  the  delay  caused  in  filing  of  appeal;  that  such  hyper  technical 

objection and time limitation should not be considered in the interest of justice to set 

aside the irregularities and illegalities committed by the Courts below, which should 

not be allowed to perpetuate on the basis of a wrong judgment of the Courts below. 

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent contends that concurrent findings 

of  the  courts  below  in  favour  of  respondent  could  not  be  set  aside  merely  on 

technical  grounds  as  CDA/petitioner  has  conceded  the  claim  of  respondent  in  the 

Court and such conceding statement could not be set aside at this stage; that appeal 

filed  by  the  CDA  before  the  Appellate  Court  was  time  barred  and  same  was 

dismissed on the said ground as no valid justification has been rendered on record for 

filing  of  the  appeal  beyond  the  time  period;  that  instant  civil  revision  is  also  time 

barred and such delay could not be condoned. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  respondent  being  plaintiff  filed  suit  for 

declaration,  permanent  and  mandatory  injunction  against  the  CDA  with  the  claim 

that he is entitled and eligible allottee under rehabilitation benefit as his property has 

been acquired by the CDA through award and name of plaintiff/respondent has been 

recorded in the award Ex.P-2 at S.No.17, whereas under CDA Rehabilitation Policy 

he is eligible for allotment of plot being affectee of acquisition process of CDA under 

 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

3 

CDA Ordinance, 1960. As per contents of the plaint, CDA authorities are reluctant 

to allot plot despite the fact that respondent/plaintiff case has been processed and he 

was given assurance for allotment of Plot No.320, Chak Shehzad, Islamabad. 

7. 

On  the  other  hand,  CDA  filed  written  statement  with  only  one  contention 

against the relevant claim that “denied for want of knowledge”, which was signed by 

Deputy  Director  Land,  CDA.  The  trial  Court  after  deciding  the  application  U/O 

XXXIX Rules 1 & 2 CPC framed the following issues vide order dated 15.03.2017:- 

1. 

Whether the plaintiff is entitled for decree of declaration, permanent and 

mandatory injunction, as prayed for? OPP 

2. 

Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the instant suit, hence, 

it is liable to be dismissed? OPD 

3. 

Relief? 

8. 

Respondent  while  appearing  as  PW-1  through  his  attorney  stated  that  he  is 

affectee  of  Mouza  Mohrian  and  his  land  was  acquired  by  CDA  vide  award  dated 

18.01.1982 Ex.P-2 and he was declared entitled for allotment of plot and his case was 

accepted  by  CDA,  whereby  Plot  No.320,  Chak  Shehzad,  Islamabad  was  approved 

but  allotment  letter  was  not  issued.  During  the  course  of  cross-examination,  it  was 

not  denied  that  respondent’s  land  was  acquired,  however,  on  the  other  hand 

petitioner’s side produced Tairmoor Ahmed, Deputy Director Land, CDA as DW-1, 

who recorded his statement to the following effect:- 

G-5

  رٹکیس  ،

34

  ربمو  ٹیلف  لٹساہ  ٹىموروگ  ہىکس  ناخ  محمد  ریما  دلو  دمحا  رومیت  ںازا  نایب

 ا

یلا يارمہ ڈراکیر۔ںوہ دابٓا ملاسا

CDA 

 ڈىیل رٹکیرئاڈ یٹپڈ ںیم ہک ایک نایب فلح رب دابٓا ملاسا

 ںیم هیرثاتم ےک داسہش کچ یلخاد ںایروم عضوم روا ےہ اٹیب اک ی ٰضترم ملاغ یعدم ںوہ

 لیریس ےک ڈراویا روا  ےہ رادقح اک ٹلاپ  ےک

30x70

  تحت ڈراویا  یترادص روا  ےہ ےس

 وہ  یگیئادا  ےپور

477/-

  غلبم  روا  اھت  اوہ  رئاوکیا  ناکم  ٹف  عبرم

711

  اک  یعدم

71 

  ربمو

۔ےہ یک قیدصت یک ڈراویا یھب ےو چوارب

ویوویر یک

CDA 

 ۔ےہ یکچ

9.  While considering the above background, there is no denial that land/built-up 

property  of  respondent  has  been  acquired  through  award  Ex.P-2  and  name  of 

respondent  has  been  reflected  at  S.No.17  of  the  award,  whereby  built-up  property 

measuring  175  Sq.  ft.  was  acquired  in  village  Mohrian  and  on  the  conceding 

statement of concerned Deputy Director Land, CDA/DW-1, the trial Court passed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

4 

the judgment & decree in favour of respondent. In order to resolve the controversy, I 

have gone through the Islamabad Displaced Persons Rehabilitation Policy, 1984, which is 

applicable  to  the  affectees,  whose  land  were  acquired  by  the  CDA  on  or  before 

01.10.1984 as per clause 1(3) of the said policy, however, unsettled cases of past have 

been  covered  by  this  policy  but  the  most  important  aspect  of  this  case  is  as  to 

whether  every  person  whose  land  or  built-up  property  acquired  comes  under  the 

definition  of  affectee  in  terms  of  clause  2(1)  of  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons 

Rehabilitation Policy, 1984, the same is hereby reproduced as under:- 

2(1)  “Affectee”  means  a  person  or  persons  whose  agricultural  land  and/or 

built-up property is acquired under the CDA Ordinance. 

10.  However, in terms of clause 4 of the Policy certain restrictions for the built-up 

property  have  been  referred  in  clause  4(a)  and  4(b)  of  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons 

Rehabilitation Policy, 1984, same are reproduced as under:- 

(A) 

Affectees due to acquisition of Built-up Property only---Where only 

built-up  property  is  acquired  from  the  affectees,  residential  plots  in  the  Sub 

Urban Centres would be offered to them as a consideration for their permanent 

rehabilitation. The basis of such an offer will be a single family unit. 

(B) 

Affecttees due to acquisition of land or land and built-up property:-- 

1. 

Where built-up property or land not less than 4 kanals, or land 

and  built-up  property  is  acquired  and  the  acquired  area  is  less 

than  40  kanals  of  cultarable  land  but  more  than  4  kanals  the 

affectee would qualify for allotment of a residential plot in a Sub 

Urban Centre. 

2. 

Where  land  or  land  and  built-up  property  is  acquired  and  the 

area acquired is 40 kanals to 100 kanals of cultarable land then 

the affectees would become entitled to consideration for allotment 

of  one  agro  unit  (approx  :  20  kanals  of  agricultural  land  and  a 

residential plot in an agroville. 

3. 

Where land acquired is more than 140 kanals of cultarable land 

[with a margin of (--) 5 kanals], the affectee would be considered 

for the allotment of two agro units and a residential plot in one of 

the proposed agrovilles. 

4. 

In case of joint family entitlement on the basis of (1) & (3) above, 

the  affectee  family  would  qualify  for  allotment  of  corresponding 

 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

5 

number  of  agro  units  and  residential  plots  in  agroville  and/or 

Sub Urban Centre as the case may be. 

5. 

Those affecttees who wish to be covered under the old scheme of 

obtaining  land  available  in  Colony  Districts,  would  be  issued 

eligibility  certificates  according  to  new  entitlement,  i.e.  if 

cultarable land lost in acquisition is 40 kanals or more.  

11. 

I  have  also  attended  to  the  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons  Rehabilitation  Policy, 

1996,  which  is  applicable  to  the  acquisition  of  land  or  built-up  property  prior  to 

01.01.1996,  but  in  this  policy  the  concept  of  built-up  property  has  been  defined  in 

Section  2(d)  of  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons  Rehabilitation  Policy,  1996,  which  is  as 

under:- 

2(d) 

“Built up Property” means a residential house with covered area not 

less then 300 square feet. 

And  allotment  of  residential  plot  has  been  referred  in  clause  4  of  Islamabad 

Displaced Persons Rehabilitation Policy, 1996 in the following manner:- 

4. 

Allotment of residential plots: The residential plots shall be allotted to 

the affectees according to the following scale namely:- 

(i)  Where  the  land  acquired  is  with  or  without  built  up  property 

thereon and the area of land acquired is:--- 

(a) 

4  Kanals  or  More  but 

= 

a plot of size 25x50 

less than 10 Kanals. 

(b) 

10 Kanals or more. 

= 

a plot of size 30x60 

Provided that where the land acquired is less than 4 Kanals, the 

Affectee  will  be  allowed  to  join  other  affectees  to  make  up  the 

deficiency  in  the  minimum  area  of  04  Kanals  to  be  eligible  for 

joint allotment of a plot. 

(ii)  Where  built  up  property  is  acquired  in  Abadi  Deh,  residential 

plots  will  be  allotted  to  the  affectees,  notwithstanding  the 

ownership  of  the  land  beneath  the  built  up  property,  on  the 

following criteria:- 

Area of BUP 

Plot Size 

300 to 499 Square feet 

Plot of size 25’x50’ 

500  Square 

feet 

and 

Plot of size 30’x60’ 

i) 

ii) 

upwards 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

6 

The allotment will, however, be subject to the condition that the 

affecttee has not availed any benefit against acquisition of land, if 

any,  acquired  from  him,  provided  that  where  the  acquired  built 

up property is located outside. Abadi Deh, residential plots will be 

allotted  to  the  affectee  of  the  built  up  property,  as  in  the  case  of 

Abadi  Deh,  only  if  the  land  beneath  is  owned  by  the  affectee 

himself.     

12. 

Similarly,  there  are  certain  general  conditions  highlighted  in  the  said  policy 

for the old cases of acquisition prior to 1978, which have been governed under clause 

8(2) of the said policy. 

13. 

I  have  gone  through  both  the  policies  in  detail  and  confronted  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  respondent  to  justify  his  entitlement  of  the  suit  plot  which  he  has 

claimed  in  the  plaint,  whereby  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  has  given  only  a 

single argument that conceding statement has been given by Deputy Director Land 

CDA  in  his  favour  and  such  statement  was  given  on  the  basis  of  some  record, 

although the entire court file is silent qua any  record nor even any  such record  has 

ever  been  called  by  the  respondent  in  the  Court,  even  there  is  no  admission  in  the 

written statement on the part of CDA that some plot was allotted to the respondent, 

therefore, while considering the position argued by the parties before this Court, it is 

necessary  to  consider  the  question  of  onus  of  proof,  whereby  Article  117  of  the 

Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 deals with concept of burden of proof which imposes a 

duty upon a person who desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or 

liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those 

facts exist and such person to prove the existence of such fact is under obligation to 

discharge the burden of proof which lies on him. Reliance is placed upon 2016 SCMR 

1225 (Phul Peer Shah VS Hafeez Fatima) and 2010 SCMR 1358 (Muhammad Saee VS 

Mst. Sharaf Elahi, etc.). Similarly, if the burden of proof in a suit or proceedings lies 

on a person who would fail to prove the existence of such fact, it has been assumed 

that  burden  has  not  been  discharged  in  terms  of  Article  118  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat 

Order,  1984,  especially  when  the  entire  record  is  silent  qua  the  plot  number  which 

has been referred in the plaint by respondent/plaintiff. 

 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

7 

14. 

It is trite law that beneficiary has to discharge the onus at the first instance i.e. 

the respondent in this case, who has referred Plot No.320 on record but no document 

or record has been placed before the Court to  justify  the stance rather the collusive 

and  conceding  statement  of  DW-1  the  then  Deputy  Director  Land,  CDA  has  been 

managed to justify the case of respondent, such conduct on the part of CDA official 

as well as counsel for CDA is highly objectionable and illegal, especially when there 

is no record.  

15. 

The  counsel  for  petitioner/CDA  i.e.  Mr.  Amir  Latif  Gill,  Advocate 

contended  that  the  entire  scheme  was  managed  by  CDA  official  as  well  as  counsel 

for CDA at that time, who were in league with each other to help out the respondent 

to establish a false claim which is not possible otherwise under Land  Rehabilitation 

Policy, 1984 as well as 1996 mainly on the ground that respondent does not fulfill the 

requirement of Rehabilitation Policy. 

16.  As  of  today,  I  have  confronted  the  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  to 

justify his eligibility under Rehabilitation Policy which provides different parameters 

for eligibility of plot as in this case respondent was holding built-up property of 175 

Sq. ft., which does not fulfill the criteria to fall under eligibility of the plot. 

17. 

I have gone through the judgment of learned trial Court with able assistance 

of learned counsel for both the parties and as such the findings on issue No.1 are not 

substantiated  from  record  nor  even  looked  into  by  the  Courts  below  in  a  proper 

manner in terms of Articles 117 & 118 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, the onus has 

not been discharged, no independent evidence has been brought on record, nor even 

corroborated from any independent source, neither even a single document has been 

brought on record to justify that Plot No.320 is in existence in any scheme. 

18. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  judgment  of  Appellate  Court,  whereby  RFA 

filed by CDA was dismissed being time barred by 30 days, although the application 

for  condonation  of  delay  has  been  filed  alongwith  appeal,  whereby  it  has  been 

referred  in  the  said  application  that  “it  is  relevant  to  mention  here  that  the  previous 

CDA counsel also caused unjustified delay in intimating about the outcome of civil suit for 

 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

8 

further  legal  proceedings  to  challenge  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated 

28.05.2018”. 

19.  While considering the  above position, it has been argued by  Mr. Amir Latif 

Gill,  Advocate  for  the  petitioner/CDA  that  the  then  counsel  for  CDA  namely  Mr. 

Musharaf  Khan,  Advocate  was  in  connivance  with  the  respondent  and  has  not 

informed the CDA authorities for filing of appeal, rather has given his opinion that it 

will  be  wastage  of  time  and  money  and  the  said  opinion  of 

the  then 

advocate/counsel was considered by the then Deputy Director Land, CDA, who is 

member  of  entire  racket  in  this  fraud.  The  petitioner/CDA  in  order  to  justify  his 

position has appended the opinion given by the then counsel which is part of record, 

therefore, it is necessary to reproduce the same, which is as under:- 

SUBJECT. 
COURT 

SAJAD  MAHMOOD  VS CDA  (SEVEN  CASES)  IN  CIVIL 

The undersigned is counsel on behalf of CDA in seven cases title as following 

1. 

Sajad Mahmood VS CDA 

2.  Muhammad Ameen VS CDA 

3. 

Sufaidan bibi VS CDA 

4.  Muhammad Saeed VS CDA 

5.  Ejaz Mehmood VS CDA 

6.  Waheed Akhter VS CDA 

7. 

Imran etc VS CDA 

All the above mentioned suits for declaration and permanent injunction 

have been filed by the affectees of Moza Mohrian, Moza Chak Shehzad, Moza 

Pandori, and Moza Shana etc with the contention that approval has been given 

by CDA for allotment of plots to them and they are entitled for allotment of plot 

because their land has been acquired, and approval for allotment already given 

for allotment of plot to them may not be cancelled. 

The  plaintiff  presented  their  evidence  in  connection  with  the  above 

mentioned contentions and after closing their evidence the CDA also presented 

the  evidence.  The  evidence  of  CDA  as  per  record  was  in  consonance  with  the 

contentions of plaintiffs. After arguments of both the parties the Court (Samia 

Noureen,  Civil  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  decreed  all  the  suits  of  plaintiffs. 

(Copies are enclosed). 

That  keeping  in  view  the  above  position  and  evidence  presented  by 

CDA there is no need of any appeal as it will be wastage of time and money as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

9 

well, however if not agreed the undersigned have stopped the limitation period 

of six days and may be contact to the undersigned as soon as possible. 

Submitted for information and further orders. 

20. 

The  above  referred  fact  if  considered  to  be  correct  then  there  is  no  need  for 

further explanation as the then counsel Mr. Musharraf Khan, Advocate has given his 

own  opinion  despite  the  fact  that  there  was  not  a  single  record  to  substantiate  that 

suit  plot  has  ever  been  allotted  to  the  respondent.  I  have  attended  to  the  written 

statement  of  the  then  counsel  of  CDA  in  the  light  of  case  reported  as  2004  SCMR 

1247 (Faisalabad Development Authority VS Raja Jahangir Nasir, etc.) and 2019 SCMR 

738  (Kenneth  F.  Solomon  and  Sterathal  Katzaelson  Montigny  LLP  VS  Judith  Matte-

Thompson  and  166376  Canada  Inc.).  However,  under  Chapter  XII  (Canons  of 

Professional Conduct and Etiquette of Advocate) of the Pakistan Legal Practitioners 

and Bar Councils Rules, 1976, it is primary duty of an Advocate to give his opinion 

in the best interest of his client in accordance with law  so that the legal right of his 

client could be achieved from the court of law. The Advocate is an agent of principal 

i.e. his client and if he fails to disclose a material fact to its client when an opinion 

has been sought or concealed the material fact from a court of law or he is aware that 

what he is disclosing before the Court through a fact not reflected from the record or 

in evidence placed before the Court, he becomes part of misconduct or accomplice to 

the  situation,  therefore,  a  lawyer  should  take  every  remedial  measures  so  that  the 

court of law shall not reach at wrong conclusion, even the lawyer may refuse to offer 

such material, document or fact that he reasonably believes to be false.  

21. 

In  view  of  above,  the  opinion  rendered  by  the  then  counsel  for  CDA  for 

non-filing of appeal is contrary to record and such request could not be considered at 

this stage, especially when the entire judgment & decree was managed through fraud. 

The Appellate Court has not considered all these aspects and grounds referred in the 

application for condonation of delay, which are material for holding that appeal was 

time  barred  especially  when  the  petitioner/CDA  at  that  time  being  appellant  was 

hampered  on  hyper  technical  grounds  by  its  own  employee  i.e.  Deputy  Director 

Land as well as the counsel in league with respondent, the beneficiary of decree. As a 

 
 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

10 

result of the said decree respondent is getting the benefit of  plot who is not entitled 

for the same and officials are getting benefit which is not on record but it is State land 

which could not be given to a person who is not entitled for the same and State being 

the  custodian,  can  take  every  step  to  protect  its  land/assets,  even  where  fraud  has 

been played through Court to extend the benefit to a non-entitled person. Hence the 

dismissal  of  appeal  on  technical  grounds  is  not  warranted  under  the  law,  although 

learned Additional District Judge (East), Islamabad has categorically referred in the 

impugned  judgment  “appellant  has  not  attached  anything  with  the  application  for 

condonation  of  delay  to  show  that  any  action  has  been  taken  against  the  one  who  is 

instrumental  in  delay  for  filing  of  appeal”.  I  have  attended  to  this  proposition  in  the 

light  of  PLD  1989  SC  627  (Deputy  Collector  of  Customs  and  2  others  VS  Muhammad 

Tahir  and  another),  which  has  further  been  considered  by  the  Apex  Court  in  case 

reported  as  2016  SCMR  1410  (Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  through  Secretary 

Industries  Commerce  and  Mineral  Development,  Peshawar  and  others  VS  Frontier 

Chemical Industries Ram Bagh, Mardan) in the following manner:- 

8. 

Next  comes  delay  of  41  days  in  filing  the  petition  for  leave  to  appeal. 

According  to  the  learned  Addl.  A.  G.,  delay  in  filing  the  petition  occurred 

because  of  late  supplies  of  copies  and  lengthy  correspondence  between  various 

tiers of the department. This explanation, in the matrix of the case appears to be 

satisfactory.  It  is  more  so  when  we  see  the  conduct  of  the  subordinate 

functionaries who being sell-out are ever ready to do away with anything public 

for  petty  gains.  In  the  case  of  Deputy  Collector  of  Customs  and  2  others  v. 

Muhammad Tahir and another (supra) while dealing with an identical aspect 

held as under:- 

"It has recently been held by this Court that the petitions on behalf of 

the  Government  or  Government  functionaries  in  matters  involving 

Government interest or public interest, the petitioners no doubt would 

be  treated  at  par  with  ordinary  citizens;  but  they  would  be  given  the 

same  concessions  and  considerations  as  given  to  the  other  citizens.  It 

has also to be observed that while examining the merits of application 

for  condonation  of  delay  the  Court  can  look  into  the  conduct  of  the 

subordinate  functionaries,  on  whose  conduct  the  higher  policy  maker 

functionaries have only a remote physical control. Hence, the conduct of 

the  lower  functionaries  can  in  appropriate  cases  be  taken  as  a  good 

 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

11 

ground for condonation of delay. In this case, prima facie, some of the 

lower  functionaries,  as  explained  in  the  application,  seem  to  have 

misconducted  in  the  matter  of  vigilance  and  preparation  for  filing  of 

petition  for  leave  to  appeal.  And  further,  as  admitted  at  the  Bar, 

departmental  action  is  being  taken  against  them  in  this  behalf.  This 

amongst other shows bona fides on Government's part. We consider it a 

fit  one  for  condonation  of  delay.  Accordingly  the  application  in  that 

behalf is allowed and the delay is condoned." 

22.  At  last  the  case  argued  before  this  Court  by  both  the  parties  persuaded  this 

Court to believe that systematic fraud has been played by the CDA officials in order 

to  give  benefit  to  a  person  who  is  not  entitled  for  plot  under  Rehabilitation  Policy 

and counsel for CDA is also part of this fraud and same is reflected from statement 

of  the  then  Deputy  Director  Land,  CDA,  who  accepted  the  claim  of  respondent, 

whereas  the  CDA  denied  the  claim  of  respondent  in  the  written  statement  “being 

denied for want of knowledge”, therefore, in such situation Court cannot sit as silent 

spectator  rather  discharged  its  constitutional  and  legal  obligation  as  highlighted  in 

case reported as 1981 SCMR 294 (Abdul Rahim, etc. VS The State). 

23.  While  considering  all  these  aspects,  this  Court  has  to  exercise  its  powers  in 

terms  of  Section  115(1)  CPC  read  with  Section  151  CPC  to  eliminate  the  fraud  by 

exercising  inherent  powers  and  the  discretionary  jurisdiction,  especially  when  the 

illegality has been noticed by this Court, such powers would only be exercised in aid 

of  justice  and  not  to  defeat  its  ends.  I  am  mindful  of  the  fact  that  power  U/S  115 

CPC will not be exercised to correct every irregularity in the exercise of jurisdiction, 

but  the  same  has  to  be  exercised  where  grave  injustice  or  hardships  on  account  of 

fraud is apparent. Reliance is placed upon 2010 CLC 1215 Lahore (Province of Punjab 

through Collector District Lahore VS Muhammad Latif), PLD 2008 SC 155 (Asmatullah 

VS  Amanat  Ullah),  PLD  2008  Islamabad  11  (Miss  Kiran  Arif  Man  VS  Miss  Kinza 

Khalid), PLD 2010 SC 1186 (Mst. Banori VS Jilani), PLD 2012 SC 400 (Hafeez Ahmad 

VS Civil Judge, Lahore) and 2016 SCMR 24 (Nazim-ud-Din VS Sheikh Zia-ul-Qamar). 

The entire edifice constructed by the respondent through the foul play and fraud left 

nothing in his favour to achieve the benefit for which he is not entitled, even the time 

 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

12 

barred matters have been considered by the Apex Court being custodian of the rights 

of the parties, even in cases where reasons enumerated in the condonation of delay 

application  were  not  convincing  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  established  fact  that 

matter was one of public importance. 

24. 

I  have  considered  the  proposition  in  the  light  of  PLD  2007  SC  582  (Zulfiqar 

and  others  VS  Shahdat  Khan)  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  non-suiting  a  litigant  for 

not filing appeal would amount to punishing him for not availing a right, which ensured to 

his  benefit.  Similarly  in  another  case  reported  as  PLD  2002  SC  630  (Col.  (Rtd)  Ayub 

Ali Rana VS Dr. Carlite S. Pune and another) wherein it has been held that mere wrong 

advice  by  a  counsel  in  the  matter  by  itself,  was  not  considered  as  sufficient  ground  for 

condonation  of  delay  but  each  case  had  to  be  considered  in  which  question  of  limitation 

was  raised  keeping  in  view  peculiar  circumstances  of  that  case  the  High  Court  rightly 

proceeded to set aside the same by condoning the delay by holding that in such matters, the 

point  of  limitation  would  not  stand  in  the  way  of  Court  to  do  justice.  I  have  also  gone 

through  the  case  reported  as  2007  SCMR  1574  (Government  of  Balochistan  through 

Secretary Board of  Revenue,  Balochistan  Quetta and  others  VS  Muhammad  Ali  and  11 

others) wherein it has been held as under:- 

Declaration  of  title---Appeal  barred  by  limitation---Public  property---Public 

functionaries,  negligence  of---Plaintiffs  sought  declaration  of  title  against  suit 

property,  ownership  of  which  vested  with  Forest  department---Trial  Court 

decreed  the  suit  in  favour  of  plaintiffs---Appeal  against  judgment  and  decree 

passed  by  Trial  Court  was  dismissed  by  Lower  Appellate  Court  solely  on  the 

ground of its being barred by limitation---High, Court in exercise of revisional 

jurisdiction  after  discussing  merits  of  the  case  declined  to  interfere  with  the 

judgment  passed  by  Lower  Appellate  Court---Plea  raised  by  authorities  was 

that  as  appeal  before  Lower  Appellate  Court  was  not  decided  on  merits, 

therefore, merits of the case should not have been dilated upon by High Court---

Validity---Due  to  serious  lapses  and  failure  to  discharge  legal  duties  promptly 

and within the prescribed period of limitation by all concerned in the matter, in 

view of the decree of the Trial Court, no actual loss, damage or deprivation of 

rights  had  occurred  to  public  functionaries  concerned  in  the  matter,  rather 

Government  and  Forest  Department  stood  completely  deprived  of  the  public 

property solely meant to be used, utilized and dealt with in public interest being 

a  public  property  of  which  Government  and  the  Department  through  its 

 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

13 

functionaries were the custodian---Decree of Trial Court was not assailed before 

Lower Appellate Court within the prescribed period of limitation and for such 

reason  alone,  appeal  was  dismissed,  upheld  by  High  Court  as  well, 

consequently Government stood divested of huge property for being its custodian 

and  thereby  interests  of  public  stood  completely  jeopardized  merely  because  of 

grave  omissions  and  inaction  on  the  part  of  concerned  public  functionaries---

Supreme Court, in view and for doing complete justice; took notice of delay in 

preferring  appeal  before  Lower  Appellate  Court  and  having  preferred  civil 

petition for leave to appeal before Supreme Court much beyond the prescribed 

period of limitation- and condoned the delay---Judgment and decree passed by 

Lower  Appellate  Court  was  set  aside  and  appeal  was  remanded  to  Lower 

Appellate  Court  for  decision  afresh  on  merits---Supreme  Court  directed  the 

competent authority to proceed against all the concerned delinquent officers and 

public  functionaries  by  taking  disciplinary  action  under  the  appropriate  law 

and  rules  for  not  having  approached  Lower  Appellate  Court  and  Supreme 

Court within the prescribed period of limitation and in accordance with law---

Appeal was allowed. 

25. 

Similarly, the delay has also been condoned in cases where some of the lower 

functionary  has  played  fraud  and  committed  misconduct  in  the  matter  of  vigilance 

and  they  should  be  dealt  with  by  way  of  departmental  action.  Reliance  is  placed 

upon  PLD  1989  SC  627  (Deputy  Collector  of  Customs  and  2  others  VS  Muhammad 

Tahir  and  another),  therefore,  the  ground  of  limitation  argued  by  the  respondent’s 

side  in  the  filing  of  appeal  as  well  as  in  this  revisional  jurisdiction  is  of  no 

significance.  

26. 

The  entire  epitome  of  discussion  above  gives  rise  to  situation  that  even  in 

cases where conceding statement was given by the defendant, it is obligation of the 

Court to satisfy itself regarding the evidence as to whether mere conceding statement 

of  defendant  is  enough  to  award  the  relief  to  the  plaintiff  and  if  the  relief  is  still 

dependent  upon  other  documentary  evidence,  witnesses  or  record,  the  Court  shall 

call all those evidences and satisfy its conscious. It is also the duty of the trial Court 

to be more vigilant in cases of State Land and Assets where some official just put his 

appearance  on  behalf  of  any  department  and  record  his  statement,  the  Court  shall 

 
 
 
C.R No.378/2018 

14 

verify the record by going through the same, subject to relevant law and if Court is 

satisfied then it is necessary to pass the appropriate order. 

27. 

It is also the duty of the Court in  such type of matters  to apply inquisitorial 

approach and direct the official to submit his statement after approval of competent 

authority in writing in accordance with record so that no fraud could be played qua 

the State assets. Hence, this Court comes to irresistible conclusion that no record was 

available qua the allotment of any plot nor the same was produced by CDA in Court, 

neither  plaintiff/respondent  was  able  to  justify  his  eligibility  and  entitlement  under 

the law as well as under the policies involved, which has not been appreciated by the 

Courts below, therefore, the instance civil revision is allowed and concurrent findings 

of  the  learned  Civil  Court  as  well  as  of  the  learned  Appellate  Court  are  hereby  set 

aside and matter is remanded to learned trial Court to decide afresh while considering 

the  record  of  CDA  and  if  in  case  no  such  record  is  available  or  produced  then  the 

fate  of  suit  be  decided  accordingly  within  a  period  of  three  (03)  months  under 

intimation to this Court. 

28. 

Before parting with this judgment, it is necessary to pass appropriate direction 

to  the  Chairman  CDA  to  initiate  action  against  the  then  Deputy  Director  Land 

CDA, who has recorded the statement without any record, however, in inquiry if it is 

established  that  the  record  is  available,  which  has  been  withheld,  then  appropriate 

measures  be  taken  as  to  why  the  officials  and  functionaries  of  the  CDA  could  not 

produce their own record. Similarly, the counsel who has become tool of beneficiary 

may  not  be  allowed  to  represent  department  in  future  and  CDA  shall  re-visit  the 

conduct of their officials and their counsel who are in league with the individuals for 

their illegal gains.  

Approved for reporting. 

Zahid 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

JUDGE 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
