Form  No.:  HCJD/C 
ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition  No. 187 of 2020 

Salma  Naz  Zaidi 

VERSUS 

Federation  of Pakistan  through  its  Secretary,  Ministry  of 
Interior,  Islamabad. 

For the  Petitioner: 

Mrs.  Sarkar Abbas,  Advocates. 

For Respondent  No.1: 

Mr.  Muhammad  Aftab  Ahmed, 
Assistant  Attorney  General. 

For Respondent  N o.2 & 3: 
Date of hearing: 

Mr. Junaid  Jaffar,  Advocate. 
31.01.2020. 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ. I: 

Present  petition  has  been 

filed  against  refusal 

to  grant  Family  Registration  Certificate 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FRC"),  in  respect  of  petitioner's 

husband,  and his family in Pakistan  by NADRA. 

2. 

Facts, in brief, are that Petitioner  is a dual  national  of UK and 

Pakistan.  She  married  with  one  Syed  Sheraz  Haider  Zaidi  on 

15.08.2009, in  Rawalpindi  and  obtained  CNIC  with  her  husband's 

name.  The  Petitioner  came  to  know  that  her  husband  contracted 

2nd  marriage  without  her  permission  and  due  to  this  marriage, 

matrimonial 

relationship  of  the  petitioner  with  her  husband 

became  strained  and  presently  case  of  financial  distributions 

between  the  petitioner  and  her  husband 

is  pending  before  UK 

Courts. 

W.P.  No.11i7/2020 
Sa Ima  Naz  Zaidi  VS  federation  of Pakistan 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for petitioner  has,  inier-alia, argued  that  she 

needs  the evidence  of her husband's  family members  in Pakistan in 

shape  of  FRC  for  submission  before  UK  court  where 

the 

dissolution  of marriage  and  distribution  of assets  proceedings  arc 

pending,  and  for  this  purpose,  Petitioner  approached  National 

Database and  Registration  Authority  (hereinafter  referred  to as the 

"Authority"), however,  the  Authority  has  refused  to issue  the  said 

certificate  due  to  reason  that  2°d  wife  is  separate  family  and  only 

the  member  of  that  family  can  obtain  the  said  information/  FRC. 

Learned  counsel  has  argued  that  Petitioner  is  entitled  of  having 

information  regarding  her  husband's  other  family  as  she  is.  not 

demanding  information  of any  other  person  but  of her  husband's 

family members,  for which  she is legally entitled. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of 

the Authority  vehemently  opposed  contentions  of the Petitioner  on 

the ground  that  the Authority  maintains  family  wise data  and  treat 

cv-:.•ry  spouse  and  his/her  children  as  separate  family,  therefore, 

information/PRC  of  second  wife  and  their  children  cannot  be 

provided  to  Petitioner.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Authority,  m 

support  of  his  contentions,  relied  on  Section  28  and  30  of  the 

National  Database  and  Registration  Authority  Ordinance,  2000, 

(hereinafter referred  to as the" Ordinance of 2000"), and  also on the 

SOP /NADRA  Registration  Policy Version 5.0.0. 

5. 

I have  beard  the learned  counsel  for the  parties  and have also 

perused  the relevant record  with  their able assistance. 

Salina  Naz  Zaidi  VS  federation  of Pakistan 

W.P.  No.  187/2020  13 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  Ordinance of  2000  revealed  that  it  docs  not 

contain  any  provision  relating  to  maintenance  and/  or  issuance  of 

- 

FRC,  whereas,  its  issuance 

is  mentioned  in  SOPs  contained  in 

NADRA  Registration  Policy  5.0.0  relevant  provision  of  which  is 

given  as  under: 

•  Presence  of any blood  relative 
•  Presence  of minor(s)  if below  18 years of age. 

7.  With  regard  to  placing  reliance  on  SOP  by  the  Respondent, 

Hon'ble Lahore  High Court in case  of "Muhammad  Salaiz  Ud Din  VS 

NADRA"  [PLD 2012 Lahore  378] has  held  as follows: 

to  ensure  consistency  and  un.iformiiy 

"Standard  Operating  Procedures  and  Registration  Policy  were 
internal  instructions  to enable NADRA 
lo achieve optimum  level of 
its 
efficiency  and 
procedure  and  process.  Standard  Operating  procedures  did  not 
have  the  force  of  law  and  were  not  binding  on  the  NJ\IJIU\. 
Standard  Operating  procedures were  internal  documents,  at  best, 
and  could not form  the  basis  of denying  the petitioner  tile  right  to 
have the correct information  maintained  in  the citizen  database and 
printed  on the CNIC." 

in 

I am  also  in respectful agreement with  the  above  observation  of the 

Hon'ble  High Court  that  the SOPs  arc  only  the  internal  documents 

formulated  for  prescribing  procedures  for  smooth  functioning  of 

the  affairs  of  the  Authority  and  for  regulating  their  own  working 

system,  as  such,  having no  legal  binding  on  other issues. 

8. 

The  perusal  of  Ordinance  of  2000  shows  that  it  has  been 

promulgated  with  the  main  object  of  establishment  registration 

Authority  with  improved  and  modernized  system  of  registration 

so  as  to  facilitate 

the  registration  of  all  the  persons  and  for  Hw 

establishment  and  maintenance  of  multipurpose  database,  data 

W.P.  No.  187/2020  I 
Salma Naz Zaidi VS federation  of Pakistan  1 

warehouses,  networking, 

interfacing  of  databases  and  related 

facilities. 

09. 

I  do  not  find  any  prohibition  under  the  Ordinance  of 2000, 

regarding  issuance  of  information/ FRC of  one  family  member  to 

any  other  family  member  and  thus  I am  of  the  view  that  the 

Petitioner  being  the  wife of Syed Sheraz Haider  Zaidi  is entitled· to 

have  information  maintained  with  Authority  regarding  all of this 

family members  in Pakistan,  therefore,  the  Authority  is directed  to 

provide  the  desired  information/PRC  relating  to  her  husband 

namely  Syed  Sheraz  Haider  Zaidi  and  his  entire  family  members 

from both the spouses  to her. 

10.  With  the  above  said  direction,  the  petition  stands  disposed 

of. 

M.  JUNAID  USMAN 

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PER VEZ) 
JUDGE 

