ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P. No.1632/2016 

Kamran Saeed  

VS    

Chairman National Accountability Bureau, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 
(11) 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 
20.07.2016 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary.  

Sardar  Asmat  Ullah  Khan  &  Raja  Aamir  Abbas, 
Advocates for the petitioner alongwith petitioner. 
Mr. Adnan Tahir, Sr. Prosecutor for NAB. 
Muhammad Ghufran I.O. NAB. 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J.--- Through the instant 

writ  petition,  the  petitioner  seeks  his  pre-arrest  bail  in  NAB 

Reference No.12/2016 offence U/S 9 read with section 10 of 

National Accountability Ordinance, 1999. 

2.  As  per  allegations  contained  in  the  Reference,  a 

complaint  was  received  from  Uzair  Abu  Bakr  Ex-D.G.M 

National Fertilizer Marketing Limited (NFML) regarding illegal 

appointments 

in  NFML  and 

thereafter  certain  other 

complaints  were 

received 

by 

NFML 

regarding 

misappropriation  and  dumping  of  imported  Urea  Fertilizer, 

allocation  of  quota  to  different  Carriage  Contractors  who  in 

connivance  with  Ex-General  Manager  (Distribution)  (Present 

Petitioner)  and  Managing  Director  caused  huge  loss  to 

national 

exchequer. 

Instant 

reference  pertains 

to 

misappropriation  of  Urea  Fertilizer  by  M/s  Bilal  Carriage 

Contractor  and  officers/officials  of  National  Fertilizer 

Marketing Limited, Ministry of Industries and Production who 

are involved in the scam. To the extent of M/s Bilal Carriage 

Contractor  inquiry  was  entrusted  to  Ms.  Hira  Ahmad  Junior 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

Investigation  Officer  NAB  Rawalpindi  on  28.11.2014  which 

was completed and recommended by her for up-gradation to 

investigation  resultantly  investigation  was  entrusted  to 

Muhammad  Ghufran  Dy.  Assistant  Director  NAB  Rawalpindi 

on  18.01.2016.  As  per  allegation  M/s  Bilal  Carriage 

Contractor  was  awarded  contract  for  transportation  of  Urea 

Fertilizer  bags  from  Karachi  Port  to  various  Godowns  in  the 

country  however,  7953.55  Metric  Tons  of  Urea  was 

misappropriated  from  October  2013  to  April  2014  causing 

loss  of  Rs.284,100,806/-  to  the  national  exchequer  with 

other  penalties  imposed  by  NFML.  During  the  course  of 

inquiry  it  has  been  proved  that  present  petitioner  remained 

General  Manager 

(Marketing  and  Distribution) 

from 

24.12.2013  to  June  2014  and  during  the  said  period  28 

vessels  containing  imported  Urea  had  arrived  at  Pakistan 

port  and  from  the  said  vessels  15909  Metric  Ton  Urea  was 

allocated  to  M/S  Bilal  Carriage  Contractor  by  the  present 

petitioner,  the  then  G.M.  (Distribution).  As  per  distribution 

manual of NFML the petitioner being G.M. (Distribution) had 

the  complete  control  over  the  movement  of  imported  Urea 

from Karachi to entire country. It has also been alleged that 

the  petitioner  while  misusing  his  official  position  allocated 

extra  quota  to  M/S  Bilal  Carriage  Contractor  having  the 

knowledge  that  M/S  Bilal  Carriage  Contractor  has  already 

defaulted in delivery of the Urea but petitioner has not taken 

any  action  against  the  Contractor  hence,  the  petitioner  has 

not  performed  his  duties  diligently  although,  he  was  main 

executor  of  entire  operation.  Finally  the  reference  was 

prepared/ filed after investigation.  

 
3 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  petitioner 

is  a  CSP  officer  of  Pakistan  Railway  Group  who  was 

transferred  to  NFML  on  12.12.2013  and  thereafter,  he  was 

promoted  as  incharge  of  distribution  and  subsequently  as 

G.M. (Distribution) however, he was repatriated to Pakistan 

Railways  on  20.07.2014.  Learned  counsel  further  contends 

that  the  entire  loss  and  misappropriation  of  urea  has  been 

made by officials prior to appointment of petitioner in NFML 

even the shortage has not been attributed to the petitioner. 

Learned counsel further contends that NAB has already filed 

a  reference  against  the  Urea  dealers,  therefore,  second 

reference  on  other  set  of  co-accused  is  not  permissible. 

Learned  counsel 

further  contends  that  the  petitioner 

remained  behind  the  bars  for  5  months  12  days  in  earlier 

reference  and  was  granted  bail  after  arrest  by  Hon’ble 

Lahore  High  Court,  hence  the  present  reference  is  based 

upon malafide which is apparent from record. 

4.  Conversely,  learned  Sr.  Prosecutor  NAB  controverted 

the said position and states that the petitioner was working 

as  G.M.  (Distribution)  in  the  office  of  NFML  and  he  was 

responsible for all operational duties including lifting of Urea, 

allocation  of  quota,  clearance  of  bills  and  other 

administrative  work.  Learned  counsel  further  contends  that 

from the Station Transfer Notes it has been proved that the 

carriage  contractor  has  misappropriated  a  huge  quantity  of 

urea  and  it  was  the  responsibility  of  the  petitioner  to  have 

look on each contractor or its trucks as to whether they are 

performing  their  duties  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of 

natural justice or otherwise. 

 
4 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

5.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

6. 

From  the  tentative  assessment  of  record  it  transpires 

that initially a complaint was filed against M/s Bilal Carriage 

Contractor  who  was  awarded  contract  for  transportation  of 

Urea bags from Karachi port to various Godowns of Pakistan 

by  NFML  however,  7953.55  metric 

tons  Urea  was 

misappropriated from October 2013 to April 2014 causing a 

loss  of  Rs.284,100,806/-  with  other  penalties    imposed  by 

the NFML. During the course of inquiry and subsequently in 

investigation, it revealed that petitioner remained appointed 

on  different  positions  whereas  he  belongs  to  Pakistan 

Railways  Group  and  transferred  to  NFML  on  deputation  as 

Senior Manager. On 12.12.2013 he was further promoted to 

the  post  of  incharge  distribution  on  24.12.2013  and 

thereafter,  he  was  promoted  as  G.M.  distribution  on 

09.01.2014  he  remained  G.M.  (Distribution)  till  20.07.2014, 

thereafter,  he  was  repatriated  to  his  parent  department 

Pakistan Railways. 

7.  While taking bird’s eye view, it reveals from the record 

that, petitioner remained as G.M. (Distribution) and by virtue 

of his official position he was incharge to supervise the lifting 

of  Urea  from  the  port  and  allocate  the  same  to  different 

carriage  contractors  and  distribute  the  same  to  the  Urea 

dealers in Pakistan. Cursory glimpse of material available on 

records  reveals  that  15909  Metric  Tons  Urea  quota  was 

allocated to M/s Bilal carriage contractor from 28.07.2013 to 

27.05.2014  whereas  7953.55  metric  tons  Urea  was  found 

missing which was allocated to M/S Bilal carriage contractor. 

The petitioner being G.M. (Distribution) had allocated quota 

 
5 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

to  six  different  carriage  contractors  including  M/S  Bilal 

carriage  contractor  in  his  period  of  posting  whereas,  the 

petitioner  has  issued  a  letter  dated  11.01.2014  to  M/s  Bilal 

for  his  outstanding  Station  Transfer  Notes.  In  the  said 

detailed  letter  he  has  specifically  written  to  the  co-accused 

M/S  Bilal  carriage  contractor  to  provide  the  details  of  his 

Station  Transfer  Notes  and  ask  him  to  confirm  the  delivery 

of the said Urea which is in transit hence, it is apparent from 

record that he was very well aware that co-accused M/S Bilal 

Carriage  Contractor  are  defaulter  of  their  contractual 

obligations  and  have  failed  to  deliver  the  huge  volume  of 

Urea  but  even  after  knowing  these  facts  the  petitioner 

allocated  Urea  of  huge  volume  to  M/s  Bilal  Carriage 

Contractor  and  had  not 

imposed  any  ban  on  their 

dispatches,  it  was  duty  of  the  petitioner  to  stop  further 

allocation  to  M/s  Bilal  carriage  contractor  but  he  allocated 

15909  Metric  Tons  Urea  to  M/S  Bilal  Carriage  Contractor 

hence, it is clear that he has extended undue favour to the 

said  company  and  on  the  reconciliation  statement  on 

15.01.2014  the  pending/outstanding  Urea  of  M/s  Bilal 

carriage  contractor  has  risen  to  7699.75  Metric  Tons  but 

even  then  the  petitioner  further  allocated  1568  Metric  Ton 

Urea  on  17.01.2014  and  1554  Metric  Tons  Urea  on 

20.01.2014  to  the  said  contractor.  After  the  inquiry,  matter 

has  been  converted  into  investigation  and  finally  Reference 

No.12/2016  has  been  filed  on  12.05.2016  by  the  NAB 

authorities  before  the  Accountability  Court  Islamabad  and 

the  petitioner  has  been  nominated  as  accused  No.4  in  the 

said reference.  

 
6 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

8. 

It has also been observed that the petitioner being G.M 

(Distribution)  has  issued  a  first  letter  to  declare  M/S  Bilal 

carriage  contractor  as  defaulter  and  stopped  his  dispatches 

vide  letter  dated  25.04.2014,  however,  the  major  loss  had 

already  been  cause  to  national  exchequer,  as  per  his  own 

letter dated 25.04.2014, 146 STNS were in transit means not 

reached  to  their  destination  nor  any  confirmation  was 

received  rather  the  said  trucks  were  misappropriated  and 

the total quantity of misappropriated Urea is 7699.75 Metric 

Tons  which  is  missing.  As  per  recorded  data  dated 

17.04.2014 

the 

approximate 

value 

of 

the 

said 

misappropriated  Urea  is  280  Million  whereas  M/S  Bilal 

Carriage Contractor has entered into a VR and has deposited 

Rs.67,400,000/-. 

9.  Section  9  (a)  (vi)  of  NAB  Ordinance,  1999  read  as 

follows: 

“9. Corruption and corrupt practices: (a) A holder 
of a public office, or any other person, is said to 
commit or to have committed the offence of corruption 
and corrupt practices- 
(vi) misuses his authority so as to gain any benefit or 
favour for himself or any other person, or to render or 
attempt to do so.” 

The above referred State of affairs, prima facie, demonstrate 

that  the  petitioner  being  G.M.  (Distribution)  has  to  perform 

his duties to prevent the loss to the national exchequer even 

though  the  contract  between  the  NFML  and  M/s  Bilal 

carriage  contractor  clearly  reflects  the  conditions  in  which 

carriage  contractor  is  under  obligation  to  transport  the 

fertilizer to designated destination ordered by the company, 

the three provisions were:- 

“CARTAGE  CONTRACTOR  TO  DELIVER  FERTILIZER 
WITHIN TIME TO CONSIGNEE (S) 

 
 
7 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

10. The Cartage Contractor shall transport the fertilizer 
to the designated destination(s) and effect delivery to 
the consignee(s) ordered by the Company within the 
hereinafter  mentioned  maximum  periods  calculated 
from the time loaded trucks leave the Gwadar Port. 
Where distance of destination (from Gwadar Port) upto 
1000 kms, the maximum period during which delivery 
must be made shall be 4 days, where the distance is 
from 1001 kms to 1500 kms, this period must be 6 
days and where the distance is beyond 1500 kms the 
delivery must be made within 8 days. The product 
unloaded at Karachi / Hub Godown for trans-shipment 
purpose will be allowed additional margin of 5 days 
over and above the mentioned distance time brackets. 
However NFML will be in its right to extend this time 
under  special  circumstances.  In  case  the  Cartage 
Contractor  fails  to  deliver  the  fertilizer  within  the 
specified time, he will be liable to pay damages at the 
rate of Rs.400.00 per ten metric ton, for each day of 
delay. 
CARTAGE  CONTRACTOR  TO  OBTAIN  SIGNATURES 
ETC. FROM CONSGINEE UPON DELIVERY. 
11.  The Cartage Contractor shall deliver the product 
to the consignee at the destination designated by the 
Company and obtain signatures alongwith delivery date 
and stamp from the consignee for the receipt thereof 
on the Supply Order/ Stock Transfer Note form. In case 
it  is  found  that  forged  signatures/stamp  are 
appended/affixed on any Supply Order/ Stock Transfer 
Note, the Cartage Contractor shall be liable to pay 
damages @ Rs.10,000.00 per Supply Order/ Stock 
Transfer Note. 
NON-DELIVERY OF CONSIGNMENT AT DESIGNATED 
DESTINATION/DUMPING 
12.  In case the Cartage contractor in connivance 
with  the  consignee  delivers/unloads/dumps  the 
consignment at a place other than the designated 
destination, the Cartage Contractor shall be liable to 
pay to the Company the full value of the consignment 
at  TCP  Import  price  plus  damages  amounting  to 
Rs.40,000.00 per Supply Order/Stock Transfer Note. 
Besides, no freight charges shall, in such cases, be 
payable to the Cartage Contractor. In addition the 
Company will be within its right to terminate the 
Agreement, forthwith.” 

Hence,  from  the  plain  reading  of  above  clauses  of  the 

contract  it  was  the  duty  of  the  petitioner  to  look  after  the 

affairs  of  distribution  of  Urea  specially  when  the  carriage 

contractor  fails  to  deliver  the  consignment  within  the 

prescribed period of 6 to 8 days and an additional margin of 

5  days  could  be  extended  to  the  said  carriage  contractor 

 
 
8 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

even  the  delivery  reports  to  the  consignee  was  to  be 

considered  on  serious  basis  but  despite  clear  terms  of 

contract as well as the job description the petitioner himself 

wrote  a  letter  to  M/s  Bilal  carriage  contractor  whereby  he 

had  pointed  out  the  non-delivery  of  Urea  in  the  month  of 

January but subsequently allocated further quota to M/s Bilal 

carriage  contractor  even  without  considering  his  own 

observation  which  is  available  in  his  own  official  record, 

hence, this demonstrates that petitioner prima facie is guilty 

of  misusing  his  authority  and  extending  benefits  to  co-

accused  Imran  Mohsin  whose  bail  has  already  been 

dismissed by this Court vide order dated 14.01.2016 in W.P. 

No.2988/2015  and  the  same  has  been  upheld  by  the  Apex 

Court in CPLA No.272/2016 vide order dated 17.06.2016. 

10.  The  petitioner  is  prima  facie  involved  and  is  well 

connected with the commission of offence and the question 

of grant of pre-arrest bail in such like cases  does not arise. 

Even  otherwise,  concept  of  criminal  misconduct  which  lead 

to  such  kind  of  corruption  has  been  defined  in  2016 

P.Cr.LJ. 396 “Abdul Sattar and another VSThe 

State”:- 

“High Court observed that 'corruption' in a civilized 
society is like a disease like cancer, which, if not 
detected in time, is surely to malign the polity of 
country  leading  to  disastrous  consequences---
'Corruption' is now termed as 'Royal thievery', which 
affects not only an individual', but also the economy, 
and the same destroys cultural heritage---Crime of 
'corruption' is to be considered as one of the serious 
problems and threats posed to stability and security of 
societies, undermining the institutions and values of 
democracy, ethical values and justice and jeopardizing 
sustainable development and rule of law---One must 
keep distinction between an act of receiving money as 
'consideration' for doing an illegal or legal act and the 
act which falls within meaning of corruption qualifying 
the term 'misappropriation'.” 

 
9 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

Even  otherwise  NAO,  1999  provides  a  mechanism  to 

eliminate  the  abuse  of  powers  or  authority,  default  in 

repayment  of  amounts  to  financial  institutions,  banks, 

government  and  others  agencies,  urgent  needs  of  recovery 

of state money and other assets and to deal with the people 

who  are  misappropriating  the  assets  and  their  corruption 

and corrupt practices by misusing their powers and authority 

the right of bail is not available under the NAO, 1999 and in 

our estimation following kind of  officials are not entitled for 

any  concession  of  pre-arrest  bail  and  even  for  post  arrest 

bail. 

a.  The persons of authority in Government office, state 
owned organizations who are responsible to prevent 
the loss of national exchequer but involved in crime 
and caused loss to exchequer. 

b.  The persons of authority of any designation who are 
under the obligation and custodian of any asset of 
state and being in service of federation or attached 
with the affairs of the state are bound to perform 
their specific duties to prevent the loss, recover the 
due amounts, to perform such statutory duties which 
are required under the law as guardian, protector and 
to prevent or on behalf of state but did not perform 
their duties. 

c.  Any person having the authority or sitting on position 
of authority has not performed his duties by way of 
negligence, compromise, connivance with the others 
to cause loss to the national exchequer. 

d.  Any person of authority who could not prevent or 
raise objection on any corruption or corrupt practices 
by  his  senior  authority  rather  kept  silent  and 
overlooked illegal actions of superior which resulted 
into loss to assets of the state or loss to the national 
exchequer. 

e.  Any individual officer who compromised the command 
of his superior knowingly that the same is illegal, 
contrary to law and is an offence which resulted into 
loss and established financial corruption. 

f.  Any individual who has received any illegal benefit 

due to his official position. 

g.  Any public officer who has not received any benefit 
for himself but received any benefit indirectly through 
his family on the basis of his official position and did 
not allows any other person under his control from 
performing their lawful duties to prevent loss to the 
national assets and public exchequer.  

 
 
10 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

h.  Even  those  officers  who  though  themselves  are  not 
the  corrupt 

directly 
practices in their office and official duties. 

facilitated 

involved 

rather 

11.  Hence,  above  mentioned  categories  of  officers  are  not 

entitled  for  any  such  concession  of  bail  who  have  not 

performed their duties in accordance with minimum required 

standards to protect the assets of state and Government of 

Pakistan  which  is  a  sacred  trust  under  their  command  and 

control  as  the  same  amounts  to  corruption  and  corrupt 

practices.  Even  the  apex  court  in  recent  judgment  imposed 

special duty upon the courts to perform their duties actively, 

diligently  to  eliminate  such  kind  of  corrupt  practices  and 

corruption.  In  CPLA  No.272/2016  titled  as  “Imran 

Mohsin VSthe State, etc” has held as under:- 

زج

 ےئگ ےئبٌث

 ںیہ
ےئل ےک ةبثِضط ےک یًاوٌػضث ہک وج ںوراصا یثبظتدا مبوت
"
 روا بگوہ بًلا ےٌهبط وک
ںوزظفا راضتًبیص کبپ ےط یًاوٌػضث روا لثبق ںیه ىا
 یٰلػا تیثزت یکیٌکت روا یٌف ےط ےقیزط غهبج روا لوکه یک ىُا
 زپ خطط
 بتٌث ضزف بک ىبہازثزط ےک ںوراصا ىا ۔ےہ بیگ وہ یهسلا روا نہا تہث بًزک
 یہص مبجًا یک طئازف
 ےک ءلاکو ےک ہثبغتطا روا ںوراصا یشیتفت ٍو ہک ےہ
 و نظً لوکه ںیه صا زک ھکر زظً ِز
ی
س ےط تیزق تیبہً وک لبؼفا ہلوُج روا
 ںیه
  یہص  مبجًا  یک  طئازف  ےٌپا  یہ  صوس  ٍو  زگیص  ِتروصث  ،ےئلا  طجظ
 ںیه  نئا
  ےک  نظق  صا  ہکًوج  ۔ےگ  ںیئبج  ےھجوط  تکتزه  ےک  یہبتوک
صروُث صروُس
 ےہ یتوہ ںیه ےپور ںوڑوزک ںوھکلا حزش بی نقر یػووجه
ذہٰل
 ےک ںوهشله ےلاو ےًبوک
 ےظیا ا
 ےظیپ  ےک  صروُث  ر ُوس  روا  ٹوظھ
 ہک 
بث  لکشه  یئوک  ہی  ےئل
 یشیتفت  و
  یقیقذت  ےکزک  چزس  ہصد  ھچک  ےط  تلوص  ٍصزک  لصبد  ےط
 یک تلاضػ ۔ےلضیزس وک یراصبفو روا یطبٌش ضزف یک ىازگیص روا ىازظفا
 روا ےہ
لصا مزج ہی ںیه زظً
ي 
 ےک  ےٌتزث  یہبتوک
بٌلاڈ  ٍصزپ  زپ  مزج  لصا
وک ىبہازثزط ےک  ںوراصا ىا  اذہٰل ۔ےہ فصازته
 یراصبفو یک صاصاضس  ِتکلوه ،
ےڈٌھٹ روا شئبطٓازُپ ےئوہ ےتزھث مزھث بک
 ےک عوً نہا ،زک لکً ےط ںوزوک
 یًزک  یًازگً  یھث  صوس  یک  ںوتػبوج  یلاو  ےًزک  یًازگً  یک  تبهضقه
بچ

یک 
تلوص ےط یًاوٌػضث روا روطر و زثا

یگٌط ٍصبیس ےط یًاوٌػضث  ِمزج ےک مزجه

  ہتظًاص  ںیه  طئازف  ےٌپا  روا

ںیہً  ت

  ٹُول

۔ےئیہ

" 

ک

وچ

طبً

صس  اذہٰل

  ۔ےہ  یئگ  یک

 ےک یًاوٌػضث وک

 ہک ےہبیگ وہ یروزظ یھث بًزک شیوجت ہی

 یک ىوًبق ےک ةبظتدا ہکً
ںبہی
 یہبٌگ  ےث  ِتثبث  توجثِربث  ںیه  نئازج  ےک  عوً  صا  زپ  ءبٌث  یک
ںوقش  فلتشه
 ںیتلاضػ  یک  لیپا  روا  ںیتلاضػ  یصو
  ضئبػ  ہپ  ىبهشله
 ےط  یٌیث  کیربث  بک  ںوقش  یًوًبق  ىا  زظً  ِشیپ  ےک  صوصشه  ےک  کله
 کبپ ےط رو
بج
 یًاوٌػضث ہکًویک ۔ےزک اصا راصزک لبؼف روا کزذته یئبہتًا ےئل ےک ےًزک
 بک صا زگا ےہ یہر لیھپ ںیه ےزشبؼه روا کله ےط یشیت ضج زپ خطط زہ
 ،یصبصتقا یک ںوراصا روا کله حزط یک
 کویص ہی وت بیگ بیک ہً ةبثِضط یروف
 زک ربچ وص ےط مبج
ًا وک تطبیر ےکزک
لاھکوھک وک ںوصبیٌث یشبؼه روا یلبه
 ہکًوچ ۔بگوہ يکوه
 بً 
 ةبثِضط ںیه ضؼث بک ضج یگ
 ںیہً ںیه
ےً یظک ںیوہ ںیه تروص یک تطبیر ربتشه صوس کبپ ِضرا
 ہولظه  ہچزگا  ۔ںیئگ  یص  ںیًبثزق  یک  ںوًبج  ںوھکلا  ےئل  ےک  صا  ہکلث  بیص

ےزشبؼه روا ںوراصا ،کله زک ےل ٍشئ

ہکلث لکشه فزص ہً بًزک

ہفذت

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 

W.P. No.1632/2016  

یٌیگٌط  ض

  ےک  ےٌچث  ےط

جئبتً  يیگٌط  غقوته  روا

ںیتلاضػ یصوصس روا ہیلضػ

 ساضًا زظً زظکی یک ںولوصا ےک فبصًا روا

 لوکه یک نئازج ےک عوً صا ہکبت ےزک اصا راصزک لبؼ

 يکیل بتکط بج بیک ںیہً
 ىوًبق
 اربوہ  ہی  ےئل
یک  تلابد
 یٰلػا ہک ےہ بتٌث ضزف
 ،طبتذه ںیه ےلظلط صا
یٌُک زیث
ف روا کزذته
 ہک  بتکط  بج  بیک  ںیہً  ساض
ًا  زظً  یھث  وک  تبث  صا  زپ  ںبہی  ۔ےکط  بج  یک
 ےط ےقیزط راصروس فلاس ےک یًاوٌػ ضث صازفا ےک ےقجط زہ ےک ےزشبؼه
 ساوٓا
 تیژکا ےط ںیه ىا ےط یتوظقضث يکیل ںیہ ےتوہ شیپ شیپ ںیه ےًبھٹا
 ےتٓا زظً ںاشیزگ ےط ےًازک ےًزک ضهٓارص
 یثبظتدا صوس
 ۔ےہ ںیہً نک ےط ےیولا یهوق ہکوج ںیہ

 ہپ لوصا

 لوػ

 ےک

12.  In  view  of  above,  the  petitioner  is  prima  facie 

connected with the commission of offence and has failed to 

demonstrate  that  he  has  performed  his  duties  honestly, 

diligently  in  a  carefully  manner  rather  he  prime  facie,  was 

instrumental  in  causing  loss  to  national  exchequer,  even 

there  is  no  malafide  on  the  part  of  NAB  authorities  against 

petitioner  apparent  on  record  nor  petitioner  demonstrated 

through any material that he is not connected with the said 

offence  of  corruption  and  corrupt  practices,  therefore,  the 

instant  writ  petition  is  devoid  of  merits  and  is  hereby 

dismissed.  The  pre-arrest  bail  granting  order  dated 

03.05.2016 is hereby recalled. 

(AAMER FAROOQ)  
          JUDGE 

      (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

             JUDGE 

Irfan Ali   

Approved for reporting. 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
