ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
OUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal  Appeal  No.117/2017 
Fakhar Aman  v. Additional  Sessions Judge  & 2  others 

Appellant  by: 

Mian Asad Hayat Awan, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Muhammad  Sohail Khurshid, State Counsel. 
Mr. Anis Yaqub Rathore, Advocate for Respondent No.2 

and 

Criminal  Revision  No.115/2017 
Sajjad Hussain  v.  Fakhar Iman  & 2 others 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr. Anis Yaqub Rathore, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Muhammad  Sohail Khurshid, State Counsel. 
Mian Asad Hayat Awan, Advocate for Respondent No.1. 

Date of Hearing: 

16.04.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAY ANI,  I:  Through  this  common  judgment,  I 

intend  to decide the captioned  criminal appeal  and criminal revision having been 

arisen  out  of judgment  passed  by the  learned  Additional  Sessions Judge  (East), 

Islamabad,  dated  20.07.2017,  whereby  Fakhar  Aman/appellant  has  been 

convicted  in  case  FIR  No.283,  dated  10.11.2015, U /S  302  PPC,  P.S.  Khanna, 

Islamabad  and  sentenced  to  life imprisonment  under  Section 302(b) PPC along 

with  payment  of  fine  of  Rs.300,000/-  as  compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of 

deceased, in default  whereof,  the said  accused/ appellant  has to further  undergo 

simple imprisonment  for one year. The accused has also been extended  benefit of 

Section 382-B Cr.P.C. 

2. 

Brief facts  as  referred  in  FIR  (Exh.PA/l),  registered  on  the  complaint 

(Exh.PA) of PW-1 Sajjad Hussain,  are  that  on 09.11.2015, complainant's  younger 

brother  namely  Muhammad  lbrar  went  missing  after 8 p.m. and  was  not located 

by  the  next  morning  until  his  dead  body  was  found  lying  nearby  One  Minar 

Masjid. The complainant  by  recording  his  supplementary  statement  nominated 

the appellant  for commission  of Qatl-e-Amd of deceased by strangulation  as well 

as  by  slitting  his  throat  with  knife.  Pursuant 

to  arrest  of  appellant  and 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  2 

completion of investigation, report under Section 173  Cr.P.C. was sent up  to the 

learned trial Court, to which the appellant pleaded not guilty  and claimed trial 

on  merits.  Accordingly, the  prosecution  had  produced  17 witnesses  and  the 

learned trial Court pursuant  to recording of prosecution evidence and statement 

of  accused under  Section 342 Cr.P.C., passed  the  impugned  judgment,  dated 

20.07.2017, and  awarded  life imprisonment  to  appellant  under  Section 302(b) 

PPC along with fine of Rs.300,000/- as compensation to be paid to the legal heirs 

of  deceased,  in  default  whereof,  the  appellant  to  further  undergo  simple 

imprisonment for one year. Benefit of Section 382-B has also been extended to the 

appellant/ accused. Hence, the captioned criminal appeal and criminal revision. 

3. 

Learned counsel for appellant contended that  impugned judgment is not 

sustainable  in  the  eyes  of  law  as  undue  benefit  was  extended  in  favour  of 

prosecution  despite  the  fact  that  the  prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to 

discharge the burden  of proof; that  learned trial Court has  not  appreciated the 

stance of defence that the occurrence was unseen and the case established by the 

prosecution suffers from missing links and the chain set up by the prosecution is 

broken,  which  is  not  enough  to  hold  the  appellant  for  the  allegation  of 

commission  of  offence;  that  the  prosecution  case  suffers  from  numerous 

inconsistencies, additions  and  improvements of material facts, but  the  learned 

trial Court has relied upon  such trembling evidence and  passed the  impugned 

judgment  in  violation  of law,  therefore, the  same is liable to  be  set-aside and 

appellant may be acquitted of the charge. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

complainant opposed  the instant criminal appeal and  supported  the impugned 

judgment by contending that the learned trial Court has rightly appreciated the 

evidence available on  record  to  the  extent of conviction of appellant,  but  the 

learned trial Court has awarded  lesser punishment  of life imprisonment to  the 

appellant as the prosecution has proved  the case beyond any shadow of doubt; 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  3 

that  the  impugned 

judgment  suffers  from  misreading  and  non-reading  of 

evidence  as  the  learned  trial  Court  has  failed  to  note  that  the  appellant  with 

premeditation  in  his  mind  has  brutally  murdered  the  deceased  with  a  sharp 

edged  weapon,  which  he had  also recovered  during  the  course  of investigation; 

that  the  findings  of  the  learned  trial  Court  to  the  extent  of  awarding  lesser 

punishment  of life imprisonment  are  based  on  misconception  of law,  therefore, 

the  impugned  judgment  may  be  modified  to  the  extent  of  imposing  of  death 

sentence instead  of imprisonment  for life to the appellant. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  PW-1 Sajjad Hussain  i.e. elder  brother  of 

deceased, resident  of Dhoke Nagial, presently  residing  at Iftikhar Town, Khanna 

Dhak,  Islamabad  along  with  his  family  members,  stated  that  on  09.11.2015, at 

about  7:20  p.m.,  when  he came back to his house  his brother  Muhammad  Ibrar 

(deceased) was present  in the house, who, at about 8 o'clock in the night, went  to 

a nearby  market  and  was  having  chit-chat with  his friends  as he was  seen by his 

father  namely  PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain,  however,  his  younger  brother  did  not 

come back, who  was  searched  till morning,  but  they received  information  that  a 

dead body  of a young  boy is lying near One Minar Masjid, next to the graveyard. 

Thereafter,  the  complainant  and  his  younger  brother  namely  Saddam  Hussain 

went to the said place, where  they found  the dead body of their deceased brother, 

who was found  to be murdered  with a sharp edged weapon  as his throat was slit. 

7. 

PW-16  Anees  Akbar/S.1.  having  been  the  first  Investigating  Officer 

reached at spot  and  prepared  the inquest report  Exh.PB by referring  the eyes and 

mouth  of deceased  semi-opened  in Column  No.8. He also referred  the injuries in 

Column  No.10 in the following manner: 

.1~{~U~;if 

)r;J e.i~,JL1,~  ,..-.: }LJ{,;~,,f~  U~; ir;J}l~i:I' J~_ii.11,~" 

"-u(/i(; 

PW-16  Anees  Akbar/S.1.  drafted  application  for  conduct  of  postmortem 

examination  (Exh.PZ), sent  the  dead  body  through  Arshid/ Constable  to  PIMS 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  4 

Hospital  on official vehicle and  prepared  rough  site plan  Exh.PZ-A followed  by 

collection of bloodstained  earth  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PC and  recording  of 

statements  of witnesses  under  Section 161  Cr.P.C. However,  on  24.11.2015, the 

investigation  of  this  case  was  transferred  from  him  to  CIA  staff.  During  the 

course  of cross-examination,  PW-16 Anees  Akbar/S.1.  acknowledged  that  name 

of  deceased' s  father  i.e. Tasawwar  Hussain  was  not  mentioned  in  the  inquest 

report  Exh.PB and  he has not recorded  statement  of deceased' s father  despite the 

fact 

that  his  name  was  mentioned 

in  complaint  Exh.P A.  He  further 

acknowledged  that  it  revealed  to  him  during  the  course  of  investigation  that 

deceased  had  relation  with  a girl and  he was  telephonically  in contact with  her. 

He  also  acknowledged  that  till transfer  of investigation,  there  was  no  evidence 

which  could  lead  to  the  arrest  of  appellant  and  even  he  had  not  noticed  any 

injury on the appellant's  finger. 

8. 

Pursuant  to  transfer  of  investigation  to  CIA  Staff on  24.11.2015, PW-17 

Tariq Cheema/S.I.  has  taken  over the investigation  of the case and  recorded  the 

statements  of PW-1 Sajjad Hussain  and  PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain  under  Section 

161 Cr.P.C. He has also obtained  the CDR (Exh.P9 to 37) of appellant  as well as of 

the deceased through  separate  application,  which was taken  into possession vide 

recovery  memo  Exh.PT,  dated  07.12.2015. He  also  recorded  the  statements  of 

Asad,  Bilal and  Usman  on  28.11.2015. PW-17 Tariq  Cheema/S.I.  arrested  the 

appellant  on 20.12.2015, who  on the same day  had  disclosed  the incident  as well 

as about  the  place  of occurrence.  On  25.12.2015, the  appellant  got recovered  the 

weapon  of  offence  i.e.  knife  Exh.PS together  with  a  wire  Exh.P6 and  LCD of 

mobile  phone  Exh.P8,  through  recovery  memos  Exh.PW,  Exh.PX  &  Exh.PY, 

respectively,  as  well  as  a  chip/SIM  Exh.P7 from  his  house  situated  at  Ashraf 

Town.  A site plan  of recovery  was  also prepared  vide  Exh.PZ-C and  a separate 

criminal case under Sections 13 / 20 / 65 of Arms Ordinance  was registered  against 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  5 

the  appellant.  PW-17  Tariq  Cheema/S.1.  prepared 

the  challan  against  the 

appellant  after dispatch  of Churri  Exh.PS to Forensic Science Laboratory, Lahore. 

9. 

Keeping  in  view  the  background  of  the  case,  since  the  entire  case  rests 

upon  material  points  of medical evidence, motive, last seen evidence, recovery of 

weapon  of  offence,  and  CDR,  therefore,  in  order  to  untangle  the  threads  of 

murder  of  deceased,  the  said  material  points  needed  to  be  thrashed  out 

separately. 

MEDICAL EVIDENCE 

10. 

PW-7  Dr.  Muhammad  Naseer  conducted  the  autopsy  of  deceased  on 

10.11.2015, at 10:30 a.m.  and  explained  the  dead  body  as  of a  young  man  of 18 

years  having  height  of 5'11"  with  good  physique,  small  beard,  eyes and  mouth 

having  been  semi  opened,  wearing  black  color  Shalwar  Qameez  and  white 

bunyan,  which  were  bloodstained.  After the postmortem  examination,  PW-7 Dr. 

Muhammad  Naseer  has  produced  the  postmortem  report  Exh.PH/1-6,  wherein 

he has observed  the following injuries on the dead body  of deceased. 

i. 

u. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

Cut  throat  in  the  middle  of  neck  transversely  deeply  seated 
cutting  all  the  organs  and  vessels  of  neck  measuring  14  x  4.5 
c.m. 
Incise  wound  on  the  medial  aspect  of  middle  of  left  elbow 
measuring  6 x 4 c.m.  which  was on  the muscle  deep. 
Incise  wound  just  below  the  right  nipple  transversely  seated 
measuring  5 x 2 c.m.  penetrating  deeply. 
Incise  would  on  the  epigaspric  area  penetrating  up  downward 
measuring  4 x 2 c.m.  deeply seated. 
Incise  would  on  the  left  hypochondria  area  transversely  6  x  2 
c.m. 
Incise  wound  over  the  middle  of  sternum  bone  in  area  of  third 
intercostals  scale  measuring  3  x  1  c.m.  which  was  muscle  and 
skin  cut  penetrating  deeply  in  the  chest  cavity  mainly  on  the  left 
side of chest cavity. 

On  skull  examination  all  the organs  were found  healthy  while on 
tissues,  skin  vessels, 

neck  dissection  all  the  muscles  subcutaneous 
nerves,  thyroid gland,  tracea,  Esophagus  were completely cut. 

On  thorax  examination  chest  walls  were  ruptured,  both  pleurae 
were  ruptured  and  contained  clotted  and  unclotted  blood.  Trachea  was 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  6 

cut  at  the  level  of  neck.  Right  lung  was  ruptured  while  left  lung  was 
found  healthy.  There  w  as  rupture  of  pericardium  and  contained 
unclotted  blood while heart itself was found  healthy. 

On  abdominal  examination,  abdominal  wall  and  peritoneum 
were  ruptured.  Esophagus  was  ruptured  at  the  neck  level  in  an  area  of 
cut  throat.  Stomach  was  ruptured  and  contained  mostly  semi  digested 
food  and  little  amount  of undigested food.  Large  intestine  was  ruptured 
in  the  descending  colon  area.  All  other  organs  of abdominal  were found 
healthy. 

OPINION 

Deceased  sustained  cut  thorat  of injury  No.1,  which  resulted  in 
rupture  of all  the  blood  vessels,  draining  and  supplying  the  brain,  the 
most  vital  organ  of  the  body  plus  obstruction  in  the  respiratory  tract 
leading loss of function  of brain  and lungs  causing death of deceased.  All 
injuries  were  ante  mortem  in  nature  and  sufficient  to  cause  death  in 
ordinary  cause of nature.  As  there were  low defense  marks on  the body of 
deceased,  therefore,  gastric  lavage,  piece  of stomach,  spleen,  liver  kidney 
to  chemical 
and  small 
examiner,  Lahore. 

taken  for  any  drug 

intoxication 

intestine 

Probable time  between injury and death:- 03 to 05 minimum. 
Time between death  and post mortem:- 10 to 11  hours. 

11.  However,  during the  course  of cross-examination,  PW-7 Dr. Muhammad 

Naseer acknowledged  that: 

a)  no ligature  mark was found  on  the surroundings  of neck; 
b) 

there  were  six  injuries  of sharp  in  nature,  there  is  a  chance  of more 
than one accused. 

c)  I have  the  time period  between  the postmortem  and death  as  10  to  11 
hours,  so  there  is  a  chance  of  murder  in  between  11.30  p.m.  or  12 
midnight. 

d)  At the  time of postmortem  examination,  the deceased mouth  and eyes 

were semi open and were not fully  opened. 

e)  Name  of Tasawwar  Hussain  who  is  the father  of deceased  is  nowhere 

mentioned  in the inquest report signed by Anees Akbar,  S.I. 

MOTIVE 

12. 

The prosecution  in order to prove the motive part of this case has produced 

PW-10 Usman  Alunad  i.e. neighbor  and  mutual  friend  of deceased  as well as of 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  7 

appellant, PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal and Asad, who referred the reason and motive 

of commission of offence in the following manner: 

11 Fakhar  Aman  had  good  attraction  and  friendship  towards  Asad.  He 
liked  him.  But  parents  of  Asad  asked  to  refrain  from 
very  much 
friendship  of  Accused  Fakhar  Aman.  As  Fakhar  Aman  is  pathan  and 
older  to  Asad.  That's  why  Asad  cut  of  his friendship  with  the  accused 
Fakhar  Aman  and  Fakhar  Aman  was  very  depressed.  I along  with  Bilal 
attempted  for  reconciliation  but  Asad  refused.  We  used  to  play  cricket 
together.  One  day  we  were  playing  cricket  together  when  deceased  Ibrar 
gave a slap  to Asad.  Upon  this,  accused  had a quarrel  with  deceased  that 
why  you  slapped  Asad.  Due  to  this,  Asad  was  in  talking  terms  with 
Ibrar  but  not  with  accused.  On  various  opinions  accused  Fakhar  Aman 
said  that  he  will  not  spare  anyone  who  will  come  in  his  way  as  to 
friendship  between  him  and Asad. 11 

13. 

Similarly,  the  other  witness  of  motive  appeared  as  PW-11 Muhammad 

Bilal, who stated  the reasons  in the following manner: 

11 Stated  that deceased  Ibrar Hussain  was  my  neighbor and friend  as  well 
Asad,  Usman,  and Fakhar Aman  were also  my friend,  Fakhar Aman  had 
good  attraction  and friendship  towards  Asad.  He  very  much  liked  him. 
But  parents  of Asad  asked  to  refrain from  friendship  of Accused  Fakhar 
Aman.  Asad  cut  of  his friendship  with  the  accused  Fakhar  Aman  and 
Fakhar  Aman  was  very  depressed.  I  along  with  Usman  attempted  for 
reconciliation  but  Asad  refused.  Asad  told  us  that  Fakhar  is  pathan  as 
well  he  is older  them  so  his  parents forbid  him from  his friendship.  One 
day we  were  playing  cricket  together  when  deceased  Ibrar gave  a  slap  to 
Asad.  Upon  this,  accused  had  a  quarrel  with  deceased  that  why  you 
slapped Asad.  Due  to  this, Asad  was  in  talking  terms  with  Ibrar but  not 
with  accused and accused felt jealousy. 11 

EVIDENCE  OF  LAST  SEEN 

14. 

PW-2 Tasawwar  Husasin,  father  of  deceased,  stated  that  on  09.11.2015, 

when  he  was  on  his  way  back  to  home  after  offering  Isha  prayer,  he  saw  his 

deceased  son standing  with  the appellant  and  PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal, whereas 

in his presence,  PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal went  to his house,  while  the  appellant 

made  accompanied  his  deceased  son  to  his  house,  whereafter  he  heard  that 

appellant  took  the  deceased  nearby  Minar  Wali  Masjid,  near  Chota  Qabristan, 

where he murdered  his son with  Churri blows. 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  8 

15. 

The above referred  stance of PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain  was also confirmed 

by PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal as he stated  that  on 09.11.2015, they  in routine  were 

standing 

in  front  of  deceased' s  house  and  at  7 / 8  o'clock,  PW-1  Sajjad 

Hussain/  complainant  gave them  money  and  asked  to pay  amount  of committee 

and load mobile balance/  easy load at Sheikh General Store. On return,  they were 

standing  in  front  of  deceased's  house,  PW-2  Tasawwar  Hussain/deceased's 

father  had  also met  them.  PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal further  stated  that  at 8  p.m., 

he  left  for  his  house  while  the  appellant  and  deceased  went  towards  the 

appellant's  house. 

RECOVERY OF WEAPON OF OFFENCE AND OTHER BELONGINGS 

16. 

PW-17 Tariq Cheema/1.0.  stated  that  on 25.12.2015, the  appellant  during 

physical  remand  disclosed  and  got  recovered  the  weapon  of offence i.e. Churri 

(Exh.P5), wire  Exh.P6 and  Chip  (Exh.P7) lying  in a plastic tub  kept  in his house 

vide recovery memos  Exh.PW, Exh.PX and  Exh.PY, which are witnessed  by PW- 

14 Liaqat  Bhatti  Masih,  Muhammad  lbrar  and  PW-13 Sikandar  Ali/Constable. 

He  further  confirmed  that  Churri  (Exh.P5)  despite  being  easily  available  in 

market  is not common use in household  items, rather  generally used by butchers. 

He also stated  that  Churri  (Exh.P5) was recovered  after more than  one and  a half 

months  after  the  occurrence.  The recovery  witness  i.e. PW-13 Sikandar  Ali/HC 

also confirmed  the  recovery  of weapon  of offence (Exh.P5) being  bloodstained 

and  explained  the weapon  of offence as 14 inches of knife having  a wood  handle 

and  9  inches  of blade  in  length.  He  further  stated  that  red  wire  Exh.P6 having 

length  of 4'8"  was  also  recovered  on  the  pointation  of appellant  from  the  same 

plastic  tub  along  with  broken  Q  Mobile Chip  Exh.P7 and  LCD Exh.P8, which 

belonged to the deceased. 

17. 

The  other  witness  of  recovery  namely  Liaqat  Bhatti  Masih  appeared  as 

PW-14, resident  of  New  Shakrial,  Zia  Masjid,  Islamabad,  who  stated  that  on 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  9 

25.12.2015, he  went  to  Iftikhar  Town  in connection  with  some  work  and  in  his 

presence, the S.I. along with  appellant  came there. In his presence and  the people 

gathered  there  after  seeing them,  appellant  got recovered  the bloodstained  knife 

(Exh.P5) and  a  red  color  wire  having  length  of 4'8"  from  same  tub  along  with 

broken Q Mobile Chip and  LCD. 

COLLECTION AND  VERIFICATION  OF CDR 

18.  On  07.12.2015, PW-17 Tariq  Cheema/S.1.  obtained  the  CDR of deceased 

and  appellant  vide  memo  Exh.PT, consisting  of  29  pages,  and  inquired  about 

phone numbers  mentioned  in CDR. The SIM found  during  the course of recovery 

was issued in the name  of Latif ldrees  and not in the name  of deceased, while the 

said Latif ldrees  has not  been  produced  as witness  in this case, whereas  the SIM 

used  by the appellant  was  in the name  of his father,  but  even this aspect has not 

been  clarified  by  the  Investigating  Officer. The  CDR further  discloses  that  the 

mobile  phone  of  deceased  having  IMEi  No.356019057458220 was  used  on 

09.11.2015, at  8:04,  with  SIM  No.0304-5536935, which  belongs  to  appellant. 

However,  this aspect  has  not  been  explained  by  the  Investigating  Officer in his 

examination-in-chief, except he produced  the CDR. 

CONCLUSION 

19. 

The  entire  matter, 

if  seen 

in  light  of  evidence  of  PW-1  Sajjad 

Hussain/  complainant,  he  has  acknowledged  the  followings  facts  during  the 

course of cross examination. 

a) 

b) 

c) 

I  did  not  see  by  myself  the  accused  along  with  two  friends 
standing  at market and same  was seen  by my father. 
It  is  correct  that  I  did  not  mention  name  of  any  person  in 
Exh.PA 
the 
occurrence. 
It  is  correct  that  I  did  not  mention  specifically  in  Exh.PA  that 
my father  had also seen  Bilal,  Ibrar deceased  and Fakhar Aman. 

those  were  seen  standing 

in  Bazaar  prior 

to 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  10 

d) 

e) 

fJ 

g) 

h) 

i) 

j) 
k) 

l) 

m) 

n) 

the  detail  of 

It  is  correct  that  I  did  not  mention  in  Exh.PA 
that  in  the 
meanwhile,  Muhammad  Bilal  went  to  his  own  house  whereas 
accused  Fakhar Aman  brought my  brother  to his own  house. 
It  is  correct  that  I  did  not  mention  in  Exh.PA 
inquiry  which  we held for  tracing out  deceased. 
It  is  correct  that  I  mention  in  Exh.PA  that  my  brother  was 
murdered  by some  unknown  person. 
It  is  correct  that  Exh.PB  (inquest  report)  does  not  contain  my 
father  presence. 
I accompanied  the  dead body of my  brother  to hospital  at about  8 
a.m.  We  reached  hospital  where  postmortem  of  my  brother  was 
carried out. 
After  5  days  of  my  brother  burial  I joined  police  investigation 
again.  After  that  on  26.11.2015  my  statement  was  recorded  by 
police. 
My father  did not  make  any  statement  till 26.11.2015. 
I  did  not  mention  in  Exh.PA  that  my  brother  had  two  mobile 
phones. 
It  is  correct  that  no  statement  regarding  two  mobiles  which  I 
stated in my  statement  bey which I recorded  before  the police. 
It  is  correct  that  motive  about  strained  friendship  was  not 
mentioned  in  Exh.PA. 
It  is  correct  that  alleged  motive  which  I  have  mentioned  in  my 
statement  was not stated  to police before 26.11.2015. 

20. 

Similarly, the witness of last seen i.e. PW-2 Tasawwar Hussain/father  of 

deceased has admitted three following important factors. 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

e) 

My  first  visit  was after a  week of burial  of my  son.  I did  not  tell 
the  police  on  my first  visit  that on  my  presence  Bilal  went  to his 
house and Fakhar Aman  took deceased son  to his house. 
It is  correct  that  I did  not  mention  before  the  police  that  my  son 
had  two mobile phones  prior to 26.11.2015. 
It is also  correct  that I did not mention  that the  SIM  was missing 
before  26.11.2015. 
I  did  not  mention  to  police  that finger  of Fakhar  Aman  had  an 
injury  on  his  index  finger.  Volunteered  that  my  son  had  told 
about it  to  the police. 
The motive  about strained relationship  was  not in my  knowledge. 

21. 

The crux of the evidence of above two star witnesses namely PW-1 Sajjad 

Hussain/complainant  and  PW-2 Tasawwar Hussain is that it has been noted in 

complaint Exh.PA that  on 10.11.2015, the deceased along with  his friends went 

out  to  the  market  at  about  8  p.m.,  who  had  been  seen  by  PW-2 Tasawwar 

Hussain/father.  This aspect is a hearsay evidence as even the names of friends 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal  Revision  No.115/2017 

Page  I  11 

were  not  disclosed in  complaint  Exh.P A, though  the  same  were  disclosed by 

PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain/father  on  26.11.2015 i.e. after  about  16  days  of the 

alleged occurrence. Similarly, I  have  also attended  to  the  statements of PW-10 

Usman  Ahmad,  PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal and  PW-12 Asad  Mehmood  being 

witnesses  of  motives  and  last  seen  to  corroborate  the  testimony  of  PW-2 

Tasawwar  Hussain/ father,  but  surprisingly  the  statements  of  all  the  said 

witnesses were  recorded  by  the  police on  28.11.2015 i.e.  after  19 days  of the 

alleged  occurrence, about  which  no  logical explanation  has  been  placed  on 

record as to why the statements of the said witnesses were recorded with delay. 

The effect of recording of statement with delay has been considered in the light 

of cases reported  as 2011P.Cr.LT1126 Lahore (Qaiser Hussain  alias  Kashi  alias 

Kashif  VS The State),  1975P.Cr.LT1304 Karachi (PINYO  VS The State,  2017 YLR 

724  Lahore  (Shaukat  Ali  VS  The State),  1998 SCMR  570 (Muhammad  Khan  VS 

Maula  Bakhsh)  and  1996 SCMR  1553 (Abdul  Khaliq  VS  The State),  whereby it 

has been settled  that  statements under  Section 161  Cr.P.C. recorded  at belated 

stage loses its  value  and  the  creditability of witnesses is  looked  with  serious 

suspicious when no plausible explanation was offered for recording of statement 

with  delay. In this  case, all these witnesses have joined the  investigation with 

delay despite the fact that  prosecution cases rests upon  circumstantial evidence 

including the ingredients of last seen, whereas the delay factor in recording the 

statement of the prosecution witness affects the case on merits, which means that 

the  star  witnesses  have  deliberated/ consulted with  each  other  and  they  have 

nothing in their mind to link the chain of evidence and as such, there is no logical 

explanation available on record as to why the statements of these witnesses were 

recorded with delay. 

22. 

PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain/father  has  stated  in  his  examination-in-chief 

th::it  on 09.11.2015,  when  he was going back home after offering Isha  prayer, he 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  12 

had  seen his son  (deceased) standing  with  the appellant  and  PW-11 Muhammad 

Bilal, but  this  fact  was  not  disclosed  till  26.11.2015 as  per  his  own  admission. 

Similarly,  PW-11  Muhammad  Bilal  being  the  second  last  seen  witness  has 

narrated  the  same  story  that  when  he was  standing  in front  of deceased' s house 

with  deceased,  appellant,  Asad  and  Usman  on  09.11.2015, the  elder  brother  of 

deceased  i.e. PW-1 Sajjad Hussain  gave him amount  to pay  committee  and  load 

mobile  balance,  but  PW-1  Sajjad  Hussain/complainant  has  not  referred  this 

factor  in  his  complaint  Exh.P A nor  he  had  seen  the  friends  of deceased  in  the 

market  as  it  was  seen  by  his  father,  even  he  did  not  mention  specifically  the 

names  of  Muhammad  Bilal, lbrar  deceased  and  Fakhar  Aman  in  Exh.P A  that 

they  were  standing  in  front  of  the  house,  therefore,  the  testimony  of  PW-11 

Muhammad  Bilal has  no  significance  which  has  not  been  corroborated  by  the 

testimony  of PW-1 Sajjad Hussain/ complainant  on this material fact. 

23. 

PW-11  Muhammad  Bilal  further 

stated 

that  PW-2  Tasawwar 

Hussain/  father  also  met  them,  whereafter  he  left  for  his  house,  however  the 

appellant  and  deceased  left  towards  appellant's  house,  this  crucial  part  of the 

evidence was  also narrated  to the police by PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal for the first 

time on 28.11.2015, but  he acknowledged  in his evidence that,  "it  is  correct  that on 

09.11.2015  after  8  p.m.  when  I left  for my  house  I never saw  or met  deceased  or accused 

prior  to  recovery  of  dead  body."  This aspect  negates  his  earlier  stance  recorded  in 

examination-in-chief  that  whether  "the  appellant  and  deceased  left towards  the 

house  of appellant  and  whether  they  were  seen in company  of each other  alive, 

whereafter  nobody  had  seen  the  deceased  alive  till  recovery  of his  dead  body. 

These  important  links  have  not  been  justified  by  PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal or 

PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain. 

24. 

In such  type  of proposition  of last  seen, this  Court  has  gone  through  the 

principles  settled  by the  apex Court  in cases reported  as 2001 SCMR  1914 (Mst. 

Crl. Appeal No.117 /2017 & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  13 

Robina  Bibi VS The State), 2008 SCMR 1103 (Alta( Hussain  VS Fakhar Hussain), 

2010 SCMR 939 (Zafar Abbas  VS  The State)  and 2016 SCMR  2123 (Muhammad 

Mushtaq  VS  Mustansar  Hussain)  and  observed  that  the  minimum  obligation 

upon  the  prosecution  is to  prove  proximity of time  and  the  witnesses should 

have seen the  deceased alive in company of accused person shortly before the 

time he was presumed to have been met with death near the place of occurrence, 

-. 

and  such  evidence  of  last  seen  should  be  corroborated  with  other  material 

evidence, even otherwise, all these aspects of last seen are not visible in this case. 

25. 

Besides the  above  referred  position,  the  dead  body  of  deceased  was 

recovered with  six (06) injuries including the  stab wounds  and  a  cut  throat  in 

middle of neck. Such commission of offence discloses the anger, rage and force 

used by the accused in committing murder  of the deceased through  brutal and 

callous manner, which reciprocate the reason and motive, hence this Court has 

considered the statements of PW-10 Usman Ahmad and PW-11 Muhammad Bilal 

being witnesses of motive, who stated that, "We  used  to  play  cricket  together.  One 

day we were playi.ng cricket  together  when  deceased  Ibrar gave a slap  to Asad.  Upon  this, 

accused  had  a  quarrel  with  deceased  that  why  slapped  Asad.  Due  to  this,  Asad  was  in 

talking  terms  with  Ibrar  but  not  with  accused".  Similarly,  the  second  factor 

highlighted  by  PW-10 Usman  Ahmad  in  his  evidence  is  that,  "Fakhar  Aman 

(appellant)  had  a  good  attraction  and friendship  with  Asad.  He  very  much  liked  him." 

Whereas, PW-12 Asad  Mehmood cut  off his  friendship  with  appellant  on  the 

direction of his parents that he is younger to appellant and appellant is Pathan  by 

caste.  Similarly, PW-11 Muhammad  Bilal also  verified  the  said  position  by 

stating  that  "Asad  became  closer 

to  deceased  and  maintained  distance  with 

the 

appellant,  due  to which  appellant  was depressed."  However, no time or date about the 

incident  of slapping  has  been  referred  by  either  witness,  even  otherwise, the 

witness which is cause of motive in this case, i.e. PW-12 Asad Mehmood has not 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  14 

narrated the incident of slapping at the hands of deceased nor he stated a word 

that  since  he  was  closer  to  deceased,  the  appellant  had  grudge  against  the 

deceased. Hence, the motive spelled out by PW-10 Usman Ahmad  and  PW-11 

Muhammad  Bilal has  not  been  confirmed  by  PW-12 Asad  Mehmood,  even 

otherwise,  the  first  Investigating  Officer  namely  PW-16  Anees  Akbar/SJ. 

acknowledged  in  his  cross-examination that  "it  is  correct  that  it  came  to  my 

knowledge  during  investigation  that  deceased  had  relation  with  a  girl  and  he  was  in 

contact  with  her  telephonically."  Such aspect further  casts  doubt  on  the  motive 

brought by the prosecution. 

26. 

It is trite law that motive is a double edged weapon and it is necessary to 

prove the motive if  it is alleged by  the prosecution as held  in 2017  SCMR  713 

(Muhammad Ismail  VS  The State).  In  this  case, the  motive  was  initially not 

known to PW-1 Sajjad Hussain/complainant  or PW-2 Tasawwar Hussain/father, 

even otherwise, the motive has not been disclosed during the first 19 days of the 

incident, neither any time, date  or place was referred, nor the said motive was 

corroborated  from  any  independent  source.  Hence,  the  motive  could  not  be 

believed. 

27. 

The  prosecution  has  tried  to  establish the  case by  way  of  evidence of 

recovery of weapon  of offence i.e. Churri  Exh.PS recovered on the pointation of 

appellant  after  one  and  a  half  month  of  occurrence  in  presence  of  PW-13 

Sikandar  Ali/HC,  who  confirmed  that  the  Churri  was  found  bloodstained. 

Although, the Churri  Exh.PS is easily available in market, but it has been stated 

by the witness that same is not common in household use, rather generally used 

by butchers. I  have  gone through  the  testimony of recovery witnesses namely 

PW-13 Sikandar Ali/HC,  who stated that on 25.11.2015, he and Sargul Khan (not 

produced) joined the  investigation and  in his presence, the appellant  disclosed 

during interrogation that he can get recovered the knife, the wire through which 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  &t Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  15 

deceased  was  strangulated,  Chip  of  mobile  phone  and  LCD  belonging  to 

deceased  from  his house.  Consequently,  Investigating  Officer along with  PW-13 

Sikandar  Ali/HC  and  Sargul  Khan  reached  Iftikhar  Town,  Pindorian,  where 

recovery  was  effected  at  the  pointation  of appellant.  However,  PW-13 Sikandar 

Ali/HC  further  introduced  PW-14 Liaquat  Bhatti and  one  Ibrar  as witnesses  of 

the recovery proceedings. 

28. 

I  have  gone  through  all  the  recovery  memos  i.e.  Exh.PW,  Exh.PX and 

Exh.PY, regarding  of weapon  of offence (Churri),  Wire, Q-Mobile Chip  & LCD 

and  found  it  to  be  signed  by  the  same  three  witnesses,  which  is  an  unusual 

practice. However,  the  prosecution  has  only  produced  PW-13 Sikandar  Ali/HC 

and  PW-14 Liaqat  Bhatti  Masih  in  this  case  as  witnesses  of  recovery.  I  have 

considered  their  testimonies  on  material  aspects  and  it  has  been  observed  that 

PW-14 Liaqat Bhatti Masih being  resident  of New  Shakrial could  not justify any 

valid reason for visiting the place of recovery on the day of recovery, even he had 

not  explained  as  to  how  he  is related  to  the  appellant  or  the  complainant  and 

why  he  has  been  selected  as  a  witness  of recovery,  nor  he  is able  to  verify  the 

number  of  rooms  at  the  place  of  recovery,  rather  he  simply  stated  about  his 

acquaintance  with  complainant  3 / 4 months  prior  to the occurrence, even certain 

factors  regarding  disclosure  and  presence  of PW-14 Liaqat  Bhatti  Masih  at  the 

place of occurrence have rightly been discarded  by the learned  Trial Court  on the 

objection raised  by the appellant.  It has further  been observed  in the statement  of 

PW-13 Sikandar  Ali/HC  that  parents,  brothers  and  sisters of appellant  were  also 

living in said house,  hence the place of recovery  is not in exclusive possession  of 

the appellant. He also acknowledged that the recovered Churri (Exh.P5) is ordinary 

one widely used in domestic work, which is also easily available in the market. 

29. 

As per  record,  the  appellant  was  arrested  on  20.12.2015 by  PW-17 Tariq 

Cheema/1.0.  while  the recovery  of weapon  of offence was effected on 25.12.2015 

Crl. Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  16 

i.e.  after  five  days  of the  arrest.  Such  type  of delayed  recoveries  have  negative 

effect on  the  prosecution  case  as  held  in  1999 MLD  1208 Lahore  (Muhammad 

lavaid  VS  The  State)  and  2013 P.Cr.Ll  783  Karachi  (Ammar  Yasir  Ali  VS  The 

State).  As such,  the  recovery  of weapon  of offence could  not  be  related  by  the 

Investigating  Officer  as  to  its  origin  or  from  where  it  was  purchased  by  the 

appellant  or  his  family  members.  I  have  also  considered  the  recovery  of  LCD 

Exh.P8 and  Chip  Exh.P7, vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PY, but  it  is  nobody's  case 

that deceased  was  in possession  of the Chip Exh.P7 and  LCD Exh.P8, at the time 

of  his  murder,  even 

this  aspect  has  been  confronted 

to  PW-1  Sajjad 

Hussain/complainant  and  PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain/father,  who  confirmed  that 

they  did  not  mention  that  SIM was  missing  or  the  deceased  had  two  mobile 

phones  prior  to 26.11.2015, even otherwise,  the SIM and  LCD have not been sent 

for forensic analysis  for the purpose  of verification nor  there  is any document  of 

a  cellular  company  to  verify  that  SIM was  in  use  by  the  deceased  and  even 

PW-17 Tariq  Cheema/S.I.  confirmed  that  he  inquired  about  mobile  numbers 

mentioned  in CDR, but  he  did  not  make  it  part  of the  challan  file. One  mobile 

phone was recovered  from dead  body containing  a SIM registered  in the name of 

one Latif, therefore,  this Court  believes that  the recovery of LCD and  SIM has no 

bearing  to  the  case  of prosecution  nor  it  helps  the  prosecution  in  any  manner, 

hence,  when  the  link  has  not  been  proved,  such  recovery  is  inconsequential. 

Furthermore, 

the  Investigating  Officer  intended 

to  prove  from  the  CDR, 

consisting  of 29 pages  (Exh.P9-37) and  stated  that  appellant  had  used  his  own 

SIM (0304-5536935) in the  deceased' s  mobile phone  (Model QE 787)  at 08:04  pm 

on  09.11.2015. This  aspect  has  not  been  justified  as  IMEi No.35601-9057458220 

belongs to one Latif, who  was not cited as witness  of this case, even otherwise,  it 

has not been  confirmed  through  any  independent  source  or proof as to whether 

the appellant  was using  the said mobile number  with his SIM (0304-5536935). 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  17 

30.  Much emphasis has  been placed by  the prosecution upon  the cut  mark 

injury observed on the  index finger of appellant's  right  hand,  which was seen 

after the murder  of deceased, although  there was no  medical evidence to  that 

extent. However,  the  appellant  had  acknowledged  such  injury  and  given  his 

explanation while answering Question No.6 in his statement under  Section 342 

Cr.P.C., that  the  injury  received  was  a  result  of  trying  to  open  a  nut  in  a 

workshop. I  have gone through  the statement of appellant, who has denied his 

involvement in the alleged incident. 

31.  While considering the above background of the case, I have gone through 

the  impugned  judgment  of  the  learned  Trial  Court,  whereby  conviction  of 

appellant was based upon the following observations. 

"Though  it  is  a  case  of  last  seen  evidence  supported  technological 
supportive  and  circumstantial  evidence  but  as  there  is  no  enmity, 
recoveries  were  made  on  the  pointation  of  accused  from  his  house  and 
there  is  no  rebuttal.  The  last  seen  witnesses  have  appeared,  CDR  has 
been  produced  wherein  the  accused  used  cell  phone  of  deceased  on  the 
day  and  time  of occurrence.  There  is  no  question  of mis-identity.  There 
was  no enmity  between  the  witnesses  and  the  accused.  The  explanation 
given for  index finger  injury  proved  that  there  was  injury  on  the  day of 
occurrence  on  the right finger  of accused.  The prosecution  has proved  the 
case under  the circumstances.  The report of serologist  is positive  wherein 
it  is  mentioned  that  the knife  blood stained contains  human  blood.  There 
is  last  seen  evidence  supported  by  medical  evidence  and  there  is  motive 
which  was  duly  proved  through  independent  witnesses  coupled  with 
recovery  made  in  the presence  of independent  witnesses  and accused  was 
nominated 
through  supplementary  statement  after  getting  certainty 
about  his  involvement.  There  are  witnesses  of  last  seen  and  upon  the 
pointation  of  accused,  recoveries  have  been  affected.  The  report  of 
chemical  examiner  has  been  received  positive  knife  being  blood  stained. 
the  house  of  accused,  so  bloodstained 
The  recovery  was  made  from 
remained  intact  till  recovery.  After  discovery  of dead  body  within  1  ~ 
hours,  the  FIR  was  lodged,  so  there  is  no  question  of any  deliberation, 
to  the  witnesses, 
concoction  or  falsification.  The  accused  is  known 
therefore,  there  was  no  chance  of  mis-identification.  The  witnesses  are 
natural  witnesses  not  related 
time  of 
to 
postmortem  full  rigor  mortus  was  developed,  so  approximate  time  by 
doctor about  death  is  irrelevant.  There  is  CDR  wherein  it  is proved  that 
the  accused  used  cell  of  deceased  at  the  time  of  occurrence  and  as  per 
Article  73  automated  generated  record  is per se  admissible.  The  accused 
has  right  hand  index finger  injury  and  the  same  was  also  authenticated 
by the doctor when he was examined after arrest." 

the  complainant.  The 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  18 

32. 

The  detailed  insight  of  evidence  as  well  as  the  portion  of  impugned 

judgment  reproduced  above  clearly  spells  out  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  has 

not  appreciated 

the  chain  of  circumstantial  evidence  in  a  proper  manner, 

although  the  motive  has  not  been  proved  and  recovery  along  with  evidence  of 

last  seen  was  wrongly  believed.  The verification  and  authentication  of CDR as 

well as confirmation  of Chip  Exh.P7 and  LCD of Q-Mobile (E787) Exh.P8 has not 

been  justified  from 

the 

testimony  of  PW-1  Sajjad  Hussain/complainant. 

Similarly, PW-2 Tasawwar  Hussain,  father  of deceased,  also confirmed  that  his 

son  was  using  two  mobile  phones,  though  he  acknowledged  that  he  did  not 

mention  before the police that his son had two mobile phones  prior  to 26.11.2015, 

nor  mentioned  that  SIM  was  missing  before  26.11.2015. Hence,  it  has  been 

concluded  that  the  improvements  made  in  testimonies  of both  these  witnesses 

are afterthoughts,  which  were  made  in order  to strengthen  the prosecution  case, 

whereas  they  have  not  disclosed  missing  of the  mobile phone  or the SIM of the 

deceased  at the time  of alleged  occurrence, even  otherwise,  it has been observed 

from  recovery  memo  of the  articles recovered  from  the  dead  body  of deceased 

that,  "Q  Mobile  ~  i.S.;I", which has not been explained  from its features  nor any 

reference  was  given  in  inquest  report  Exh.PB. No  ligature  mark  was  seen  by 

doctor  despite  the  fact that  red  wire  Exh.P6 was  recovered  on the  pointation  of 

appellant.  Two  of  the  witnesses  have  seen  the  injury  on  the  index  finger  of 

appellant's  right  hand,  but  this  aspect  has  not  been  confirmed  through  medical 

evidence,  even  otherwise,  the  murder  was  committed  in brutal  and  sensational 

manner as highlighted  in inquest report Exh.PB at Column No.8, which reads that: 

J,,J l:JP-''°' ~-J,J" ~r  I 

i:I' "~ ,,i.:;1{? J  (A) I 

33. 

This  fact  was  also  confirmed  by  PW-7 Muhammad  Naseer/Doctor,  who 

stated  that, "he was  a young  man of good physique,  small  beard, eyes and mouth 

were semi  opened."  This aspect  was  observed  during  the  course  of postmortem 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  19 

examination,  even  the  doctor  has  confirmed  that  "no  ligature  mark  was  found 

near the su"ounding  of neck"  and  probability  of involvement  of more  than  one 

accused was not ruled  out by the doctor. There was no logical explanation  on the 

part  of  PW-1  Sajjad  Hussain/  complainant,  brother  of  deceased,  and  PW-2 

Tasawwar  Hussain/ father  as  to why  the  eyes and  mouth  of deceased  were  left 

opened  and  tongue  was  protruding  from  mouth  at  the  time  of  preparing  of 

inquest  report  or even at  the time of postmortem  despite  the fact that  they were 

present  at the  place of occurrence  when  dead  body  was  being  dispatched  to the 

hospital.  It  is  usual  conduct  of  family  members  of  any  deceased  person  as  a 

religious ritual  to close down  the eyes and  mouth  of deceased and  this practice is 

not  followed  by  the  strangers.  Such  manner  has  also  been  highlighted  in  case 

reported  as  2019 SCMR  1068 (Muhammad  Rafique  alias  Feeqa VS  The State), 

wherein  it  has  been  held  that  presence  of close family  members  at  the  time  of 

recovery of dead  body  in such like condition is doubtful. 

34.  All the  incriminating  evidence  were  put  to  accused  while  recording  his 

statement  under  Section  342 Cr.P.C.,  however  the  recovery  of  Q  Mobile  Chip 

Exh.P7 and  LCD Exh.P8 is inadmissible  as the same were not identified  by any of 

the  family  member  that  these  were  the  articles  which  belong  to  deceased  and 

taken  by  accused  person  at  the  time  of murder,  in  such  type  of circumstantial 

evidence  case, the  prosecution  was  bound  to  link  every  piece  of evidence  with 

another  in a manner  that it forms a continuous  chain of circumstances  connecting 

the accused with  alleged  offence, however  if one link of chain is missing then the 

entire  edifice  crumbles  down  and  chain  of  prosecution  case  would  fall  on 

ground.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2009 SCMR  407 (Ibrahim  VS  The  State)  and 

2011  SCMR  1127 (Muhammad  Hussain  VS The State). 

35. 

The  learned  Trial  Court  has  not  appreciated  the  inconsistencies  and  the 

improvements  made  by the witnesses  of motive,  even otherwise,  the evidence of 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page I  20 

last  seen  is  defective  and  the  motive  has  been  disbelieved  by  this  Court, 

therefore, the conviction on capital charge could not be justified only on the basis 

of recovery  of weapon  of offence Exh.P5. The cumulative  effect of entire  case of 

prosecution  raises  suspicion  and  doubts,  even  the  first  Investigating  Officer of 

the  case  i.e.  PW-16  Anees  Akbar/S.1.  has  acknowledged  in  his  testimony  a 

different motive that deceased had relation with a girl as he was telephonically  in 

contact with  her. This aspect was concealed by the other witnesses  of prosecution 

and  not  explained,  which  could  give  rise  to  possibility  that  someone  had 

committed  the  murder  of  deceased  due  to  family  honor,  which  could  not  be 

ruled  out, especially while taking into account the injuries of deceased. 

36. 

In view  of above, the appellant  earns a benefit of doubt  as the evidence of 

last seen is not  sufficient to maintain  the conviction of appellant,  even otherwise, 

it  is a  weak  type  of evidence  requiring  strong  corroboration,  but  this  aspect  is 

also missing in this case. Clouds  of doubts  are looming large rendering  the same 

to have  been  based  on  polluted  evidence  of the  witnesses,  who  were  otherwise 

interested  and  recorded  their  initial  statements  after  18  days  of the  incident  to 

strengthen  the  prosecution  case, therefore,  the  principle  extracted  from  Islamic 

jurisprudence  that  it  is  better  that  ten  guilty  persons  go  free  than  that  one 

innocent person  be convicted  should  be given preference.  It is not necessary that 

there  should  be  many  circumstances  creating  doubts  as  a  single  circumstance 

creating  a doubt  in a prudent mind  about  guilt  of accused  makes  him  entitle for 

relief not  as a matter  of grace or concession but  as a matter  of right.  Reliance is 

placed upon  1995 SCMR 1345 (Tarig Pervez VS The State). 

37.  Hence, the upshot  of discussion  made  above is that  prosecution  has failed 

to  complete  the  chain  of  circumstantial  evidence  to  justify  the  conviction  of 

appellant,  thus  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  establish  its case against  appellant 

beyond  reasonable  shadow  of doubt.  Accordingly, the captioned  Criminal  Appeal 

No.111ao11  (Fakhar  Aman  v.  Additional  Sessions  ludge  & 2  others)  is ALLOWED. 

Crl.  Appeal  No.117 /2017  & Criminal Revision No.115/2017 

Page  I  21 

The impugned  judgment  dated  20.07.2017 is set aside, the  appellant  is acquitted 

of the charge  of murder  of deceased  and  he be released  from jail immediately,  if 

not required  in any other criminal case. 

38. 

In  sequel  to  discussion  made  in  preceding  paragraph, 

the  captioned 

Criminal  Revision  No.11sao11 

(Saiiad  Hussain  v.  Fakhar  Iman  & 2  others)  filed  by 

the complainant  for enhancement  of sentence from life imprisonment  to death  to 

the appellant  is hereby DISMISSED. 

39. 

Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  it  has  been  observed  with  great 

concern  that  the  first  Investigating  Officer  of  this  case  i.e.  PW-16  Anees 

Akbar/S.1.  has  not  investigated  the  case  in  a  proper  and  determined  manner, 

which  shows  his  lackadaisical  attitude  in  the  entire  matter  making  the  case  in 

hand  a  fiasco  example  as  he  had  not  bothered  to  record  the  statements  of 

prosecution  witnesses  at  the  earliest,  rather  delayed  the  matter  without  any 

justified  reason  and  the  statements  of witnesses  of  motive  as  well  as  of  PW-2 

Tasawwar  Hussain,  witness  of last seen, were  recorded  when  investigation  was 

transferred  and  handed  over to PW-17 Tariq Cheema/S.1 .. This aspect shows that 

PW-16  Anees  Akbar/S.I. 

is  incompetent  police  official  having  no  working 

knowledge  to investigate  the  crime of murder.  Hence, copy  of instant  judgment 

be  transmitted 

to  LG.  of  Police,  Islamabad  and  SSP,  Islamabad  for  future 

guidance  and  to  ensure  that  such  type  of police  officers shall  not  be  entrusted 

with  investigation  of murder  with  view  to cure intentional  delay  in collection of 

evidence and  recording  of statement  of witnesses. 

Announced  in open Court on:  Sl> It;,.  ~I 

2DU>  · 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR ~ANI) 

JUDGE 

KhalidZ. 

JUDGE 

