ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

C.R.No.73 of 2016 

Sohail Ahmed Jan 
VS           

Siraj Ahmed Jan and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 

04.07.2017   
Mr. Taufiq Asif, Advocate. 
Ch. Liaqat Ali, Advocate for respondent No.1,  
Mian Abdul Razzaq, Advocate for respondents 
No.2 to 4,  
Syed  Masood 
respondent No.10 

Advocate 

Ahmad, 

for 

_____________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant  civil 

revision  petition,  the  petitioner,  Sohail  Ahmed  Jan,  impugns  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated  11.12.2015,  passed  by  the  Court  of 

the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the 

petitioner’s  appeal  against  the 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

26.03.2012,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad,  was  partly  accepted  and  the  said  judgment  and 

decree  passed  by  the  learned  civil  Court  was  modified.  Vide  the 

said  judgment  and  decree  dated  26.03.2012,  the  learned  civil 

Court  had  dismissed  the  suit  for  declaration,  permanent  and 

mandatory  injunction,  instituted  by  the  petitioner  against  his 

brothers and sisters etc. 

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  this  petition  are  that 

the petitioner is the brother of respondent No.1 (Siraj Ahmed Jan), 

respondent No.2 (Kamran Ahmed Jan), respondent No.3 (Rehana 

Gulzar),  and  respondent  No.4  (Alia  Khalid).  Their  father  (Gulzar 

Ahmed)  died  in  May,  1994,  whereas  their  mother  (Razia  Sultana) 

died  on  22.05.2005.  The  essential  dispute  in  the  case  at  hand  is 

whether  House  No.26,  Street  No.55,  Sector  G-9/4,  Islamabad 

(“suit property No.1”) was gifted and transferred by Razia Sultana 

to  her  daughter,  Rehana  Gulzar/respondent  No.3,  and  House 

No.AA/349,  Mohalla  Pir  Harra,  Jamiah  Masjid  Road,  Rawalpindi, 

(“suit property No.2”) was gifted and transferred by Razia Sultana 

to her son Kamran Ahmad Jan/respondent No.2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

C.R.No.73/2016 

3. 

On  11.08.2005, 

the  petitioner 

instituted  a  suit 

for 

declaration,  permanent  and  mandatory  injunction  before  the 

learned civil Court, praying for inter alia a declaration to the effect 

that  he  was  entitled  to  inherit  and  receive  his  share  in  the 

following properties:- 

(I)  House No.26, Street No.55, G-9/4, Islamabad. 
(II)  Commercial  Unit/Building  No.B-I/352  Lower  Bazaar, 

Murree, District Rawalpindi. 

(III)  House  No.AA/349,  Mohalla  Pir  Harra,  Jamiah  Masjid 

Road, Rawalpindi. 

(IV)  Defence  Saving  Certificates  and  Special  Saving 

Certificates. 

4. 

Furthermore, in the said suit it was prayed that the transfer 

of  Razia  Sultana’s  abovementioned  properties  be  declared  as 

illegal,  without  any 

lawful  authority  and 

ineffective  on  the 

petitioner’s  rights.  The  petitioner  also  prayed  for  a  mandatory 

injunction  and  a direction for  the cancellation  of the transfer and 

the reversion of the title in the said properties to Razia Sultana so 

that  they  are  distributed  amongst  her  legal  heirs  according  to 

Islamic  law.  Respondents  No.1  to  3  contested  the  said  suit  by 

filing  a  joint  written  statement.  Respondent  No.4  filed  a  separate 

written statement in which she prayed for the suit to be decreed. 

On  12.04.2010,  the  learned  civil  Court  framed  the  following 

issues:- 

1.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled to receive his share in the suit 
property being legal heir of deceased Gulzar Ahmed Khan? OPP 
2.  Whether the transfer of suit property in the name of defendant 
No.3 is illegal and unlawful and ineffective upon the rights of 
plaintiff? OPP 

3.  Whether the suit is not maintainable in its present form? OPD 
4.  Whether the suit of plaintiff is false and vexatious and as such 

defendants are entitled to recover special costs? OPD 
5.  Whether the suit is hit by order 7 Rule 11 of CPC? OPD 
6.  Relief” 

5. 

The  petitioner  entered  the  witness  box  as  PW-1,  whereas 

Mr.  Abdali  Shah,  from  the  Estate  Management  Directorate  of  the 

Capital  Development  Authority  (“C.D.A.”)  appeared  as  PW-2. 

Respondent No.4/Alia Gulzar appeared as DW-1; respondent No.3 

(Rehana Gulzar) as DW-2; and respondent No.1 (Siraj Ahmed Jan) 

as DW-3. Vide judgment and decree dated 26.03.2012, the learned 

civil  Court  dismissed  the  suit.  Against  the  said  judgment  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

C.R.No.73/2016 

decree, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Court of the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad.  Vide  judgment  and 

decree  dated  11.12.2015,  the  said  appeal  was  partly  accepted. 

The  learned  Appellate  Court  held  that  the  petitioner  was  entitled 

to  inherit  and  receive  his  Islamic  share  in  the  properties  which 

were  in  Razia  Sultana’s  name  when  she  died.  These  properties 

were  identified  as  building  No.B-1/352,  Lower  Bazaar,  Murree, 

and the saving certificates issued in Razia Sultana’s name by the 

National  Saving  Centres  at  Markaz  G-6,  and  Markaz  G-9, 

Islamabad.  As  regards 

the  saving  certificates 

in  which 

respondents No.1 to 3, were named as ‘nominees’ and which had 

already been en-cashed by the said respondents, it was held that 

the  petitioner  was  also  entitled  to  get  his  Islamic  share  in  the 

amount so en-cashed by the said respondents. Suit property No.1 

was  held  to  have  been  validly  gifted  and  transferred  by  Razia 

Sultana to respondent No.3, whereas suit property No.2 was held 

to  have  been  validly  gifted  on  29.09.2003,  by  Razia  Sultana  to 

respondent No.2. 

6. 

The  petitioner  in  the  instant  civil  revision  petition  has 

impugned  the  judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the  learned 

Courts  below.  Even  though  the  learned  Appellate  Court  partly 

accepted the petitioner’s appeal, respondents No.2 to 4 have not 

challenged the appellate judgment and decree.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  THE 
PETITIONER:- 

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  suit 

property  No.1  had  been  given  to  Razia  Sultana  by  her  late 

husband;  that  it  had  not been proved  that suit property  No.1 had 

been  gifted  by  Razia  Sultana  to  respondent  No.3;  that  in  fact 

respondent  No.3  had  obtained  suit  property  No.1  fraudulently 

from  Razia  Sultana,  when  she  was  paralyzed;  that  respondent 

No.3  was  the  only  witness  who appeared  before  the  learned  civil 

Court to prove the transfer of suit property No.1 in her favour; that 

respondent  No.4/DW-1  was  in  Karachi  when  the  alleged  gift 

regarding  suit  property  No.1  was  executed;  that  respondent 

No.4’s  stance  in  her  written  statement  supports  the  petitioner’s 

 
 
4 

C.R.No.73/2016 

case; that after filing the written statement, respondent No.4 was 

won  over  by  respondent  No.3,  which  resulted  in  respondent 

No.4's  evidence  to  be  contrary  to  her  position  in  her  written 

statement;  that  the  ingredients  of  a  valid  gift  had  not  been 

satisfied  as  regards  suit  property  No.1;  that  possession  of  suit 

property  No.1  had  not  been  delivered  by  Razia  Sultana  to 

respondent No.3 when the said gift was allegedly made; that even 

now  respondent  No.3  is  not  in  exclusive  possession  of  suit 

property  No.1;  that  a  ‘family  transfer’  at  the  C.D.A.  cannot  be 

recognized as a valid gift; that the word ‘gift’ has not been used in 

any of the documents on the basis of which suit property No.1 was 

transferred to respondent No.3’s name in the C.D.A. records; that 

the  transfer  letter  dated  26.08.2003,  (Exh.P.8)  cannot  be  termed 

as a gift deed; that a gift deed is required to be registered under 

the  law;  that  if  Razia  Sultana  wanted  to  gift  suit  property  No.1  to 

respondent No.3, she should have executed a registered gift deed 

in  respondent  No.3’s  favour;  that  suit  property  No.1  belonged  to 

Razia Sultana at all material times, and the petitioner is entitled to 

his  inherited  share  in  the  said  property;  and  that  the  petitioner 

was unlawfully denied the right to inherit his share in suit property 

No.1, which was owned by his mother. 

8. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the 

learned  trial  Court  had  not  framed  the  issues  properly;  that  the 

onus  in  the  issues  has  been  wrongly  placed  by  the  learned  civil 

Court;  that  the  learned  civil  Court  should  have  re-framed  the 

issues;  that  the  alleged  donee  of  suit  property  No.2,  did  not 

appear  as  a  witness;  and  that  the  concurrent  findings  of  the 

learned  Courts  below  are  as  a  consequence  of  misreading  and 

non-reading  of  evidence.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 

prayed  for  the  concurrent  judgments  and  decrees  of  the  learned 

Courts  below  to  the  extent  of  the  findings  with  respect  to  suit 

property  No.1 and  suit property  No.2  to  be set  aside,  and  for  the 

petitioner’s  suit  to  be  decreed.  In  support  of  his  contentions, 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  relied  on  the  following  case 

law:- 

 
5 

C.R.No.73/2016 

(i) 

Shabbir  Hussain  VS  Asghar  Hussain  Shah  (2007  SCMR 

1884), wherein it has been held as follows:- 

“9. … According to Article 78 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat, 
1984, execution of a document is to be proved to be in 
the  handwriting  or  signature  or  thumb-mark  of  the 
alleged executant, which would mean signing or putting 
thumb-mark  over  a  document  as  consenting  party 
thereto. Execution of document would not only mean 
mere signing or putting thumb-impression but something 
more than mere signing or putting thumb-impression by 
the executant. It must be proved that thumb-mark was 
made in the presence of witness in whose presence the 
document  was  written  and  read  over  and  it  was 
understood by the vendor and would not only be limited 
to merely signing a name or placing thumb-impression 
upon a blank sheet of paper so as to prove the document 
to have been executed whose identification should also 
be proved by reliable and authentic evidence that a 
person who has affixed thumb-mark or signature was the 
same person who owned the land and sold the same to 
the vendee. Execution would mean series of acts; which 
would complete the execution. Mere signing or putting 
thumb-mark would not amount to execution in terms of 
Article 78 of Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984. A document which 
is not proved is inadmissible in evidence, unless strict 
proof of it is waived.” 

(ii)  Aurangzeb  VS  Muhammad  Jaffar  (2007  SCMR  236), 

wherein it has been held that in a transaction of gift, heavy 

onus 

lies  on  the  beneficiary  to  prove  by  convincing 

evidence  which  satisfies  the  judicial  conscience  of  the 

Court that the transaction shown to be a gift was executed 

by  the  donor  in  favour  of  the  donee.  Law  to  this  effect  has 

also been laid down in the case of Manzoor VS Bakhan Mai 

Khokhar (2010 CLC 328).  

(iii)  Muhammad  Idrees  VS  Zeenat  Bibi  (2005  SCMR  1690), 

wherein  it  has  been  held  that  the  factum  of  gift  had  to  be 

proved  by  the  donee  through  cogent  and  concrete 

evidence. It was also held that the essential ingredients of a 

valid  gift  were  (i)  declaration  of  the  gift,  (ii)  acceptance  of 

the gift, and (iii) delivery of possession to the donee.  

(iv)  Rabnawaz VS Ghulam Rasul (2014 SCMR 1181), wherein it 

has  been  held  that  when  a gift was  challenged,  the  burden 

lay on the donee to prove that all the essentials of a valid gift 

had been fulfilled. In the said case, the donor was very old, 

infirm and incapacitated, and was living at the mercy of the 

 
 
6 

C.R.No.73/2016 

donee,  in  the  latter’s  house.  The  trial  Court  and  the 

appellate  Court  had  concurrently  held  that  the  gift  was  an 

outcome  of  undue  influence.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

agreed  with  the  said  findings,  and  also  held  that  another 

reason militating against the validity of the gift was want of 

delivery of possession.  

(v)  Rashida  Bibi  VS  Mukhtar  Ahmad  (2008  SCMR  1384  =  NLR 

2008  Revenue  97),  wherein  it  was  held  that  a  very  heavy 

burden lay on the donee to prove that a valid gift had been 

made  in  his  favour.  In  the  said  case,  the  donors  were 

pardanashin  illiterate  ladies.  It  was  also  held  that  mere 

admission of making thumb impression or appearing before 

the Sub-Registrar was not sufficient to infer that the donors 

had  declared  their  intentions  to  transfer  their  share  in  the 

property in question. It was also held that mere registration 

of  a  document  in  itself  is  not  proof  of  its  execution  by  a 

person  by  whom  it  is  alleged  to  have  been  executed  the 

same, if the execution of such a document had been denied 

by any of parties in the litigation.  

(vi)  Mian Ghayassuddin VS Hidayatun Nisa (2011 SCMR 803). In 

the said case, a mutation of gift allegedly made by a mother 

in  favour  of  her  sons  was  disputed  by  her  daughter,  who 

claimed  her  Islamic  share  in  the  legacy  of  her  deceased 

mother. The  donor  at  the relevant  time was  ninety  years  of 

age  and  was  held  to  have  lost  her  faculty  of  memory  and 

understanding. The alleged mutation of gift was made soon 

before the donor’s demise. It was held that the sons/donees 

had  not  satisfactorily  discharged  the  onus  of  proving  that 

the  gift  was  made  without  exercising  undue  influence  over 

the donor or that she had been given independent advice at 

the relevant time or that she had made the gift with her free 

will and consent.  

(vii)  Khan  Muhammad  VS  Muhammad  Din  (2010  SCMR  1351), 

wherein it has been held that the initial burden to prove the 

execution  of  a  document  is  on  the  party  which  relies  on 

such  a  document,  and  once  this  onus  is  discharged,  the 

 
7 

C.R.No.73/2016 

burden  to  prove  the  factum  of  fraud  or  undue  influence  or 

genuineness  of  the  document  shifts  to  the  party  which 

alleges fraud. 

(viii)  Mst.  Shafqat  Parveen  VS  Muhammad  Iftikhar  Amjid  (2012 

SCMR  1602),  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  under  Islamic 

law, offer, acceptance, and delivery of possession were the 

three  essential ingredients  of  a valid  gift  and  the  onus  was 

on the donee to prove the said components. 

(ix)  Riaz Mehmood VS Altaf Hussain (2011 YLR 1674), wherein it 

has  been  held  that  when  a  fact  renders  the  physical  and 

mental capacity of a donor to make a gift highly doubtful, it 

is  for  the  beneficiaries  to  prove  that  the  donor  was  in 

mentally  fit  condition,  and  that  he  had  independent  advice 

available to him, and that he had made a valid offer of a gift 

which  had  been  accepted  by  the  donee.  In  the  said  case, 

the  donor  was  suffering  from  a  serious  illness  and  was 

paralyzed.  His  thumb  impression  was  obtained  through  a 

local  commission  who  appeared  as  a  witness  before  the 

trial Court and admitted that two witnesses did not sign the 

gift deed in his presence. He had also deposed that the two 

witnesses were not present when he went to get the donor’s 

thumb impression on the gift deed. The gift was held not to 

have been validly executed.  

(x)  Miraj  Din  VS  Mst.  Sardar  Bibi  (2010  MLD  843),  wherein  it 

has been held that where a gift was made to the exclusion of 

legal  heirs,  the  absence  of  reason  or  justification  for  the 

same  adversely  affected  its  validity.  It  was  also  held  that 

where an oral gift was recorded through a mutation, and the 

Revenue Officer attesting  the same  was  not examined  as  a 

witness, a serious doubt as to its validity would arise. 

(xi)  Khaliqdad  Khan  VS  Zeenat  Khatoon  (2010  SCMR  1370), 

wherein 

it  has  been  held  that  the  onus  to  prove  a 

transaction embodied in a gift mutation would essentially be 

upon  the  beneficiary,  who  would  be  required  to  establish 

that the gift was the result of a conscious application of the 

donor’s mind, and not the result of undue influence or fraud 

 
8 

C.R.No.73/2016 

played  on  him.  It  was  also  held  that  the  beneficiary  of  the 

gift  must  prove  the  mutation  by  producing  evidence  in 

accordance with the accepted principles and in terms of the 

Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984.  

CONTENTIONS  OF  THE  LEARNED  COUNSEL  FOR  RESPONDENTS 
NO.2 TO 4:- 

9. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.2  to  4  submitted  that 

suit property No.1 was given to Razia Sultana by her parents, and 

not by her husband; that Razia Sultana died in 2005, whereas suit 

property  No.1  was  gifted  and  transferred  to  respondent  No.3  in 

2003; that Kamran Ahmad Jan/respondent No.2 accompanied his 

mother  to  the  C.D.A.  where  she  transferred  property  No.1  to 

respondent  No.3;  that  the  indemnity  bond  executed  by  Razia 

Sultana  had  also  been  signed  by  respondent  No.2  as  a  witness; 

that  Razia  Sultana  was  mentally  alert  when  she  transferred  suit 

property  No.1  to  respondent  No.3;  that  at  no  stage  was  any 

application  under  the  provisions  of  the  Mental  Health  Ordinance, 

2001,  filed  regarding  Razia  Sultana’s  mental  health;  that  Razia 

Sultana  was  not  paralyzed  as  asserted  by  the  petitioner;  that 

Razia Sultana would go herself to receive her pension; that in the 

plaint,  the  petitioner  had  not  alleged  that  his  mother’s  signature 

on  the  transfer  documents  was  forged;  that  the  petitioner,  in  his 

appeal, had not taken a ground regarding non framing of an issue; 

that respondents No.1 to 3 had filed a joint written statement; that 

after  filing  the  written  statement,  respondent  No.1  changed  his 

stance  and  sided  with  the  petitioner;  that  respondent  No.1  could 

not take a position contrary to the one taken by him in the written 

statement;  that  respondent  No.1  did  not  file  an  application  to 

transpose  himself  as  a  co-plaintiff;  that  respondent  No.4,  in  her 

written statement, had taken a position adverse to the interests of 

respondent  No.3;  that the  evidence adduced  by  respondent No.4 

contradicts her pleadings in her written statement; that since the 

evidence  adduced  by  respondent  No.4  did  not  support  her 

pleadings  in  her  written  statement,  the  contents  of  her  written 

statement  are  of  no  consequence;  and  that  respondent  No.4  did 

not sign the written statement in the presence of her counsel; that 

 
 
 
9 

C.R.No.73/2016 

respondent No.4’s written statement was attested and verified at 

Karachi. 

10.  Learned  counsel 

for  respondents  No.2 

to  4 

further 

submitted  that  a  Muslim  had  unfettered  powers  to  gift  away  his 

property to one of his legal heirs to the exclusion of the others. In 

this regard, he placed reliance on the law laid down in the case of 

Ghulam  Muhammad  VS  Mian  Muhammad  (2007  SCMR  231).  He 

further submitted that the petitioner, in his suit, had not sought the 

relief  of  possession  of  suit  property  No.1;  and  that  a  simple 

declaratory  suit  by  a  plaintiff  without  seeking  the  consequential 

relief of possession when such a plaintiff was out of possession of 

the  suit  property,  would  not  be  maintainable.  In  this  regard, 

reference  was  made  to  the  law  laid  down  in  the  cases  of  Abdur 

Razzaq VS Zahoor Ahmad (2005 CLJ 955), Muhammad Saeed VS 

Munawar  Shah  (PLD  1973  Peshawar  80),  and  Farmanullah  VS 

Qalandar (1999 YLR 1610). 

11.  Learned  counsel 

for  respondents  No.2 

to  4 

further 

submitted  that  the  petitioner  was  bound  to  annex  with  this  civil 

revision  petition,  certified  copies  of  the  pleadings,  the  complete 

evidence,  orders  and  judgments/decrees,  and  that  non-filing  of 

such  documents  rendered  the  revision  petition  incompetent. 

Reference  in  this  regard  was  made  to  the  law  laid  down  in  the 

cases  of  Mst.  Banori  VS  Jilani  (PLD  2010  SC  1186,  Saleem  Khan 

VS Province of Punjab (2013 MLD 1618), Raja Muhammad Kamran 

VS Shaheer Constructions (2013 MLD 118), and Abdul Hafeez VS 

Shaukat  Ali  (2014  MLD  555).  Learned  counsel  for  respondents 

No.2 to 4 prayed for the revision petition to be dismissed.  

12. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties,  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition 

have  been  set  out  in  sufficient  detail  in  paragraphs  No.2  to  6 

above, and need not be recapitulated. 

13.  The main contest in this case is between the petitioner (who 

claims  his  inherited  share  in  suit  property  No.1)  and  respondent 

No.3  (who  claims  that  the  said  property  was  gifted  and 

 
10 

C.R.No.73/2016 

transferred to her by her mother, Razia Sultana, two years before 

the latter’s demise).  

14.  The  petitioner  in  his  suit  has  inter-alia  pleaded  that  Razia 

Sultana, after her husband’s death,  became seriously ill and also 

got  an  attack  of  paralysis  rendering  her  incapable  of  performing 

“ordinary functions of life”. It was also pleaded that she had to be 

continuously nursed, and remained in a state of ill-health until her 

death  on  25.05.2005.  The  petitioner  asserted  that  the  transfer  of 

suit  property  No.1 

in  respondent  No.3’s 

favour  was 

the 

consequence  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  respondent  No.3,  who  took 

undue advantage of Razia Sutana’s mental incapacity and illness. 

In his suit, the petitioner inter-alia pleaded that “the documents of 

transfer were false and manipulated without any free will and 

consent of the transferor." 

15.  The  petitioner  said  assertions  were  denied  by  respondents 

No.1  to  3  in  their  joint  written  statement.  In  the  said  written 

statement,  it  was  pleaded  that  other  than  diabetes,  for  which 

Razia  Sultana  was  being  treated,  she  suffered  from  no  other 

serious  disease.  It  was  also  pleaded  that  she  was  mentally  quite 

perfect  and  until  February  2005,  she  would  go  to  the  bank  to 

receive  her  pension.  Respondents  No.1  to  3  in  their  written 

statement  have  pleaded  that  their  mother,  Razia  Sultana, 

transferred  suit  property  No.1  in  respondent  No.3’s  favour  with 

her  free  will  and  consent.  It  was  also  pleaded  that  all  of 

respondent  No.3’s  siblings,  including  the  petitioner,  had  given 

their  consent  to  the  said  gift;  and  that  suit  property  No.1  was 

transferred  by  Razia  Sultana  in  respondent  No.3’s  name  on 

26.08.2003,  whereas  suit  property  No.2  was  transferred 

in 

respondent No.2’s name on 29.09.2003.  

16.  Respondent  No.4/Mst.  Alia  Khalid  had  filed  a  consenting 

written  statement  in  which  she  admitted  all  that  was  pleaded  in 

the petitioner’s civil suit. 

17.  The  petitioner  appeared  as  PW.1  before  the  learned  trial 

Court and buttressed his pleadings in the civil suit by deposing in 

his examination-in-chief that after  his  father’s demise,  his mother 

became seriously ill and got an attack of paralysis; that she could 

 
11 

C.R.No.73/2016 

not write, and that all her affairs were dealt with by the petitioner. 

In his cross-examination, the petitioner deposed inter-alia that his 

mother  had  herself  received  her  pension  on  22.03.2005  and  that 

he had accompanied her; that when his mother would receive her 

pension,  the  bank  officials  would  take  her  signature  and  thumb 

impression;  that  his  mother  had  not  given  an  authority  letter  to 

anyone for receiving her pension; that he or his brothers had not 

approached  any  Court with a plea that  his  mother  was  incapable 

of  carrying  out  official  work  (daftri kaam)  due  to  her  illness;  that 

her  mother  used  to  reside  in  suit  property  No.1;  that  respondent 

No.3  was  divorced  and  used  to  live  with  her  mother;  that 

respondent No.3 is still unmarried; and that respondent No.3 used 

take care of her mother.  

18.  The  petitioner  does  not  dispute  the  fact  that  the  suit 

property  No.1  was  transferred  by  Razia  Sultana  to  respondent 

No.3,  but  asserts  that “the documents of transfer were false and 

manipulated without any free will and consent of the transferor”. 

Other  than  this,  there  is  no  other  pleading  as  regards  the 

allegation of fraud against respondent No.3. It is essential that in a 

case  where  fraud,  undue  influence,  or  coercion  is  put  at  the 

forefront, the complainant party should set out the facts in full and 

give  essential  particulars  instead  of  making  general  allegations. 

This is a legal requirement enshrined in Order VI, Rule 4 of C.P.C 

and  reiterated  by  the  superior  Courts  in  several  cases  including 

Faizum alias Toor VS Nander Khan (2006 SCMR 1931), Mst. Sahib 

Noor  VS  Haji  Ahmed  (1988  SCMR  1703),  and  Pakistan  Banking 

Council  VS  Ali  Maohtaram  Naqvi  (1985  SCMR  714).  Recently  in 

the  case  of  Lanvin  Traders,  Karachi  VS  Presiding  Officer, 

Banking  Court  No.2,  Karachi  (2013  CLD  1581),  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  has  held  that  it  is  an  elementary  principle  of 

pleadings  that  where  allegations  of  fraud,  misrepresentation, 

collusion or malafide are attributed, necessary particulars and the 

details in that context are to be unfolded in the pleadings, and that 

bald  or  vague  statements  to  that  effect  are  of  no 

legal 

consequence.  It  is  also  well  settled  that  a  Court  must  scrutinize 

the  pleadings  to  find  out  that  a  plea  has  been  made  out  and  that 

 
12 

C.R.No.73/2016 

full particulars thereof have been given before examining whether 

fraud  or  undue  influence  was  exercised.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the 

petitioner’s  pleadings  in  his  suit  regarding  the  falsehood  and 

manipulation  of  the  transferred  documents  are  not  so  appealing 

and  telling,  so  as  to  invalidate  the  validity  of  the  oral  gift  of  suit 

property No.1 by Razia Sultana in favour of respondent No.3, duly 

recorded in the Capital Development Authority records. 

19.  The thrust of the petitioner’s case in his suit was that Razia 

Sultana could not have transferred any of her properties because 

she was “seriously ill”, “incapable”, “not mentally conscious”, and 

“could not perform any normal functions of life”.    The  petitioner 

(PW-1)  in  his  cross-examination  admitted  that  Razia  Sultana  had 

not  given  an authority  letter to  any  of  her  children  to  receive  her 

pension, and that she had herself received her pension for the last 

time on 22.03.2005. He also deposed that none of Razia Sultana’s 

children  filed  any  application  before  any  forum  regarding  her 

inability  to  perform  any  official  work.  The  petitioner’s  testimony 

regarding  his  mother’s  heath  is  not  in  consonance  with  his 

pleadings in the suit. In the absence of any independent proof as 

to the mental incapacity of the donor/Razia Sultana, it could not be 

held that the transfer of the suit properties was unlawful or void.In 

the case of Muhammad Khan VS Mst. Hayat Bibi (1987 CLC 1187), 

the  petitioner  (donor’s  son)  had  challenged  the  validity  of  a  gift 

made  by  the  donor  in  favour  of  the  donee/respondent  (donor’s 

daughter), alleging that the donor was coerced and defrauded by 

the donee to gift away his property when the donor, due to illness, 

was not in his senses. The donee had served the donor during his 

illness.  The  petitioner  failed  to  prove  the  allegation  of  fraud  and 

coercion. It was held by the Hon'ble Lahore High Court that losing 

senses  due  to  illness  does  not  necessarily  mean  entertaining  an 

apprehension of imminent death, which indeed is sine qua non for 

striking  down  any  transaction  made  in  that  state  of  mind. The 

petitioner’s challenge to the gift made in favour of the petitioner’s 

sister  by  his  father  was  concurrently  dismissed.  Furthermore,  in 

the  case  of  Mashooq  Ali  VS  Shah  Zaman  (2017  YLR  957),  an 

issueless  female  donor  was  alleged  to  be  of  an  unsound  mind  at 

 
13 

C.R.No.73/2016 

the time of making a gift of land in favour of her sister-in-law. The 

gift  was  concurrently  held  to  be  valid.  In  the  said  report  it  was 

held as follows:-  

“9.   Even if it is presumed that the Donor was of unsound mind, 
then the burden of proof lies on the petitioner to prove her mental 
illness and incapability by producing strong oral as well as 
documentary evidence but he failed to substantiate by producing 
Medical Expert who was treating her (Donor) being his patient. 
Mere oral assertion regarding mental health condition of a person 
is not sufficient proof until and unless it was corroborated by 
strong, confidence inspiring evidence which is lacking in the 
instant case therefore, petitioner failed to discharge the burden 
on him.” 

20.  The  petitioner,  in  his  suit,  had  pleaded  inter-alia  that  his 

mother  was  seriously 

ill  after  his 

father's  death.  The 

petitioner/P.W-1 in his evidence deposed that his mother had been 

suffering  from  paralysis  and  blood  pressure.  Such  an  illness 

cannot  form  the  basis  of  invalidating  the  gift  and  transfer  of  suit 

property  No.1 to  respondent No.3.  In the  case  of  Mst.  Chand  BiBi 

VS  Muhammad  Shafaat  (PLD  1977  SC  28),  it  has  been  held  that  it 

was  wrong  to  suggest  that  stroke  of  paralysis  is  immediately 

dangerous  to  life  and  or  that  merely  because  a  donor  was 

suffering  from  paralysis  it  must  be  inferred  that  he  was  under 

pressure of the  sense  of the imminence of death.  Furthermore,  it 

was held that mere prolonged suffering from paralysis or gout per 

se was insufficient to sustain plea of marzulmaut. 

21. 

It has been consistently held that in order that a declaration 

of a gift is  established, it must be shown that  the donor, either in 

the presence of witnesses or otherwise, made a public statement 

that he  or she gifted the property in favour  of the donee and that 

he divested himself of the ownership of the property by delivering 

such possession  as  the property  is  capable  of to the  donee,  who 

accepted  it.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  gift  of  suit  property  No.1 

made  by  Razia  Sultana  in  favour  of  respondent  No.3,  was  not 

made  within  the  confines  of  a  house,  but  in  the  offices  of  the 

Capital Development Authority. Razia Sultana/donor submitted an 

application  (Exh.P/5)  for  the  transfer  of  suit  property  No.1  in 

favour  of  respondent  No.3.  The  said  application  bears  the 

certificate  of  Syed  Ali  Akber  Rizvi,  APV/Manager,  Allied  Bank  of 

 
 
14 

C.R.No.73/2016 

Pakistan Limited, who had certified that Razia Sultana had signed 

the  said  application  in  his  presence.  The  said  application  bears 

three thumb impressions and specimen signatures of respondent 

No.3,  as  the  transferee.  On  10.05.2004,  Razia  Sultana  had  also 

executed  an  indemnity  bond  (Exh.P/6),  wherein  it  was  clearly 

stated  that  she  had  “gifted/transferred”  suit  property  No.1  to 

respondent  No.3.  Vide 

indemnity  bond  dated  10.05.2004 

(Exh.P/7),  respondent  No.3  declared  that  she  had  obtained  suit 

property  No.1  from  her  mother,  Razia  Sultana.  Vide  letter  dated 

26.08.2003  (Exh.P/8),  the  Capital  Development  Authority  (Estate 

Management  Directorate),  informed  Razia  Sultana  that  on  her 

application  dated  30.06.2003,  suit  property  No.1  had  been 

transferred  to  respondent  No.3.  Since  Razia  Sultana  had  herself 

appeared before the offices in the Capital Development Authority 

for the transfer of suit property No.1, it could not be  said that the 

transfer  documents  were  “false and manipulated”,  or  executed 

without Razia Sultana’s free consent. 

22.  Under Regulation No.18 (2) of the Islamabad Land Disposal 

Regulations,  2005,  which  have  been  framed  in  exercise  of  the 

powers  under  sections  49  and  51  of  the  Capital  Development 

Authority  Ordinance,  1960,  provides  that  in  case  of  transfer  of 

plots within the family, a token fee shall be charged by the Capital 

Development Authority. The documents brought on record by PW-

2 show  that the transfer of suit property No.1 from Razia Sultana 

to respondent No.3 was a ‘family transfer’, which is a recognized 

mode of transfer of property under the law, as mentioned above.  

23.  As mentioned above, respondents No.1 to 3 had filed a joint 

written  statement.  In  the  said  written  statement,  it  was  inter-alia 

pleaded that suit property No.1 had been gifted and transferred to 

respondent  No.3  by  Razia  Sultana  with  respondent  No.1’s 

consent.  Respondent  No.1  gave  evidence  as  DW-3.  In  his 

evidence,  respondent  No.1  took  a  dramatic  U-turn  by  deposing 

that  respondent  No.3  had  had  suit  property  No.1  transferred  in 

her  favour  through  fraud.  He  did  not  give  any  particulars  of  the 

fraud alleged to have been exercised by respondent No.3. DW-3’s 

testimony  was  in  stark  contradiction  to  his  written statement.  He 

 
15 

C.R.No.73/2016 

admitted his signatures on the written statement which was jointly 

filed by him along with respondents No.1 and 2. He also admitted 

that  at  no  stage  had  he  challenged  the  transfer  of  suit  property 

No.1  in  the  Capital  Development  Authority.  The  inconsistent 

positions  taken  by  respondent  No.1  in  his  written  statement  and 

his evidence are not worthy of any consideration. It is well settled 

that  a  party/witness  who  takes  inconsistent  positions  loses 

credibility.  Reference  may  also  be  made  to  the  maxim,  alleqans 

centraria non set audiendus (a person alleging contradictory facts 

should not be heard). 

24.  The  antipathy  between  respondent  No.1  and  respondent 

No.3  is  understandable.  After  the  filing  of  the  joint  written 

statement  by  respondents  No.1  to  3,  disputes  and  differences 

developed  between  respondent  No.1  and  respondent  No.3.  On 

02.11.2013, respondent No.3 filed a suit for possession,  recovery 

of  compensation  and  permanent  injunction  against  respondent 

No.1 before the Court of the learned Civil Judge, Islamabad. In the 

said  suit,  respondent  No.3  had  prayed  for inter-alia  a  decree  for 

possession of the ground floor of suit property No.1. In the written 

statement,  respondent  No.1  had  admitted  that  he  was 

in 

possession  of  the  ground  floor  of  suit  property  No.1.  Apparently, 

the said suit is still pending adjudication.  

25.  The  relationship  between  Kamran  Ahmad  Jan  (respondent 

No.2) and the petitioner has also been swinging  like a pendulum. 

Respondent  No.2  had  also  filed  his  written  statement  jointly  with 

respondents No.1 and 3. By doing so, respondent No.2 had taken 

the position that suit property No.1 had been gifted by his mother 

to his sister, respondent No.3. Learned counsel for the petitioner 

drew  the  attention  of  the  Court  to  an  Iqrarnama  allegedly 

executed by respondent No.2 (Kamran Ahmad Jan) and submitted 

that respondent No.1 had resiled from the position taken by him in 

the written statement filed in the suit. It is perhaps for this reason 

that  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  hardly  made  any 

submissions regarding the transfer of suit property No.2 by Razia 

Sultana in favour of Kamran Ahmad Jan. The said Iqrarnama was 

allegedly  executed  on  19.11.2008.  Kamran  Ahmed  Jan  did  not 

 
16 

C.R.No.73/2016 

appear  as  a  witness  in  the  case.  The  said  Iqrarnama  was  not 

produced  in  the  proceedings  before  the  learned  civil  Court. 

Therefore,  no  evidentiary  value  can  be  given  to  the  said 

Iqrarnama by this Court in revisional jurisdiction.  

26.  During  the  pendency  of  the  instant  civil  revision  petition, 

respondent  No.2  transferred  suit  property  No.2  to  one  Sher 

Zaman  Butt.  Vide  C.M.No.965/2016,  the  petitioner  applied  for 

impleadment  of  said  Sher  Zaman  Butt  as  a  party  to  this  petition. 

Since  the  said  sale  has  been  made  pendente lite, the  same  is 

subject  to  the  doctrine  of lis-pendens.  Since  the  learned  counsel 

for  the  petitioner  hardly  made  any  submissions  to  question  the 

validity  of  the  transfer  of  suit  property  No.2  by  Razia  Sultana  in 

Kamran  Ahmad  Jan’s 

favour,  the  said  application  stands 

dismissed.  

27.  Respondent  No.3  gave  evidence  as  DW-2  in  reiteration  of 

her pleadings in her written statement. She deposed inter alia that 

she  was  in  possession  of  suit  property  No.1.  Furthermore,  she 

deposed  that  her  mother  was  ill  for  two  months  prior  to  her 

demise;  that  her  mother  was  a  retired  Government  servant  who 

would  go  to  receive  her  pension;  that  after  her  marriage  broke 

down,  she  lived  with  her  mother.  She  denied  having  transferred 

the  suit  property  No.1  in  her  name  through  fraud  and  deception. 

Her testimony was in consonance with her pleadings in the written 

statement.  

28.  Mst.  Alia  Khalid  (respondent  No.4)  entered  the  witness  box 

as  DW-1.  The  position  taken  by  respondent  No.4  is  no  less 

contradictory than the one taken by her brother, respondent No.1. 

In  her  written  statement,  respondent  No.4’s  stance  was 

consistent with the one taken by the petitioner in suit. However, in 

her  examination-in-chief,  she  deposed  that  suit  property  No.1 

belonged to her mother, who in her lifetime transferred the same 

to  respondent  No.3.  She  also  deposed  that  her  mother  was  in 

good  health and  that  other  than diabetes  and  a problem  with  her 

thyroid, her faculties of thinking and understanding were in order. 

In  her  cross-examination,  she  deposed  inter-alia  that  when  she 

filed  she  written  statement,  she  had  developed  differences  with 

 
17 

C.R.No.73/2016 

respondent  No.3;  and  that  she  did  not  understand  or  know  what 

was  written  in  the  written  statement;  that  she  did  not  know 

whether  the  written  statement  had  been  sent  from  Karachi,  or 

whether it was verified at Karachi. About her mother’s health, DW-

1 deposed that prior to her death she used to be ill; that since she 

had  diabetes,  her  kidneys  would  suffer  when  the  sugar  level 

would  rise;  that  her  mother  was  76  years  of  age  when  she  died; 

and  that  the  petitioner  was  wrong  in  contending  that  her  mother 

was  physically  and  mentally  incapacitated  prior  to  her  death. 

About  her  changing  stance,  she  deposed  that  at  the  time  of  the 

filing  of  the  suit,  she  sided  with  the  petitioner,  and  subsequently 

she was with respondent No.3.  

29.  Since there are marked contradictions between respondent 

No.4/DW-1’s  written  statement  and  her  evidence,  the  learned 

Courts  below  were  correct 

in  not  giving  credence  to  her 

testimony.  Her  pleadings  in  her  written  statement  were  not 

supported  by  her  oral  testimony,  therefore,  the  veracity  of  such 

pleadings dwindled, and were not worthy of consideration. It is by 

now well settled that pleadings are treated as a foundation in civil 

matters  and  a  point  having  not  been  taken  regarding  a  factual 

position  cannot  be  allowed  to  be  taken  at  subsequent  stage  or 

during  evidence.  A  party  could  not  make  a  departure  from  its 

pleadings  and  was  bound  by  the  same.  No  evidence  contrary  to 

the pleadings could be permitted to be adduced by a party to the 

suit. Law to this effect has been laid down in the cases of  Jannat 

Bibi  VS  Sher  Muhammad  &  others  (1988  SCMR  1696),  Major 

(Retd.) Barkat Ali and others VS Qaim Din and others (2006 SCMR 

562),  Rehmatullah  and  others  VS  Saleh  Khan  and  others  (2007 

SCMR 729), and Muhammad Iqbal VS Mehboob Alam (2015 SCMR 

21). 

30.  Mr.  Abdali  Shah,  a  senior  officer 

from 

the  Estate 

Management  Directorate  of  the  Capital  Development  Authority 

appeared  as  PW-2,  and  produced  Razia  Sultana’s  application  for 

the transfer of suit property No.1 in respondent No.3’s favour. He 

also  produced  the  other  documents  through  which  the  said 

transfer  had  taken  place  as  Exh.P.5  to  Exh.P.8.  Exh.P.8  was  the 

 
18 

C.R.No.73/2016 

allotment  letter  dated  26.08.2003  in  respondent  No.3’s  favour. 

Although  he  deposed  that  the  transaction  was  a  simple  transfer 

and not a gift, the exhibited documents show that the transaction 

was  not a sale.  PW-2 did  not seem  to  have been  familiar  with  the 

contents of the documents that he had produced in his evidence. 

Had he read the said documents, he would have realized that the 

indemnity bond executed by Razia Sultana had clearly mentioned 

that  she  had  “gifted”  suit  property  No.1  to  respondent  No.3. 

However, in his cross-examination, PW-2 deposed that the officer 

at  the  Capital  Development  Authority  transferred  suit  property 

No.1 after taking the statements of Razia Sultana and respondent 

No.3.  He  also  deposed  that  there  were  two  witnesses,  namely, 

Kamran  Ahmed  Jan  (respondent  No.2),  and  Mudassar  Ahmed 

Bhatti, to  the indemnity bond. He also deposed that suit property 

No.1 was transferred in favour of respondent No.3 in accordance 

with  the  Capital  Development  Authority  laws.  As  mentioned 

above, the petitioner in his suit had pleaded that the documents of 

transfer  were  false  and  manipulated.  PW-2  was  produced  at  the 

instance of the petitioner. From the testimony of the said witness, 

it could  not be gauged that  the transfer documents were false or 

manipulated. 

31.  As  regards  the  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner  that  the  gift  of  suit  property  No.1 

in  favour  of 

respondent  No.3  should  have  been 

through  a  registered 

document, suffice it to say that it is well settled that under Islamic 

law,  writing  is  not  essential  for  the  validity  of  a  gift  either  of 

moveable  or  immoveable  property.  In  this  regard  paragraph  147 

of  Mulla’s  Principles  of  Mohammadan  Law,  is  reproduced  as 

under:- 

 “147. Writing not necessary.—Writing is not essential to the 
validity of a gift either of movable or of immovable property.” 

32.  The  three  essentials  of  the  gift  under  Islamic  law  are  (i)  a 

declaration  of  gift  by  the  donor;  (ii)  an  acceptance  of  the  gift, 

express or implied, by or on behalf of the donee, and (iii) delivery 

of possession of the subject matter of the gift by the donor to the 

donee. If these conditions are fulfilled, the gift is complete.  

 
 
 
19 

C.R.No.73/2016 

33.  Section 123 of the  Transfer of Property  Act, 1882, provides 

that  a  gift  of  immoveable  property  must  be  effected  by  a 

registered instrument signed by the donor and attested by at least 

two  witnesses,  and  that  a  gift  of  moveable  property  may  be 

affected  either  by  a  registered  instrument  or  signed  as  the 

aforesaid,  or by  delivery.  However, the provisions  of  Section  123 

do not apply to gifts under Islamic law. Section 129 of the Transfer 

of Property Act, 1882, exempts Muslims from certain provisions of 

the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, and that the said Act does not 

apply  to  gifts  made  by  Muslims.  Under  Islamic  law,  all  that  is 

necessary is declaration, acceptance and delivery of possession.  

A  gift  can  be  made  orally.  Gift  by  a  Muslim  would  be  complete, 

even  if  there  is  no  writing,  but  the  three  ingredients  have  to  be 

proved.  It  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  deed  of  gift  to 

make it a valid  gift.  Reference in this  regard  may  be made to  the 

following case law:-  

i) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Ejaz  VS  Mst.  Khalida  Awan 

(2010 SCMR 342), it has been held as follows:-  

“6. Under the Mahommedan Law, a gift, in order to be valid 
and binding upon the parties, must fulfil the following three 
conditions:- 

(a) a declaration of gift by the donor; 
(b) acceptance of gift by the donee; and 
(c) delivery of possession of corpus. 

 On the fulfilment of the above three ingredients, a valid gift 
comes into existence. A valid gift can be effected orally, if 
the pre-requisites are complied with. Written instrument is 
not the requirement under the Muslim Law nor is the same 
compulsorily registrable under the Registration Act, 1908.” 

ii) 

In the case of Nagina Akhtar VS Tahzim Akhtar (2009 SCMR 

623), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held inter-alia as follows:  

“A declaration of gift cannot be equated with a gift-deed, 
which  has  different  dimensions  and  parameters  as 
compared to the former. It is true that gift-deed is a 
document, which is compulsorily required by law to be 
attested by two witnesses, but it is equally true that in the 
instant case the declaration of gift cannot be termed as 
gift-deed.”  

iii) 

In  the  case  of  Maulvi  Abdullah  VS  Abdul  Aziz  (1987  SCMR 

1403), it has been held as follows:-  

“The next question which arises is whether an oral gift of 
immovable property could be made by a Muslim in favour of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 

C.R.No.73/2016 

a Muslim son of a predeceased son. If so, whether such a 
gift  has  in  any  way  to  be  effected  also  through  an 
instrument  of  writing;  and  lastly  whether  in  case  an 
instrument of writing is made whether it is ineffective 
without registration. 
In our view all these questions stand resolved by the 
judgment of this Court in Mst. Umar Bibi and 3 others v. 
Bashir Ahmad and 3 others 1977 SCMR 154. Though the 
facts in which the judgment was rendered are slightly 
distinguishable, yet in so far as the resolution of questions 
of law posed above is concerned, the answers are, of 
course, concise but very clear. An objection based on 
section 123 of the Transfer of Property Act to the effect 
that a gift of an immovable property cannot be made except 
through a registered instrument was raised but it was 
repelled with reference to section 129 of the Act which 
provided that nothing in the chapter in which section 123 
fell would affect any rule of Muslim Law. It was held that 
according to Muslim Law an oral gift of an immovable 
property could be made provided other conditions for a 
Muslim gift were satisfied. The observations made at page 
158 of the report, in this behalf, are as follows:- 

“The objection founded on section 123 of the Transfer of 
Property Act is also misconceived. Vide section 129 ibid 
the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, gifts made 
under  Muslim  Law,  are  expressly  excluded  from  the 
operation of the Act. It is firmly established proposition 
that under Muslim Law a valid gift could be affected orally 
if  the  formalities  prescribed  by  the  Muslim  Law  are 
complied  with  even  if  the  instrument  of  gift  is  not 
registered. See Muslim Law by Soksena, 3rd Edn. pp. 
368-369 and the precedent cases noticed at the foot of 
these pages. Among these formalities are, the passing of 
the possession from the donor and the acceptance of the 
same by the donee. These are amply satisfied in the 
instant case.” ” 

iv) 

In the case of  Muhammad Amin VS Mst. Shaista (2015 MLD 

295), the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court has held as  follows:-  

“A valid gift could be effected even orally and under an un-
registered  instrument.  Written  instrument  is  not  the 
requirement  under  the  Muslim  Law  nor  is  the  same 
compulsory registerable under the Registration Act, 1908. 
A written instrument in any case would not create a gift but 
was a mere evidence of the gift and as such would not 
require registration.”  

v) 

In the case of  Abdul  Hameed VS Abdul Ghafoor (2011  MLD 

1836),  the  Hon'ble  Peshawar  High  Court  has  held  as 

follows:-  

“There  is  no  denial  to  the  contentions  that  under 
Muhammadan Law a Muslim can make a valid gift either 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
21 

C.R.No.73/2016 

verbally  or  through  execution  of  a  gift  deed  and 
registration of gift deed is not essential under sections 
123 and 129 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 but for 
a valid gift the beneficiary of the alleged gift is charged 
with  heavy  burden  to  establish  the  three  essential 
ingredients  of  the  deed  (i)  offer  of  the  donor,  (ii) 
acceptance  by  the  donee  and  (iii)  delivery  of 
possession.” 

vi) 

In the case of Hakim Bibi VS Rab Nawaz Khan (2011 YLR 

2980),  one  of  the  objections  of  to  the  validity  of  the  gift 

deed  was  that  same  was  unregistered.  The  Hon'ble 

Peshawar  High  Court  held  that  such  an  objection  was  of 

no  avail  because  under  the  Muslim  Law  there  was  no 

mode  prescribed  for  a  gift,  which  could  also  be  made 

orally.  

vii) 

In the case of Mst. Jan Rana VS Commissioner Income Tax, 

Peshawar (2006 PTD 529), the Division Bench of the Hon'ble 

Peshawar High Court held as follows:-  

“8. It is pertinent to mention here that under section 138 of 
Muhammadan Law by Mulla a gift is complete when there 
is a declaration of gift by the donor, acceptance of gift, 
express or implied by or on behalf of the donee and 
delivery of possession of the subject of the gift by the 
donor  to  the  donee.  Unregistered  gift  deed, 
notwithstanding  the  amendment  of  section  49  of 
Registration Act by Registration Amendment Ordinance, 
1962 was admissible in evidence. Donor and the donee 
being brother and sister were governed by Muslim Law 
and as mentioned above the registration of the document 
was not sine qua non for validity of the gift.” 

viii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Rafiq  Saigol  VS  Trust  Modarba 

(2003  CLD  646),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  has  held  as 

follows:-  

“… section 129 of the Transfer of Property Act provides 
that  gifts  made  under  the  Muslim  Law  are  expressly 
excluded from the operation of the said Act. If sections 123 
and 129 of the Transfer of Property Act are read together, 
the obvious conclusion therefrom is that the provisions of 
section 123 does not apply to a gift under Muhammadan 
Law and no writing of such gift is essential. It has been held 
in Mst. Umar Bibi and 3 others v. Bashir Ahmad and 3 
others 1977 SCMR 154 that the gift made under the Muslim 
Law  is  expressly  excluded  from  the  operation  of  the 
Transfer of Property Act and that as soon as the formalities 
prescribed by Muslim Law, are complete, a valid gift could 
be  effected  even  orally  or  under  an  unregistered 
instrument.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
22 

C.R.No.73/2016 

ix) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Sharif  VS  Mst.  Aisha  Bibi  (1994 

MLD 677), the Hon'ble Lahore High Court has held as follows:-  

“It is well-established legal proposition that a gift by a 
Muhammadan can be created even orally and even if some 
document is written either as gift or as an acknowledgment 
of gift it does not require registration and it is definitely a 
very strong piece of evidence in favour of the transaction of 
gift.” 

34.  Since in the case at hand, the gift of suit property No.1 was 

made  by  Razia  Sultana  in  favour  of  her  daughter,  respondent 

No.3, orally and not through any written  instrument, the question 

of  registration  does  not  arise.  The  process  of  transfer  of 

ownership of suit property No.1 from Razia Sultana to respondent 

No.3  in  the  records  of  the  Capital  Development  Authority  was  in 

recognition of such an oral gift. The appearance of Razia Sultana 

and  respondent  No.3  in  the  offices  of  the  Capital  Development 

Authority  for  the  transfer  of  suit  property  No.1  is  ample  proof  of 

declaration of oral gift and its acceptance by respondent No.3.  It 

is  not  disputed  that  respondent  No.3  is  in  possession  of  suit 

property  No.1.  Therefore,  the  three  essential  ingredients  for  a 

valid gift have been satisfied in this case. After the transfer of suit 

property No.1, the donor and the donee lived in the said property 

until the former’s demise. When a parent/donor gifts a property to 

a  child/donee,  in  which  both  the  donor  and  the  donee  reside, 

constructive  position  of  the  gifted  property  needs  to  be  given  to 

the donee. For the validity of such a gift, it is not required for the 

donor or other family members to move out of the gifted property 

so as to show that possession had been delivered to the donee. 

35.  As  regards  the  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner  that  the  petitioner  could  not  have  been  deprived  of  his 

inheritance  rights  due  to  the  transfer  of  suit  property  No.1  in 

favour of respondent No.3, we must not lose sight of the fact that 

the  petitioner’s  mother,  as  a  Muslim  donor,  had  gifted  and 

transferred suit property No.1 in respondent No.3’s favour during 

her lifetime. Under Islamic law the holder of a property can gift the 

whole  or  any  part  of  his  property  to  one  of  his  children  in  his 

lifetime. Islamic law permits a man to gift away his entire property 

during his lifetime so as to even disinherit his heirs. In this regard, 

 
 
 
23 

C.R.No.73/2016 

paragraph  142  of  Mulla’s  Principles  of  Mohammadan  Law,  is 

reproduced as under:- 

 “142. Extent of donor's power.-- A gift as distinguished from a 
will, may be made of the whole of the donor's property, and it 
may be made even to an heir.” 

36.  Reference may also be made to the following case law:- 

i) 

In the case of Muhammad Bashir VS Allah Ditta (1994 SCMR 

1870),  it  has  been  held  that  a  Muslim  donor  has  unfettered 

power  to  alienate  his  property  by  way  of  gift  or  otherwise 

during  his  lifetime  provided  he  is  in  proper  state  of  health 

and in exercise of his independent voluntary discretion. 

ii) 

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Nusrat  Zohra  VS  Mst.  Azhra  Bibi  (PLD 

2006  SC  15),  it  was  held  inter-alia  that  a  preferential  gift 

made  in  favour  of  one  or  two  children  by  the  donor  in  his 

lifetime can, by no stretch of imagination, be termed as void. 

Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  the  powers  of  a  Muslim  to 

dispose  of  his  property  by  way  of  gift  are  unfettered,  and 

that a  gift  cannot  be invalidated  only  because  the  heirs  are 

deprived of their shares.  

iii) 

In  the  case  of  Ghulam  Muhammad  VS  Mian  Muhammad 

(2007  SCMR  231),  a   suit  filed  by  the  appellant/plaintiff 

challenging  the  gift  made  by  his  father,  donor,  in  favour  of 

the appellant/plaintiff’s brother, was held to be incompetent 

and not maintainable, because a Muslim could gift away his 

property  to  anyone  of  his  heirs  to  exclusion  of  others,  and 

such a gift was invalid or void. 

iv) 

In  the  case  of  Safi  Ullah  VS  Ghulam  Jabbar  (PLD  1955 

Lahore  191),  it  was  held  that  a  Muslim  he  has  unfettered 

powers  to  gift  away  his  property  to  any  one  of  his  heirs  to 

exclusion  of  others  and  such  gift  cannot  be  invalid  or  void. 

Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  the  only  restraint  upon  a 

Muslim  in  the  matter  of  alienating  his  property  imposed  by 

the Muslim Law relates to wills and gifts on death-bed.  

37.  Finding no jurisdictional infirmity, non-reading or misreading 

of evidence in the concurrent findings of the learned Courts below 

regarding  the  gift  and  transfer  of  suit  property  No.1  and  suit 

 
 
 
 
 
24 

C.R.No.73/2016 

property No.2, this revision petition is liable to be dismissed, and 

is dismissed with no order as to costs.  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2017 

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

         JUDGE  

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan*   

             (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
