JUDGMENT 

  MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J.---Through this single judgment, I intend to decide 
the captioned writ petition and criminal miscellaneous bail petition as similar questions of law 
and facts are involved in both these petitions. 

2.  Brief facts referred in the captioned writ petition are that petitioner born in Rahim Yar 
Khan (Punjab), Pakistan on 21.06.1996, moved to UK when he was 02  years old and holds 
dual nationalities i.e. Pakistani and British. On 20.05.2015, dead body of one Andre Antonio 
Marshall  (hereinafter  "deceased"),  admittedly  an  active  member  of  an  organized  criminal 
group  named  the  "Gooch  Gang",  was  discovered  by  members  of Public  namely  Rachel  Xu, 
Aaron Cooper and Seanie Lynch at Manor Park, Urmstone, Manchester, UK. On, 23.05.2015, 
petitioner's blood was found on left shoulder of driver's seat back and consequently, petiti oner 
was interviewed as a suspect on 26.05.2015, who was found to have an injury to his left hand, 
however  petitioner  was  released  on  bail  by  the  police  and  was  due  to  surrender  himself  on 
23.07.2015, but he failed to turn up and fled away. Accordingly, British High Commission at 
Islamabad requested Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Interior/respondent 
No.2  in  June,  2017  for  extradition  of  petitioner.  Because  of  no  extradition  treaty  between 
Pakistan and UK, Gazette notification under Section 4 of the Extradition Act, 1972 was issued 
on  09.06.2017  and  ultimately,  petitioner  was  arrested  from  Lahore  on  01.07.2018. 
Consequently,  after  recording  of  evidence  and  statement  under  Section  342,  Cr.P.C.  of  the 
petitioner,  Additional  Deputy  Commissioner  (G)/Inquiry  Magistrate  passed  the  impugned 
order  dated  25.10.2018  with  the  conclusion  that  prima  facie  case  is  made  out  against  the 
petitioner. Hence, the instant writ petition and criminal miscellaneous petition for bail . 

3.  Learned counsel for petitioner, inter alia, contended that petitioner has been involved 
in a blind murder and request made by the U.K Authorities for extradition of petitioner is based 
on suspicion, rather evidence; that Andre's real sister namely Sandra Marshall, leader of the 
Gooch Gang, extended life threats to the petitioner and his family, on the basis of which police 
issued them "Osman Warning" i.e. the warnings of death threats or high risk of murder issued 
to victims, therefore, petitioner and his family were forced to leave UK; that material placed 
before the inquiry Magistrate along with request was not duly authenticated in terms of Section 
9 of the Extradition Act, 1972; that Investigation Officer of the requesting State did not appear 
before the inquiry Magistrate; that the learned inquiry Magistrate relied upon circumstantial 
evidence,  which  is  the  weakest  kind  of  evidence  under  Pakistani  law;  that  Simon 
Murphy/Detective Constable stated that alleged investigator is dishonest, who claimed to have 
associated  13  witnesses  in  investigation,  but  statements  of  only  07  witnesses  have  been 
submitted  before  the  inquiry  Magistrate;  that  presence  of  petitioner's  blood  at  back  side  of 
driver's  seat  caused  due  to  maintenance  work  of  deceased's  car  as  petitioner  had  owned  a 
workshop  by  the  name  of  "AA  Tyres  Ltd."  in  Manchester;  that  learned  Inquiry  Magistrate 
failed  to  appreciate  that  there  was  inordinate  delay  of  02  years  in  filing  the  request  of 
extradition;  that  the  request  and  the  documents  annexed  therewith  reveal  no  criminal  ca se 
against  the  petitioner;  that  petitioner  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and  deserves  to  be  treated  in 
accordance with law; that prosecution evidence is full of discrepancies, benefit of which has 
not been extended to the petitioner; that the impugned order is  sheer abuse of the process of 
Court and is in clear contravention of the applicable laws, therefore, the impugned order dated 
25.10.2018  may  graciously  be  set-aside  and  the  requisition  for  extradition  and  surrender  of 
petitioner made by the British High Commission at Islamabad may be rejected. 

4.  Conversely, learned AAG contended that the inquiry was conducted in accordance with 
law  and  all  the  codal  formalities  have  been  fulfilled;  that  the  petitioner  is  a  suspect  in  the 
murder  of  deceased  and  he  was  released  on  police  bail  with  the  direction  to  surrender  on 
23.07.2015, but he escaped from UK and fled away to Pakistan, where-after he changed his 
name  and  CNIC;  that  all  the  material  placed  before  the  Inquiry  Magistrate  was  duly 
authenticated and fulfills the requirements of Section 9 of the Extradition Act, 1972; that the 
petitioner can be extradited as he is fugitive offender of a murder case; that the impugned order 
has been passed on the basis of evidence provided by the Police, which was received through 
Embassy of United Kingdom, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Interior, therefore, 

 
 
  
the instant writ petition may be dismissed. 

5. 

I have heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for petitioner as well as 

the learned AAG and perused the record with their able assistance. 

6.  Perusal of the record reveals that the petitioner has been declared fugitive offender by 
the UK Authorities on the basis of warrants of arrest dated 27.01.2016 issued by Mancherster 
Magistrate Court Exh.P.8, P.9 and Exh.P.10 and his presence is required in the murder case of 
Andre Marshall, who was an active member of an organized criminal group the Gooch Gang, 
who operated in the Moss Side area of Manchester. His body was found by member of public 
Miss  Rachel  Xu  on  20.05.2015  at  about  7:25  next  to  a  parked  car  on  Manor  Park  Road, 
Manchester. Post-mortem examination was conducted by a pathologist Philip Lumb and cause 
of death was established on the basis of said medical examination as seven gunshot wounds. 
The vehicle of victim Andre Marshall BMW was recovered on Avian Avenue, Fallowfieled, 
Manchester, which was forensically examined on 23.05.2015, from which blood of petitioner 
was discovered from the driver seat area on the base of the seat, the handbrake and the reverse 
of the sun visor. The petitioner was interviewed by police on 26.05.2015 as a suspect under 
caution.  The  petitioner  denied  his  involvement  in  the  murder  of  Andre  Marshall  but  he 
confirmed that he had been with Andre Marshall on the evening of 19.05.2015. The petitioner 
was also inquired about his injury on his left hand, which was photographed and in response 
to the inquiry, he stated that he had been playing with a flick knife whilst in Andre Marshall's 
car  and  accidently  cut  himself.  The  petitioner  was  released  on  bail  after  his  interview  as 
referred in Exh.P.5. 

7.  The above referred background was submitted by Simon Murphy in Exh.P.6 counter 
signed  by  Justice  of  the  Peace  Greater  Manchester  Magistrates  Court.  All  this  background 
to  Exh.P.22,  statement  of  Seanie 
consists  of  statement  of  Rachel  XU/Exh.P.19 
Lynch/Exh.P.23, Exh.P.24, statement of Phillip Lumb/Exh.P.25, Exh.P.26, statement of Andre 
Horne/Exh.P.27,  Exh.P.28,  statement  of  Fiona  Barrett/Exh.P.29,  Exh.P.30  and  Exh.P.31, 
statement of Jacqueline French Exh.P.32, Exh.P.33, statement of Kate Leonard/ Exh.P.32 to 
Exh.P.36. 

8.  The  above  referred  statements  were  attested  by  Justice  of  Peace  greater  Manchester 
Magistrates Court dated  05.08.2019/Exh.P.47  and  request  was  forwarded  to  Government of 
Pakistan  for  extradition  of  the  petitioner  from  Pakistan  to  United  Kingdom  on  the  murder 
charges  of  Andre  Marshall.  The  Federal  Government  notified  Inquiry  Magistrate  and  the 
petitioner  was  arrested  by  FIA  Authorities  on  01.07.2018  and  produced  before  the  Inquiry 
Magistrate for extradition proceedings. The prosecution submitted gazette notification dated 
02.06.2017 as Exh.P.B with the following contents: 

S.R.O.  462  (1)/1017.  WHEREAS  the  British  High  Commission,  Islamabad,  has 
requested for extradition of Abdul Qadar Ahsan, fugitive offender, who is wanted to 
the Government of United Kingdom for his Court trial on the charges of murder. 

AND WHEREAS no extradition treaty has so far been executed between the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan and United Kingdom. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  in  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by  section  4  of  the 
Extradition Act, 1972 (XXI of 1972), the Federal Government, considering it expedient, 
is pleased to direct that the provisions of the said Act, shall, with respect to extradition 
of Abdul Qadar Ahsan, who is wanted by the United Kingdom for the charges of murder 
have effect in relation to that state." 

9.  Keeping in view above background, the Inquiry Magistrate after 

recording statement of Muhammad Naeem, Public Prosecutor, FIA, who produced all the 
record  including  the  'extradition  documents  received  from  U.K  from  Exh.P.1  to  Exh.P.47 
ordered for extradition of the petitioner. Statement of the petitioner was recorded under section 
342 Cr.P.C. The Inquiry Magistrate recommended extradition of the  petitioner to the Federal 
Government for final decision in terms of section 10 of the Extradition Act, 1972 . 

10.  I have gone through the entire case, in which no one has put appearance on behalf of 

 
 
 
 
 
U.K  Authorities  especially  the  Investigation  Officer,  who  investigated  the  matter  regarding 
murder  of  Andre  Marshall  within  territorial  jurisdiction  of  Manchester.  The  evidences 
collected by the I.O. in U.K comprises statements of seven witnesses, which were brought on 
record through the counter attested statement of Simon Murphy/Investigator and this Court is 
of the view that Inquiry Magistrate is acting like post office on the whims of U.K Government 
without  considering  the  requirements  under  the  Pakistani  Law  as  to  whether  any  statement 
given by any of the witness or I.O. of foreign jurisdiction/requesting state is to be considered 
valid for the purpose of extradition. I have gone through the relevant law regarding minimum 
requirement  of  Extradition  Act,  1972,  especially  when  Inquiry  Magistrate  in  Pakistan  has 
neither called Simon Murphy lnvestigator/Detector nor called any witness, who could state all 
these  facts  to  ensure  that  the  requirements  of  prima  facie  case  have  been  complied  with  or 
otherwise. 

11.  As  per  record,  the  notification  Exh.P.B  issued  by  Government  of  Pakistan  dated 
02.06.2017 clearly acknowledged that "no extradition treaty has so far been executed between 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and United Kingdom" and due to the said reason section 4 of 
the  Extradition  Act,  1972  comes  into  play,  which  provides  mechanism  for  extradition  of 
fugitive offender with non-treaty state. The extract of section 4 is reproduced as under:- 

"4.  Application  of  Act  to  non-treaty  States.-(1)  Where  the  Federal  Government 
considers it expedient that the persons who, being accused or convicted of offences at 
places within, or within the jurisdiction of, a foreign State, are or are suspected to be in 
Pakistan should be  returned to  the State,  notwithstanding that there  is no  extradition 
treaty  with  that  state,  it  may,  by  notification  in  the  official  Gazette,  direct  that  the 
provisions  of  this  Act  shall,  with  respect  to  such  offences  and  subject  to  such 
modifications,  exceptions,  conditions  and  qualifications,  if  any,  as  may  be  specified 
therein, have effect in relation to that State. 

(2) Where a direction under subsection (1) in relation to a foreign State is in force, the 
provisions of this Act shall, with respect to the offences specified in that direction, have 
effect in relation to such State as if it were a treaty State." 

12.  The  above  referred  provisions  of  Extradition  Act,  1972  provide  mechanism  and  in 
compliance  of  the  same:  Federal  Government  issued  notification  dated  02.06.2017/Exh.P.B 
referred  to  the  petitioner,  therefore,  in  my  humble  understanding  the  Extradition  Act,  1972 
applies in this case and minimum requirement of application of the Act to non -treaty state has 
been fulfilled. 

13.  The other requirement under Extradition Act,  1972 has been referred in sections 5 to 
10, whereby an Inquiry Magistrate has to be appointed to see prima facie existence of the fact 
to connect the fugitive offender with the alleged offence in the judicial document warrant of 
arrest or any other document attested by foreign/requesting state. 

14.  The procedure for requisition for surrender of fugitive offender is provided in Sections 
6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the Act in a complete manner which includes the requisition for surrender 
of fugitive offender through a diplomatic representative of Pakistan, by the State asking for 
surrender on the basis of treaty or arrangement agreed with the other State. After receiving the 
request, the Federal Government may if it thinks fit, issue an order to inquire into the case  to 
any  Magistrate;  whereafter  the  Magistrate  level  inquiry  shall  be  initiated  and  all  'the 
documents/material  evidence  against  the  fugitive  offender  shall  be  placed  before  the 
Magistrate regarding the allegation on the basis of which the custody of fugitive offender has 
been claimed. The Magistrate exhibits all the documents and depositions in presence of person 
against whom the allegation has been levelled and all those documents have been considered 
and  received  which  were  authenticated,  which  requires  specific  authentication  by  the 
competent authorities of the foreign State in a manner provided in Section 9(2)(a to d). The 
Inquiry Magistrate after holding an inquiry under Section 10 of the Act prepare a report; which 
includes the opinion of Magistrate as to whether a prima facie case is made out in support of 
requisition  for  the  surrender  of  the  fugitive  offender,  the  Federal  Government  may  issue  a 
warrant of custody and removal of fugitive offender for his delivery at a place and to a person 

 
 
 
 
named in the warrant. 

15  The term "prima facie" has not been explained in the Act, therefore, the same has to be 
considered in its ordinary meaning i.e. "based on the first impression; accepted as correct until 
proved otherwise". The said term has also been explained  in judgment reported as PLD 1989 
Lahore 279 (Muhammad Asim Malik v. Anwar Jalil), 1977 SCMR 220 (Sui Gas Transmission 
Company  v.  Sui  Gas  Employees  Union),  1992  CLC  2540  (Mst.  Naz  Shoukat  Khan  v.  Mrs. 
Yasmin R. Minhas) and in the recent judgment of this Court reported as PLD 2018 Islamabad 
258 (Muhammad Shahid v. Federation of Pakistan), wherein the term "prima facie" has been 
explained in the following manner: 

"As per the black's law dictionary 8th Edition, "prima facie" means at first sight, on 
first  appearance  but  subject to  further  evidence  or information,  and prima  facie  case 
means establishment of a legally required rebuttable presumptions. 

16.  In view of above legal requirement of Extradition Act, 1972, the prosecution submitted 
statement of Simon Murphy, Investigator Exh.P.1 to Exh.P.12, which includes the background 
history of the case. The relevant extracts of witness's statement, warrant of arrest, photographs 
of the fugitive offender for his identity including his finger prints Exh.P.15 to Exh.P.1 6. The 
Investigator Simon Murphy recorded the witnesses' statements, which were exhibited in this 
case before the Inquiry Magistrate referred as Exh.P.17 to Exh. P.34. 

17.  In addition to above statements, Kate Leonard statement on oath Exh.P.34 reveals the 
definition of crime of murder, the admissibility of hearsay evidence in Criminal Justice Act 
2003 and the relevant extracts of the law have been submitted. 

18.  The  entire  background  of  the  case  has  been  submitted  in  the  shape  of  depositions 
through diplomatic channel in Pakistan by requesting state to the Director General Europe M/o 
Foreign  Affairs,  Islamabad  but  this  entire  record  is  signed  and  sealed  by  the  Greater 
Manchester Magistrates Court but surprisingly no one on behalf of Federal Government has 
put  appearance  before  this  Court  to  authenticate  that  all this  record has  been  received  from 
requesting state i.e. U.K in the office of M/o Foreign Affairs rather these documents have been 
placed  on  record  directly  by  one  Muhammad  Naeem  Public  Prosecutor  FIA,  who  is  not 
authorized person under the law as no other document has been exhibited, through which it 
can be assumed that notified officer of Federal Government was appointed in this case under 
Extradition  Act,  1972  to  submit  the  documentary  evidence  of  the  requesting  state  against 
fugitive offender before the Inquiry Magistrate. In my humble view minimum requirement that 
the person/officer of the Federal Government i.e. from M/o Foreign Affairs or M/o Interior as 
the case may be, who received the documents from the requesting state has to authenticate the 
same  that  all  the  documents  are  genuine,  duly  attested  by  Attorney  General  as  well  as 
Department  of  Justice  or  Court  of  law  of  requesting  state.  The  minimum  requirement  for 
foreign document has to be considered in terms of Pakistani Law, which provides existence of 
those  foreign  documents,  if  the  same  have  been  authenticated  in  the  manner  provided  in 
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984, therefore, record placed before the Inquiry Magistrate is not 
valid as the competent authority did not attest these documents in Pakistan nor any certificate 
to that effect has been exhibited before the Inquiry Magistrate. 

19,  In my humble view, the I.O of the requesting state Simon Murphy has to appear before 
the  Inquiry  Magistrate  to  substantiate  his  investigation  being  the  minimum  requirement  to 
justify existence of prima facie case against the petitioner and mere submission of statements 
through postal channel before the Inquiry Magistrate is not permissible under Pakistani law . 

20.  Besides  the  above  referred  position,  I  have  also  gone  through  various  case  laws  of 
extradition and observed therein the presence of witness, who has submitted details of facts 
being an Investigation Officer as well as a representative of foreign treaty State or person who 
was  legally  allowed  to  verify  the  foreign  documents,  order  or  who  has  authenticated  the 
document  received  from  the  said  State  in  shape  of  affidavit,  where-after  the  Magistrate  on 
recording of statement of those individuals gave his findings while considering the same as 
minimum standard. Reference to this regard is made to the following cases of extradition . 

(a)  PLD  1989  Lahore  279  (Muhammad  Asim  Malik  v.  Anwar  Jalil,  etc.)  where  oral 

 
 
 
evidence of Craig Lovato appeared before the court as the Agent and Chief Investigator 
and  deposed  that  the  prosecution  was  in  possession  of  oral  evidence  as  well  as 
documentary evidence proving against the fugitive offender the offence of conspiracy 
to distribute and import Hashish punishable in USA. 

(b)  PLD  1993  Lahore  732  (Nargis  Shaheen  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan),  in  which  Shoaib 
Saeed  appeared  as  PW-1  on  behalf  of  Ministry  of  Interior  and  submitted  extradition 
document  received  from  USA  through  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  on  03.06.1992, 
asking for surrender of Mian Muhammad Azam/accused. In this regard, Mr. Sher Gul 
Khan, Investigative Assistant of Drug Enforcement of Administration, USA appeared 
as PW-2  and deposed  that  he  has  been  Associated  with  investigation of  drug  related 
activities of the accused and he has submitted complete insight of the manner and mode 
in which the accused committed the offence of conspiring to import and trafficking of 
heroine to the said State. 

(c)  1993  PCr.LJ  1082  (Nasrullah  Khan  Hunjra  v.  Government  of  Pakistan)  in  which 
Muhammad Dawood, Section  Officer,  Ministry  of  Interior  appeared  as  PW-1  during 
the course of inquiry proceedings and tendered in evidence a document received from 
the  requesting  state  for  extradition  of  fugitive  offender,  whereas  Arnold  R.  Moorin, 
Special  Case  Agent  of  DEA  appeared  as  PW-2,  who  testified  and  interviewed  the 
witnesses of that case, sworn statement before the grand Jury of Eastern District of New 
York and submitted complete insight of the crime with respect to the fugitive offender's 
involvement  in  aiding  and  abetting  importation  of  a  narcotics  substances  in  the 
requesting State. 

(d)  1990 MLD 1611 (Zulqarnain Khan v. Government of Pakistan) in which Muhammad 
Dawood,  Section  Officer,  Ministry  of  Interior  as  well  as  Mr.  Benjamin  Prainard,  an 
American Investigator appeared as PW-1 and PW12, respectively, and supported the 
plea  of  extradition  against  Zulqarnain  Khan/fugitive  offender  against  his  offence  of 
conspiring smuggling of heroin from USA. 

21.  The above referred examples of different case studies give rise to a situation that cases 
and request of extradition have to be appreciated on the minimum standard of care and due 
process  on  the  basis  of  principles  of  safe  administration  of  justice,  especially  when  the 
procedure of extradition is not clear however it has been observed from careful study of the 
above referred case laws that there are two sets of cases in which request of extradition has 
been made by the requesting state i.e., 

Firstly, there is an allegation of some extradition offence against the fugitive offender 
and  the  Investigation  Officer  of  foreign  jurisdiction  has  not  yet  concluded  the 
investigation  nor  even  submitted  his  complete  investigation  report  before  the  Trial 
Court  of  that  country,  while  no  verdict  (judicial  pronouncement)  was  passed  by  the 
court of competent jurisdiction; and, 

secondly, where the Investigation Officer has submitted a complete report against the 
fugitive offender or other co-accused persons and the court of competent jurisdiction 
of foreign State after appreciation of evidence has passed the judgment in which the 
role of fugitive offender has also been thrashed. 

22.  In my humble understanding, the cases of first category somewhere fall in grey area as 
such  cases  are  at  inquiry/investigation  stage  in  foreign  jurisdiction,  therefore,  the  Inquiry 
Magistrate  in  Pakistan  is  bound  to  satisfy  his  conscience  after  perusal  of  documents, 
depositions, and affidavits brought before him, but in order  to reach at just conclusion, it is 
necessary to call the official witness of Government of Pakistan, especially from Ministry of 
Interior or Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who receives the documents from the requesting state 
and shall appear before the Inquiry Magistrate, to submit the same in order to confirm that the 
original  documents  have  been  brought  before  the  Magistrate  of  inquiry  through  a  channel 
notified by the Government of Pakistan. Such practice will eliminate any doubt or falsity of 
documents. Similarly, the Inquiry Magistrate with view to reach at just conclusion should also 
call the Investigation Officer of the requesting state, who inquired and investigated the crime 

 
 
 
 
in  his  own  jurisdiction  due  to  the  reason  that  such  Investigation  Officer  has   collected  the 
evidence and other incriminating articles, recorded the statements of witnesses through which 
he believes that fugitive offender is linked with the alleged crime. Such Investigation Officer 
of  foreign  jurisdiction  has  to  appear  before  Inquiry  Magistrate  in  Pakistan  to  record  his 
statement  and  such  witness  has  to  undergo  test  of  cross-examination  so  as  to  reach  at  just 
decision of the case in which the Inquiry Magistrate comes to a definite conclusion that as to 
whether a prima facie case has been made out against the fugitive offender or otherwise, failing 
which the admissibility of statement placed before the Inquiry Magistrate in shape of affidavit 
is of no legal worth. 

23.  While dealing with the scope and mode of magisterial enquiry under the Extradition 
Act,  1972,  the  legislature  has  provided  Section  8  of  the  Act  ibid  which  otherwise  is  quite 
exhaustive and provides a clear guidance to a Magistrate for holding magisterial enquiry, when 
the fugitive offender appears or is brought before him. For ready reference, Section 8 of the 
Extradition Act, 1972 is reproduced as under: 

(8)  (1) On receipt of an order under Section 7, the Magistrate shall issue a summon or a 
warrant for the arrest of the fugitive offender according as the case appears to b e one 
in which according to the law of Pakistan a summon or warrant would ordinarily issue. 

(2) When the fugitive offender appears or is brought before him, the Magistrate shall 
enquire into the case in the same manner, and have the same jurisdiction and  powers, 
as nearly as may be, as if the case were one triable by a court of session and shall take 
such evidence as may be produced in support of the requisition and on behalf of the 
fugitive offender, including any evidence to show that the offence of which the fugitive 
offender  is  accused  or  alleged  to  have  been  convicted  is  an  offence  of  a  political 
character or is not an extradition offence." 

The above referred Section has provided an exhaustive guideline to a Magistrate for holding 
an enquiry and has also provided the manner of inquiry with the words: 

"In the same manner and have the same jurisdiction and powers, as nearly as may be, 
as if the case were one triable by a Court of session. 

Hence, it can safely be concluded that enquiry proceedings before the enquiry Magistrate shall 
not be a summary proceedings, rather it would be in the same manner as a Sessions trial is 
conducted. In such eventuality, the enquiry Magistrate shall proceed with the matter like a trial 
court, especially in the manner as a Sessions Court conducts the trial of an accused. Hence, the 
Extradition Act, 1972 itself provides complete mechanism to the fugitive offender to defend 
himself  against  the  requisition  made  by  requesting  State  to  the  Federal  Government  for 
surrender  of  such  fugitive  offender.  As  such,  the  enquiry  Magistrate  shall  conduct  the  trial 
after giving full opportunity of producing evidence to the parties i.e. requesting State (who is 
seeking requisition of fugitive offender) as well as to the fugitive offender and shall also adopt 
every mode to dig out the truth. 

24.  While considering the entire discussion referred above in the light of case laws, I am 
of the view that following minimum requirements have to be observed in cases of extradition : 

(i)  Request of foreign State for extradition of person, 

(ii)  The presence of fugitive offender before the Inquiry Magistrate, 

(iii) Submission of authenticated judicial documents stating the facts, allegations, by way 
of deposition, warrants, or statements on oath along with the certificate of authority of 
the  requesting  State  i.e.  Secretary  of  State  and  Attorney  general  Office  which 
purportedly issued, received or taken by any court of justice outside Pakistan . 

(iv) In  cases  where  judicial  verdict  has  not  yet  been  passed  by  the  foreign  court,  the 
Investigation Officer of foreign jurisdiction/requesting State has to appear before the 
Inquiry  Magistrate  in  Pakistan  to  justify  the  allegation  on  the  basis  of  his  own 
investigation,  statement  of  witnesses  or  other  incriminating  articles  collected  by 
him/her through which the prima facie view regarding involvement of fugitive offender 

 
 
 
 
is established on record. 

(v)  In case where the Investigation Officer of requesting state has not put appearance before 
the Inquiry Magistrate in Pakistan during the extradition proceedings, due to his own 
safety,  security  or  any  other  valid  reasons,  his  statement  could  have  been  procured 
through  a  video  link  and  the  counsel  for  fugitive  offender  or  his  authorized 
representative can cross-examine the Investigation Officer in extradition proceedings 
in the office of Magistrate through the said facility of video link. 

(vi) The documents which were received from foreign jurisdiction transmitted by requesting 
state  should be  duly  attested by  competent'authority  including  Secretary  of  the  State 
under the seal of Department of Justice, Attorney General Office, or court of law and 
same shall be submitted before the Inquiry Magistrate in Pakistan through the  officer 
notified by the Government of Pakistan from Ministry of Interior or from Ministry of 
Foreign  Affairs,  who  are  the  authorities  under  the  law  to  receive  and  submit  the 
documents  of  foreign  jurisdiction  to  initiate  extradition  proceedings  in  Pakistan  and 
such officer has to appear in-person before the Inquiry Magistrate. 

(vii) 

In cases, where the court of foreign jurisdiction i.e. the Court of requesting state, 
has passed judgment against the co-accused persons or the fugitive offender in a same 
case,  its  certified  record  should  be  considered  valid  for  the  purpose  of  extradition 
request without the presence of Investigation Officer before the Inquiry Magistrate in 
extradition proceedings as the foreign judgment is admissible and presumption of truth 
is attached in terms of Articles 94 and 96 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984. Even, 
the judicial pronouncement of conviction purported to be certified by judge/Magistrate 
or  officer  of  the  State  has  to  be  considered  valid  in  terms  of  Section  9(2)(c)  of  the 
Extradition Act, 1972. 

(viii) 

 The  Inquiry  Magistrate  shall  proceed  with  the  matter  like  a  trial  court, 
especially in a manner as of a sessions court in terms of Section 8(2) of the Extradition 
Act, 1972. 

25.  While considering the above principles and parameters laid down by this Court, I have 
gone  through  impugned  order  dated  25.10.2018,  where  all  these  questions  have  not  been 
adhered to, through which it could be assumed that the documents exhibited before the Inquiry 
Magistrate  are  authenticated  under  the  law  and  minimum  requirements  for  appearance  of 
Simon Murphy, Investigator is essential for extradition of fugitive offender and when the said 
I.O.  has  not  put  to  test  of  cross-examination,  the  order  of  Inquiry  Magistrate  has  to  be 
considered order without any legal basis, which negates the very spirit of Articles 4, 9, 10-A 
and 15 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, which provides minimum 
guarantees of due process of law and equal protection of law. 

26.  For the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is Allowed and the impugned order dated 
25.10.2018  passed  by  the  Inquiry  Magistrate  is  Set  Aside.  The  matter  is  Remanded  to  the 
Inquiry Magistrate with direction to conclude the same within period of two (02) months by 
calling statement of the I.O. of the requesting state as well as of the competent officer from 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who received the certified record from the requesting state, in a 
manner discussed above. In case the I.O. of the requesting state is unable to appear  before the 
inquiry Magistrate in Pakistan, then his statement will be recorded through video link . 

27.  During  course  of  arguments,  Assistant  Attorney  General  has  provided  additional 
information  on  the  basis  of  newspaper  reports  dated  19.05.2016,  whereby  two  co-accused 
Danial Shahid and Kadell Rivers were found guilty of cold blooded murder of Andre Marshall 
and have been sentenced for 3-1/2 years by the Manchester Crown Court, which shall be also 
considered by the Inquiry Magistrate in de novo proceedings and if any judgment of conviction 
of co-accused of the petitioner has been passed by the Court of competent jurisdiction in U.K, 
its certified copy duly attested by the authorities shall also be placed on recor d 

28.  It  has  further  been  observed  that  additional  information  of  petitioner  regarding  his 
identity  has  been  presented  and  referred  by  the  Inquiry  Magistrate  in  the  impugned  order, 

 
 
wherein the alleged offender/petitioner changed his identification, name and date of birth and 
has been registered in another family with the name of Abdul Kareem, date of birth 1-3-1995 
father  name  Ghulam  Mustafa  Lund  mother  name  Hakim  Zadi  with  two  other  siblings  r/o 
District Dadoo but said information has not been confirmed through any cogent documentary 
record,  therefore,  FIA  Authorities  are  directed  to  submit  the  complete  documentary  record 
after  obtaining  the  report  from  NADRA  as  to  whether  fugitive  offender  has  changed  his 
personal details of identity in order to conceal his presence in Pakistan or otherwise and such 
material shall also be placed before the Inquiry Magistrate for final adjudication . 

29.  At last, the petitioner has also filed Crl. Misc. No.150-B/2019 (Abdul Qadar Ahsan v. 
The  State)  for  his  post  arrest  bail  in  the  extradition  offence.  While  dealing  with  the  said, 
proposition, the principles laid down in Section 497 Cr.P.C. are applicable, which govern the 
question  of  bail  in  cases  of  non-bailable  offences  in  Pakistan  jurisdiction,  although  Abdul 
Qadar  Ahsan/petitioner has been  charged  for  the  murder of  one  Andre Antonio  Marshall in 
United Kingdom and petitioner has been taken into custody on 01.07.2018 in Lahore, therefore, 
at this stage, any passing of any findings qua the grounds of bail while considering the prima 
facie case of petitioner are not appropriate as it will affect the entire proceedings in foreign 
jurisdiction. However, this does not mean that all the fugitive offenders, who have been taken 
into custody in Pakistan, are not entitled for concession of bail. Each and every case has to be 
dealt on its own merits and the Court is empowered to decide the post arrest bail application 
while considering the record of the case and the evidence brought on record. The tricky part in 
the  entire  proposition  is  the  conduct  of  the  fugitive  offender,  who  absconded  from  foreign 
jurisdiction and came to Pakistan, while in case if the bail is allowed in his favour, there is 
apprehension that the fugitive offender might again abscond, which may result into delay of 
the extradition proceedings, therefore, while considering this aspect, the conduct of petitioner, 
who came to Pakistan without any notified channel and remained absconder despite the fact 
that he was interviewed by the police authorities in UK with respect to investigation of murder 
of Andre Antonio Marshall, disentitles him for the concession of bail. 

30. 
In  view  of  above  discussion, Crl. Misc.  No.150-B/2019  (Abdul  Qadar  Ahsan v.  The 
State)  is  hereby  Dismissed.  However,  after  final  verdict  of  the  Magistrate  in  post  remand 
proceedings, petitioner would be at liberty to file afresh bail application, if so advised 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
