ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.322 of 2016 

Shoaib ur Rehman 
VS           

The M.D., Telephone Industries of Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd. and another 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondent No.1 by:  Mr. Abdur Rehman Qadar, Advocate. 
______________________________________________________________________ 

23.01.2018  
Mr. Safdar Shaheen Pirzada, Advocate, 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-Through  the  instant  writ 

petition,  the  petitioner,  Shoaib  ur  Rehman,  former  General 

Manager  (Digital  Switching) 

in  the  Telephone  Industries  of 

Pakistan 

(“T.I.P.”), 

impugns  notification  dated  03.12.2014 

whereby  the  petitioner’s  pensionary  benefits  were  forfeited,  and 

all  other  facilities  availed  by  him  and  his  family  from  the  T.I.P. 

were recalled as a consequence of the petitioner’s conviction and 

sentence of rigorous imprisonment for a period  of five years vide 

judgment  dated  27.11.2014,  passed  by  the 

learned  Judge 

Accountability Court No.1, Islamabad, in Reference No.15/13-IBD, 

titled “State VS Azad Bakht etc”. 

2. 

The  position  taken  by  the  petitioner  in  his  writ  petition  was 

that  the  National  Accountability  Bureau  had  filed  Reference 

No.15/13-IBD titled “State VS Azad Bakht etc”, before the learned 

Accountability Court, Islamabad; that the petitioner was one of the 

accused  in  the  said  reference;  that  in  the  said  reference,  it  was 

alleged  that  the  petitioner  had  committed  an  offence  under 

Section 9 of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999, and had 

caused a loss amounting to Rs.26.85 Million to the T.I.P.; that the 

trial  culminated  in  the  judgment  dated  27.11.2014,  whereby  the 

petitioner  was  convicted,  and  was  sentenced  for  a  period  of  five 

years  rigorous  imprisonment  with  a  fine  of  Rs.5  Million;  that  the 

said  judgment  has  been  challenged  before  this  Court  in  writ 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
2 

W.P.No.322/2016 

petition  No.4904/2014;  that  vide  order  dated  12.05.2015,  this 

Court has suspended the operation of the said judgment; that the 

appeal  of  the  National  Accountability  Bureau  against  the  said 

order  dated  12.05.2015  has  been  dismissed  by  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court;  and  that  respondent  No.1,  vide 

impugned 

notification  dated  03.12.2014,  forfeited  the  petitioner’s  pension, 

and  recalled  all  other  facilities  availed  by  the  petitioner  and  his 

family.  

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the 

sole  ground 

for 

issuing 

the 

impugned  notification  dated 

03.12.2014  is  the  judgment  dated  27.11.2014;  that  respondent 

No.1  did  not  consider  the  petitioner’s  meritorious  record  before 

issuing  the  said 

impugned  notification;  that  pension 

is  the 

petitioner’s  only  source  of  income;  and  that  the  forfeiture  of  the 

petitioner’s  income  has  violated  the  petitioner's  fundamental 

rights.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  prayed  for  the  writ 

petition to be allowed and for  the impugned notification  to be set 

aside.    

4. 

On the other hand, the position taken by the learned counsel 

for  respondent  No.1  was  that  writ  petition  was  not  maintainable; 

that    since  the  service  rules  of  T.I.P.  are  not  statutory  in  nature, 

the  instant  petition  is  liable  to  be  dismissed.  In  this  regard, 

reliance was placed on the judgment dated 24.03.2011, passed by 

the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  Civil  Appeal  No.424/2009  titled 

"Fakhar-ul-Islam  Qureshi  VS  Government  of  Pakistan  through 

Secretary, Ministry of Finance".  

5. 

Furthermore, 

learned  counsel 

for 

respondent  No.1 

contended  that  the  petitioner’s  conviction  by  the 

learned 

accountability  Court  has  till  date  not  been  set  aside  by  the 

appellate forum; and that the mere suspension of a sentence does 

not  do  away  with  a  conviction.  In  this  regard,  he  placed  reliance 

on  the  judgments  reported  as  PLD  1990  SC  823,  2013  CLC  1856 

3 

W.P.No.322/2016 

and 2003 CLC 300. He submitted that if the petitioner’s conviction 

is  set-aside  by  the  appellate  forum,  the  order  whereby  the 

petitioner’s  pension  was  forfeited,  would  be  recalled  and  he 

would  be  paid  his  pensionary  benefits.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.1 prayed for the writ petition to be dismissed. 

6. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting parties, and have perused the record. 

7. 

I  propose  first  to  deal  with  the  preliminary  objection  taken 

by  the  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  regarding  the 

maintainability  of  this  petition.  The  admitted  position  is  that  the 

service rules of T.I.P. are not statutory. The stance of the learned 

counsel for respondent No.1 is that since T.I.P. is a public limited 

company with no statutory service rules, the writ petition seeking 

the  setting  aside  of  the  notification,  whereby  the  petitioner’s 

pension  was  forfeited  on  the  ground  of  his  conviction  by  the 

accountability  Court,  is  not  maintainable.  The  service  rules 

governing the petitioner’s service in T.I.P. were not statutory. 

8. 

The question whether a writ petition can be filed against the 

T.I.P.  by  an  employee  aggrieved  of  T.I.P.’s  decision  with  respect 

to  his  service,  was  considered  and  decided  by  the  Hon'ble 

Supreme Court in the judgment dated 24.03.2011, passed in Civil 

Appeal  No.424/2009,  titled  “Fakhar-ul-Islam  Qureshi  etc.  VS 

Government  of  Pakistan  through  Ministry  of  Finance  etc.”  T.I.P. 

was respondent No.2 in the said appeal. The appellants, who were 

retired  employees  of  T.I.P.,  were  seeking  an  increase  in  the 

pensionary benefits in the same way as were being paid to former 

government employees or employees of organizations owned and 

controlled  by  the  Federal Government.  The  said  appeal  was  filed 

by an employee of T.I.P. after his writ petition had been dismissed 

by  this  Court.  Vide  the  said  judgment  dated  24.03.2011,  the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court held that since T.I.P.’s service rules were 

not statutory, the writ petition filed by the employee of T.I.P. with 

4 

W.P.No.322/2016 

respect to a matter concerning his service, was not maintainable. 

It  is  pertinent  to  reproduce  herein  below  paragraphs  4  and  5  of 

the said judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court:- 

“4.  Heard. While arguing the matter, learned counsel for the 
appellants  has  categorically  admitted  that  the  constitution 
petition filed by the appellants would only be competent, if the 
rules on which the appellants are basing their right are ‘Statutory 
Rules’ in nature. We are also of the view that notwithstanding the 
company  being  a  corporate  body,  having  the  control  and 
management of the Government and also performing functions in 
relation to the State or not, no writ can be issued, if it does not 
have the ‘statutory rules’ of service, therefore, without in any way 
dilating  upon  the  first  two  propositions,  we  are  confining 
ourselves to this aspect of the case. To show that the rules are 
statutory, the learned counsel for the appellants has specifically 
referred to “Executive Pension Rules – 1986 of the respondent 
No.2”, when asked, he has stated that these rules have been 
approved by the Federal Government and regarding this, mention 
is made to Rules 6 and 7 which read as under:- 
“6.  Amendment in Pension Rules 

Amendment to these Pension Rules can only be made 
with  the  prior  approval  of  the  Board  after  with  the  prior 
approval/concurrence of the Federal Government. 
7.  Where the TIP Executive Pension Rules 1986, are silent, 
the corresponding provision of Pension Rules / Regulations / 
Instructions  applicable  to  Civil  Servants  of  the  Federal 
Government shall apply to the TIP Executive also.” 

He  has  also  been  made  reference  to  letters  dated 
14.5.1986 and 29.1.1986  to urge that these rules were submitted 
for  the  approval  of  the Ministry  of  Finance, Government  of 
Pakistan and were so finally approved. 
5. 
It is an admitted position that respondent No.2 has not 
been constituted by any Act of the Parliament/Statutes, rather it 
is a body corporate formed under the company law, obviously in 
such  a  situation  there  is  no  authority  and mandate  of  law 
empowering anyone to make the rules, which could in terms of 
that specific law be approved by the Federal Government; it is 
only the Articles of Association perhaps, that the rule making 
mechanism is envisaged. These Articles cannot be considered to 
be the substitute of law, therefore, if any rules have been drawn 
under the articles and got approved even from the Federal 
Government, such rule do not attain the status of “Statutory 
Rules’, for the purpose of which it is imperative that the rule 
making power and authority must originate, spring from and arise 
from a Statute. Thus, even assuming as argued by learned 
counsel  for  the  appellants  that  respondent  No.2  is  a  body 
corporate, controlled and managed by the Federal Government 
and  some  of  its  functions  are  in  furtherance  of  the  State 
activities, yet, when the rules do not qualify the test of being 
‘Statutory  Rules’,  only  for  the  reason  that  the  Federal 

 
 
 
5 

W.P.No.322/2016 

Government as a superfluous exercise and without the mandate 
of law has approved the rules; such cannot be held to be 
statutory. Therefore, on that account the constitution petition 
was untenable. As the said proposition has been resolved in the 
matter against the appellants, therefore, in the light thereof, we 
do not find it appropriate to dilate upon the other question on 
which the leave was granted in this matter.” 

9. 

In the case of Pir Imran Sajid VS Managing Director/General 

Manager (Manger Finance) Telephone Industries of Pakistan etc. 

(2015 SCMR 1257) the appellants were seeking the regularization 

of  their  services  in  T.I.P.  on  the  basis  of  a  decision  of  the  Sub-

Committee  of  the  Cabinet  on  Regularization  of  contract/daily 

wages  employees  in  T.I.P.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  while 

allowing  the  said  appeal  against  the  judgment  of  the  Hon'ble 

Peshawar  High  Court,  whereby  the  writ  petitions  filed  by  T.I.P.’s 

employees  seeking  the  regularization  of  their  services,  was 

cognizant of its earlier judgment dated 24.03.2011, passed in Civil 

Appeal  No.424/2009,  and  distinguished  the  same  in  the  following 

terms:- 

“5.  ………….. The learned counsel for the respondents, in 
support of his second objection i.e. lack of statutory service 
rules, relied upon the judgment in the case of Fakhr-ur-Islam 
Qureshi (Civil Appeal No.424 of 2009), authored by one of us 
(Mian Saqib Nisar, J.), whereby the said appeal was dismissed on 
the  ground  that  relationship  between  the  appellant,  retired 
employee and TIP is not governed by statutory rules. Such 
reliance, in our view, is wholly mis-placed for the reason, that 
unlike in the present case the appellants therein were seeking 
pensionary benefits on the basis of pensionary rules, which rules 
were non-statutory. Whereas in the present case, the appellants 
are seeking implementation of the directive of the Prime Minister 
of Pakistan and the decision of the cabinet sub-committee for 
their  regularization  sought  to  be  enforced  by  the  relevant 
ministry.” 

10.  Since the judgment dated 24.03.2011, passed by the Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  in  Civil  Appeal  No.424/2009  holds  good,  and  has 

not  been  over  turned  by  the  judgment  reported  as  2015 SCMR 

1257,  the preliminary  objection  raised  by  the learned  counsel for 

respondent  No.1  regarding  T.I.P.’s  service  rules  to  be  non-

 
 
 
6 

W.P.No.322/2016 

statutory,  succeeds.  Resultantly,  this  petition  is  dismissed  as  not 

maintainable. I refrain from touching the merits of the case, lest it 

may  prejudice  to  the  parties  case  before  the  competent  forum. 

There  is  catena  of  case  law  in  support  of  the  view  that  where  a 

Court holds a petition not to be maintainable, it ought not to delve 

into  or  give  findings  or  even  observations  on  the  merits  of  the 

case.  Reference  in  this  regard  may  be  made  to  the  judgments  in 

the  cases  of  S.M.  Waseem  Ashraf  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan 

through Secretary, Ministry of Housing & Works and others (2013 

SCMR 338), Yousuf A. Haroon VS Custodian of the Karachi Hotel 

Project  (2004  CLC  1967),  and  Messrs  Voyage  de  Air,  General 

Sales  Agent,  Shaheen  Air 

International  VS  Shaheen  Air 

International Pvt. Ltd. (2006 CLC 173). There shall be no order as 

to costs.    

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2018 

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

Qamar Khan*  

        (JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
