JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J.--Through the instant writ petition, the petitioner seeks 
setting  aside  of  the  order  dated  06-01-2016,  passed  by  learned  Judge  Family  Court  (West) 
Islamabad and also prays for dismissal of suit filed by respondent No.1. 

2. 
Succinctly, the petitioner has mentioned in his petition, that respondent No.1 was married 
with Bilal Fazil who is the real son of the present petitioner. However, the relation between the 
parties became strained and respondent No.1 was divorced vide certificate of divorce dated 11-03-
2013.  Respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance,  dower  and  dowry 
articles  against  Bilal  Fazil  and  Mst.  Shahida  Fazil  (the  present  petitioner).  The  said  suit  was 
contested  by  the  present  petitioner/defendant.  While  filing  the  written  statement,  Bilal  Fazil/ 
defendant No.1 raised the preliminary objection that the plaintiff (respondent No.1) has not filed 
these proceedings rather the same have been initiated by the mother of Mst. Hina Tahir (respondent 
No.1). On 29-10-2014, Mst. Farhat Nigar real mother of respondent No.1 appeared as witness of 
the plaintiff and filed her affidavit in evidence claiming to be the special attorney of respondent 
No.1/plaintiff  executed  on  26-09-2012.  However,  on  23-04-2015  respondent  No.1  filed  the 
application for amendments in the plaint wherein, it was also mentioned that inadvertently while 
drafting  the  plaint  in  the  title  the  words  "through  Ms.  Farhat  Nigar  the  General  Attorney  and 
biological mother of the Plaintiff" are missing. The said application was contested by the present 
petitioner however, vide impugned order dated 06-01-2016 the learned Judge Family Court (West) 
Islamabad accepted the said application, hence, the instant writ petition. 

3. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the impugned order is completely against 
the  settled  principles  of  law;  that  precise  objection  was  taken  by  the  petitioner  in  respect  of 
maintainability of the suit; that special power of attorney for filing the suit was produced at the 
time  of  evidence;  that  Mst.  Farhat  Nigar  admitted  in  her  cross-examination  admitted  that  no 
specific permission was granted to her for filing of the suit by the plaintiff. Learned counsel for 
the petitioner has relied upon PLD 2012 (Lahore) 420, 2014 CLC 11 (Lahore), 2015 YLR 2364 
(Sindh) and 2003 YLR 3309 (Karachi). 

4. 
Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.1 has argued that the order dated 06-01-
2016 does not suffer from any legal infirmity and it is well within four corners of law. Learned 
counsel has further argued that instant writ petition is not maintainable against the interim order 
passed by the learned Judge Family Court (West) Islamabad. Learned counsel has relied upon PLD 
1973 Supreme Court 236, PLD 1974 Supreme Court 139, 2011 CLC 417, PLD 1973 Supreme 
Court 49, 2011 CLC 1836 (Lahore) and 2012 CLC 679 (Lahore). 

5. 

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. 

From  the  perusal  of  record  it  reflects  that  respondent  No.1  through  an  application  had 

6. 
sought for insertion of following of words in the plaint:-- 

In the title of the plaint the words "through Ms. Farhat Nigar the General Attorney 

"(i) 
and real biological mother of the plaintiff". 

(ii) 

To replace the amount Rs.4100,000/- by Rs.3,80,000/- in para 2 of the plaint and  

(iii) 

In para No.14 the word "Kingston" to be replaced by word "King Hospital." 

Learned Judge Family Court (West), Islamabad accepted the said application vide order dated 06-
01-2016. 

7. 
From the perusal of record and impugned order it is very much evident that Special Power 
of  Attorney  in  favour  of  Mst.  Nighar  dated  26-09-2012  is  available  on  record  which  has  been 
considered by the learned Family Judge in order dated 06-01-2016, the second Special Power of 
Attorney dated 25-06-2015 which was also referred in the said order, executed at Islamabad for 
the present  Family Suit confirms the availability of two Special Power of Attorneys before the 

 
 
  
 
Family Court and it is also admitted proposition of law that application of C.P.C. and Qanun-e-
Shahadat are excluded, hence, Family Court has power to regulate its own proceedings depending 
upon circumstances of each suit. However, basic procedure for filing of suit, written statement, 
Pre-trial  proceedings,  recording  of  evidence  and  conclusion  of  trial  were  defined  but  certain 
eventualities were not defined in the special law, hence, Family Court can regulate its proceeding 
on the general principle of law. As such, the impugned order passed by learned Judge Family Court 
(West)  Islamabad  does  not  suffer  from  any  legal  infirmity.  Even  otherwise,  the  evidence  of 
respondent No.1 has yet not been completed which is evident from the order Sheet dated 07-04-
2015. In such eventuality the contents, validity and effect of the Attorney on the Proceedings of 
the suit as well as on the fate of the suit shall ultimately be decided by the court at the time of final 
decision of the suit. Moreover, it is settled principle of law that interlocutory order is an order in 
which no final verdict is pronounced, but an ancillary order is passed with the intention to keep 
the same operative till final order/decision is passed in the pending matter. It is also observed that 
under the relevant laws legislature has not provided remedy of appeal, revision or review against 
an interim order. In this regard I am fortified by the dictum laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  in  judgment  reported  as  (1996  SCMR  1165)  "Syed  Saghir  Ahmed  Naqvi  v. 
Province of Sindh through Chief Secretary S&GAD, Karachi and others" wherein it was held that:-
- 

"Constitutional jurisdiction, exercise of statute excluding a right of appeal from the interim 
order could not be bypassed by bringing under attack such interim orders in constitutional 
jurisdiction. Party affected has to wait till it matures into a final order and then to attack it 
in the proper exclusive forum created for the purpose of examining such order." 

In this regard I am also fortified by the view taken by the Hon'ble Lahore High Court, Lahore in 
case reported as "Syed Qadas Abbas v. Mst. Samina Shahbaz" (2010 CLC 32) [Lahore]. Similar 
view  has  also  been  taken  by  the  Sindh  High  Court  in  judgment  reported  as  (2015  MLD  840) 
[Sindh]). Moreover, the Hon'ble Division Bench of Islamabad High Court vide judgment reported 
as, 2014 CLC 330 [Islamabad] has already  held that no  writ petition lies against interim order 
passed by a Judge Family Court. Hence, the order dated 06-01-2016 passed by the learned Judge 
Family Court does not suffer from any legal infirmity and is well within four corners of law. 

8. 
Before parting with this order, it is observed with great concern that suit which is subject 
matter of the instant writ petition was filed on 08-4-2013. According to section 12-A of the West 
Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964, Family Court is under legislative direction to decide the case 
within six months. However, no material efforts have been made by the court concerned for early 
disposal of the said suit. Therefore, Family Court seized with the matter is directed to decide the 
suit within one month of the receipt of the instant order. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  without  any  merits. 

9. 
Resultantly, the same stands dismissed. 

Disclaimer: The  content  available on  this document are  just for Information.  Users are 
advised not to depend on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad is not responsible for any damages arising in contract from the use of 
the content of this site. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
