JUDGMENT 

  MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.---Through  this  writ  petition,  the  petitioner  has 
assailed the order dated  04.03.2019,  passed  by  the learned  Family  Judge  (East),  Islamabad, 
whereby  interim  maintenance  allowance  in  favour  of  minor  to  the  tune  of  Rs.50,000/ -  per 
month has been fixed. 

2.  Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  Dr.  Aqueel  Waris/petitioner 
and  Dr.  Maryam  Khan/respondent  No.2  married  on  07.12.2012  and  they  were  blessed  with 
minor  son  namely  Ibrahim  Aqueel  Waris/respondent  No.1  on  01.01.2014.  However,  the 
marriage  was  dissolved  vide  judgment  and  decree  20.02.2018,  passed  by  learned  Family 
Judge (East), Islamabad. Respondent No.1 is currently in custody of Respondent No.2, who 
has  filed  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  to  the  tune  of  Rs.55,500/ -  against  the 
petitioner on account of diverse expenses of the minor i.e. school and tuition fee, stationary, 
uniform,  travelling,  sports  and  extra  curriculum  activities,  food,  health,  medical  care,  etc. 
Respondent  No.2  contends that  the  petitioner has  not  paid  a  single  penny  as  a  maintenance 
despite the fact that petitioner is qualified physician/doctor, who is settled in Ireland serving 
as Surgical Tutor in the Royal College of Surgeon, Ireland (RCSI) and he is also serving as 
Registrar in RCSI having monthly salary of €500 (Euros), which is approximately equivalent 
to  PKR.680,000/-.  The  petitioner  contested  the  suit  by  filing  his  written  statement  with  the 
stance  that  his  monthly  salary  is  €2496.92  and  after  deduction  of  €941.02,  his  net  salary  is 
€1555.90,  which  is  approximately  equal  to  PKR.211,480/-,  whereas  he  is  paying  €1,000  as 
house rent, while in the rest of the amount, he has to maintain his family and parents. In this 
context,  the  petitioner  has  tendered  in  evidence  his  salary  slip  of  Feidhmeannacht  na 
Seirbhi'se  Sla'inte,  Health  Service  Executive  along  with  his  bank  account  statement  in  the 
learned  Trial  Court.  However,  the  learned  Family  Judge  (East),  Islamabad  vide  impugned 
order dated 04.03.2019 has passed interlocutory order of interim maintenance to the tune of 
Rs.50,000/- per month in favour of respondent No.1/minor son against the petitioner/father. 
Hence, the instant writ petition. 

3.  Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the  learned  Family  Judge  while 
considering the pleadings of the parties has fixed the interim maintenance on higher side and 
as such, the order for interim maintenance allowance of the minor is unlawful and has been 
passed  in  violation  of  settled  principle  of  laws;  that  the  Family  Court  has  to  consider 
financial status of father while passing order of interim maintenance; that such kind of harsh 
order  will  not  only  deprive  the  father  /  petitioner  from  contesting  the  suit  on  merits,  but  it 
also creates a ground for technical knockout, which itself is violation of Articles 4, 9, and 10 -
A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 as it amounts to negation of 
principles of fair trial. 

4.  Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  contends  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
petitioner being father to maintain the minor and provide all the requisites of life including 
shelter,  food,  clothing  and  protection  to  the  minor,  which  is  lacking  in  this  case  and 
petitioner being father is not providing all these necessities of life, rather he is not interested 
to pay the interim maintenance, which otherwise proves that petitioner is not interested in the 
welfare of minor; that the order impugned before this Court is of interlocutory nature and the 
same could not be assailed in constitutional jurisdiction.  

5.  Arguments heard, record perused. 

6.  The perusal of record reveals that the petitioner being father of minor namely Ibrahim 
Aqueel Waris/respondent  No.1 is  aggrieved  with the  order  dated  04.03.2019, passed  by  the 
learned  Family  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  whereby  interim  maintenance  allowance  in   favour 
of minor has been fixed @ Rs.50,000/- per month. The petitioner being father contends that 
his  monthly  salary  being  a  doctor  in  Ireland  is  €2496.92,  while  he  is  taking  net  salary  is 
€1555.90 after deduction of €941.20, and out of his net salary he  is paying €1000 as rent and 
as  such,  in  the  remaining  amount  of  €555.90,  he  has  to  maintain  his  parents  and  sister  at 
home, therefore, the interim maintenance allowance fixed by the learned Family Court is on 
higher side and order impugned is harsh in nature. 

7.  While  considering  the  above  background,  this  Court  has  to  deal  with  question  that 
what  are  the  principles  to  fix  the  interim  maintenance  by  the  learned  Family  Judge?  While 
going  through  the  question  framed  above,  it  is  necessary  to  firstly  consider  the  primary 
source of law being Muslim citizens of Pakistan i.e. the Holy Quran, wherein the subject has 
been dealt in details, particular in Surah Baqarah and Surah Talaq. The specific verses of the 
said Surahs have been respectively reproduced as under: 

8. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  different  sayings  of  the  Holy  Prophet  (PBUH)  with 
respect  to  issue  in  hand  and  for  ready  reference,  one  of  the  sayings  of  the  Holy  Prophet 
(PBUH) is reproduced as under: 

"It  was  narrated  that  'Aa'ishah  said:  "Hind  bint  'Utbah,  the  wife  of  Abu  Sufyaan, 
entered  upon  the  Messenger  of  Allaah  (peace  and  blessings  of  Allaah  be  upon  him) 
and said, 'O Messenger of Allaah, Abu Sufyaan is a stingy man who does not spend 
enough  on  me  and  my  children,  except  for  what  I  take  from  his  wealth  without  his 
knowledge.  Is  there  any  sin  on  me  for  doing  that?'  The  Messenger  of  Allaah  (peace 
and  blessings  of  Allaah  be  upon  him)  said,  'Take  from  his  wealth  on  a  reasonable 
basis,  only  what  is  sufficient  for  you  and  your  children.'"  (Narrated  by  al-Bukhaari, 
5049; Muslim, 1714)." 

9.  Besides the  above  referred  guidelines,  I  have  also  gone  through the judgment of  the 
Lahore High Court reported as PLD 2016 Lahore 73 (Ali Adnan Dar v. Judge Family Court), 
wherein it has been held that: 

Father was under legal as well as moral obligation to maintain and support his minor 
daughter as per injunction of Islam. 

It has further been observed in the abovementioned case law that: 

The family court while passing the interim maintenance was required to give the  bear 
minimum to the minor. 

Similarly, it has also been held in the same judgment that: 

Interim maintenance was sufficient to meet day to day expense of minor. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.  Likewise, in another judgment reported as 2011 MLD 1105 Lahore (Amir Mehmood 

Hussain v. Niha Amir Syed), it has been held that: 

The interim maintenance has been fixed only after tentative assessment status of the 
petitioner and expense being incurred on the education and ther necessities. 

11.  In addition to above, in case reported as 2015 YLR 2364 (Tahir Ayub Khan v. Miss 

Alia Anwar), it has been held that: 

Family Courts have no unfettled or unbridled powers to fix the interim maintenance at 
its discretion as they are required to adopt a pragmatic, rational and judicial approach, 
broadly  keeping  in  mind  the  social  status  of  the  parties,  the  earnings  of  the 
petitioner/father, his capacity to pay and requirement of the minor. 

12.  Besides the above referred judgments on the question of maintainability, the Division 
Bench of this Court in reported case 2018 CLC 506 Islamabad (Minhaaj Saqib v. Najum ul 
Saqib  and  others)  has  also  settled  the  question  of  maintainability  of  writ  petition  against 
interim order, wherein it has been held that High Court could not interfere with interim order 
of lower court for reducing maintenance allowance of minors. 

13.  I  have  also  gone  through  the  judgment  rendered  by  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court 
reported  as  PLD  2016  Lahore  73  (Ali  Adnan  Dar  v.  Judge  Family  Court,  and  others), 
wherein it has been held that if the father found that the interim maintenance was excessive 
or  order  suffers  from  any  illegality,  irregularity  or  is  arbitrary,  fanciful,  and  void  ab  initio 
without jurisdiction or same had attained the status of final order, then constitutional petition 
is  maintainable.  Similarly,  certain  guidelines  have  been  set  in  supra  judgment  regarding 
fixation of interim maintenance of minor, which plays a key role while passing such order. 
For ready reference, the same are reproduced as under: 

"I.  Maintenance  allowance  is  indispensable  right  of  the  mother  and  children,  so  the 
order  for  grant  of  maintenance  allowance  must  be  passed  at  a  "convenient  stage"  of 
the proceedings. 

II. Although section 17-A of the ibid Act empowers Family Court to pass an order for 
grant  of  interim  maintenance  allowance  at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings,  in  the 
normality  of  the  circumstances,  it  must  be  passed  after  hearing  "both of  the  parties" 
unless the attitude and conduct of the defendant/father is evasive. 

III.  The  order  for  grant  of  interim  maintenance  is  made  on  the  basis  of  tentative 
assessment  of  the  material  available  on  file  and  keeping  in  view  the  social  status  of 
the  parties.  Further,  both  the  above,  material  available  and  social  status,  should  be 
mentioned in the order for the grant of interim maintenance. Further the quantum of 
interim  maintenance  should  be  "bare  minimum"  to meet  the  day  to  day  needs  of  the 
recipient in the narrow context. 

IV. Although the family laws have been enacted to promote, protect and advance the 
rights  of  women  and  children  yet  at  the  interim  stage,  the  version  of  the 
respondent/defendant  be  given  a  sympathetic  or  somewhat  preferable  consideration 
because,  non-payment  of  interim  maintenance  allowance  will  cut  throat  of  his 
invaluable  right  i.e.  "right  to  defence"  and  in  consequential  effects,  children/women 
would be the losing and deprived parties. 

V.  Further, if  the  case is  not  decided  within  the  statutory  period  as  given  in  Section 
12-A  of  the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  either  party  may  apply  to  the 
High  Court  for  appropriate  direction.  However,  the  order  for  grant  of  interim 
maintenance shall hold the field unless reviewed by High Court under section 12 -A or 
Family Court itself reviews it at any stage as observed below. 

VI. Family Court, according to section I2-A" of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 
1964,  is  under  legislative  direction  to  decide  the  case  within  six  months.  Although 
this  provision  is  directive  as  no  penalty/consequences  are  mentioned  for  non -
compliance  and  in  this regard  reference  is  made  to  (2001 SCMR  1001).  But  in  case 
the matter is not decided within six months and the delay is due to the plaintiff party, 
then  Family  Court  either  on  its  own  motion  or  on  the  application  of  the 
defendant/father review its earlier order for grant of interim maintenance allowance." 

14.  While considering the principles laid down in the Holy Quran, Sun'ah as well as in the 
aforesaid  judgments  of  superior  Courts  of  the  country,  this  Court  is  of  the  view  that  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Almighty  Allah  has  already  settled  the  principles  in  Surah  Tal'aq  and  Surah  Bakarah  in 
"  i.e.  "capacity"  and  this  concept  has  been 
unequivocal  terms  by  using  the  word  " 
followed  by  the  superior  Courts.  Accordingly,  this  Court  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  any 
order  in  which  the  financial  capacity  of  the  father  vis-a-vis  his  own  expenses  has  not  been 
considered properly by  the Judge Family Court, the order of interim maintenance would be 
considered  unjust,  perverse,  harsh,  excessive  and  fanciful,  which  will  further  create  an 
imbalance qua the rights of father, who will suffer due to socio-economic factors as he would 
not be in a position to comply with the terms of interlocutory order in terms of section 17 -A 
of the Family Courts Act, 1964, where no appeal has been provided and in such a manner, he 
has  been  deprived  of  his  constitutional  guarantees  of  equal  protection  of  law  in  terms  of 
Article 4 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, whereby the State has 
given its assurance for such guarantee. 

15.  Similarly,  on  the  other  hand,  such  harsh  order  of  higher  maintenance  in  favour  of 
minor  would  amount  to  creating  financial  problems  for  a  father,  especially  when  he  would 
not be able to comply with the terms of the interlocutory order, his right to contest the suit on 
merit would close and he would be knocked out by the Judge Family Court on failing to pay 
interim  maintenance  and  accordingly  his  suit  will  be  decided  forthwith,  which,  in  some 
cases,  is  violation  of  right  to  fair  trial  and  due  process  in  terms  of  Article  10 -A  of  the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

16.  While  considering  the  above  discussion,  interlocutory  orders  of  the  Judge  Family 
Court could not be assailed in constitutional jurisdiction, even though in some of cases they 
are  harsh,  but  the  determination  of  adequacy  or  inadequacy  of  the  quantum  of  maintenance 
would certainly require factual evidence or inquiry which cannot be made in the proceedings 
under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  as  held  in 
2018  CLC  Note  43  (Shameneh  Haider  and  others  v.  Haider  Ali  Khan),  2011  MLD  1105 
Lahore (Amir Mehmood Hussain v. Niha Amir Syed), 2015 YLR 2364 (Tahir Ayub Khan v. 
Miss Alia Anwar), PLD 2012 Lahore 420 (Ibrar Hussain v. Mehvish Rana and others), and 
PLD  2013  Lahore  64  (Muhammad  Shahbaz  Khalid  v.  Judge  Family  Court,  Lahore). 
Although, the underlining legal principles to consider this legal aspect is the intention of the 
legislature,  who  has  specifically  prohibited  filing  of  appeal  against  interim  order,  allowing 
constitutional petition would tantamount to defeating and diverting intent of the legislature. 
Even otherwise, there is no bar under the law to challenge the void ab initio orders, which are 
without  jurisdiction.  Learned  counsel  for  respondents  has  also  explained  the  principle  of 
interlocutory  order  while  relying  upon  judgment  reported  as  1999  SCMR  1447  (Mohtarma 
Benazir  Bhutto  v.  The  State),  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  orders  at  interlocutory  stages 
should  not  be  brought  to  higher  courts  to  obtain  pragmatic  orders  as  it  intends  to  harm  the 
advancement of fair trial, curtailing remedies available under the law, and even reducing the 
right of appeal. 

17.  The  epitome  of  entire  discussion  gives  a  complete  insight  that  father  should  not  be 
punished by way of interim maintenance allowance order so that he would not be able to pay 
the  maintenance  and  resulted  into  consequences  provided  in  Section  17-A  of  the  Family 
Courts  Act,  1964,  therefore,  it  is  the  imperative  duty  of  the  Family  Court  to  adopt  a 
pragmatic approach and fix the interim maintenance on the following principles: 

i.  Financial  status  of  father  shall  be  kept  in  view,  which  should  be  based  upon  salary 
slips, bank statements, income tax record, and business income reflected on record or 
through any other documentary proof placed by either side in the Court. 

ii. 

Interim  maintenance  should  be  fixed  not  on  hard  and  fast  principles,  rather  based 
upon a tentative view. 

iii.  Maintenance  should  not  be  fixed  on  a  higher  side,  which  may  result  into  technical 
knockout  of  the  father  so  that  he  could  not  able  to  pay  the  interim  maintenance, 
therefore,  his  option  should  also  be  considered  for  payment  of  interim  maintenance, 
which he agrees to pay before the Family Court. 

iv.  In cases, where father has not explained his monthly income or his financial status in 
the pleadings, rather concealed his income, the Family Court can rely upon the facts 
narrated in plaint or on the basis of attached documents vis-a-vis the needs of minor 
and  the  verbal stance  given  by  father  without  reference  to  his  written statement  will 
not be considered justified, hence the Family Court shall exercise discretion to fix the 
interim maintenance while applying the above principles. 

v. 

In cases, where determination of adequacy or inadequacy of quantum of maintenance 
requires  factual  inquiry  and  evidence  in  trial,  the  maintenance  should  be  fixed  after 
consultation  with  the  father  and  mother  as  well  as  keeping  in  view  the  day-to-day 
requirements of minor. 

vi.  The needs of minor should be considered on the basis of social stratification of family 

in which minor has been brought up. 

vii.  The financial status of father could also be considered on the basis of facts narrated in 
pleadings of the parties, which includes the living standard and previous matrimon ial 
life of the parties in which the mother/wife has been provided with particular kind of 
living,  housing  facilities,  transportation,  gifts,  immovable  properties  of  husband  and 
the  lifestyle  in  which  husband/father  was  living  prior  to  separation  or  divorce  or 
before the institution of suit for maintenance. 

viii. In  cases,  where  father  being  civil  servant  or  employee  of  any  organization, 
department  or  company  has  not  appended  his  salary  slips  or  bank  statements,  the 
Family  Court  shall  ask  for  an  undertaking  or  affidavit  regarding  his  salary  and 
thereafter shall fix the interim mairitenance, however after the trial of the case, if the 
court  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  at  the  time  of  fixation  of  interim  maintenance 
allowance  the  father/husband  has  stated  a  fact  beyond  his  pleadings  or  undertaking, 
which  is  found  to  be  false,  such  father  be  burdened  with  heavy  costs  and  action  of 
perjury may also be initiated against him. 

ix.  The  Family  Court  may  also  call  the  employer  of  father,  HR  department,  admin 
department, bank managers, land revenue department, tax record, and banking details 
as well as salary details of the father directly from the relevant offices while deciding 
the  question  of  interim  maintenance  for  a  prima  facie  view  to  fix  the  allowance  in 
favour  of  minor  so  that  no  inadequacy  is  attributed  while  fixing  the  maintenance 
allowance. 

18.  While  applying  the  above  principles  in  present  scenario,  when  the  petitioner/father 
has  taken  the  plea  that  since  he  is  left  with  €555  in  his  hand  after  deduction  of  tax   and 
payment  of  other  expenses,  he  could  not  pay  the  interim  maintenance  of  Rs.50,000/ -  per 
month  to  the  minor/respondent  No.1,  which  prima  facie  seems  to  be  on  higher  side  at  this 
stage, but this Court, in constitutional jurisdiction, is not able to determine this factual aspect 
of  adequacy  or  inadequacy  of  the  interim  maintenance  allowance  on the  basis  of  principles 
laid  down  by  the  superior  Courts,  where  such  order  could  not  be  assailed  in  constitutional 
jurisdiction.  However, in  order to  avoid  any  conflict, the Judge  Family  Court is directed to 
decide  the  pending  maintenance  suit  within  the  period  of  one  month  while  recording  the 
evidence  on  day  to  day  basis  so  that  the  father/petitioner  could  only  be  burdened  with  the 
interim maintenance of Rs.50,000/-  for a month, which would be subsequently merged into 
the final judgment or in case it may be decreased or otherwise on the basis of evidence.  

19.  In view of above, the instant writ petition is hereby DISMISSED with the direction to 

the Judge Family Court seized with the matter to conclude the suit within 30 working days. 

  Petition dismissed. 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
