Form No: HCJD/C-121. 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No. 2035 of 2019 

Tasleema Bibi 
VS 
SSP, Islamabad etc 

PETITIONER BY: 
RESPONDENTS BY: 

Mr. Muhammad Farooq, Advocate. 
Mr. Rabi Bin Tariq, State Counsel. 
Mr. Waqar Ud Din Sayed, DIG (Operation), 
Islamabad. 
Mr. Kamran Adil, AIG, Islamabad. 
Mr. Ghulam Muhammad Baqir, DSP, Islamabad. 
Mr. Azhar Shah, DSP, Islamabad. 

DATE OF HEARING: 

28-05-2019. 

ATHAR  MINALLAH,  CJ.-  The petitioner has invoked 

the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973, alleging that respondents no.4 and 5 

were kept in illegal confinement by respondent no.3. 

2. 

The facts, in brief, are that respondents no.4 and 5 namely, 

Ali Sher and Hamza, who are nephews of the petitioner and stated to 

be 12 and 14 years old respectively, were alleged to have been abducted 

by Saqib Mahmood, Assistant Sub Inspector on 13.05.2019 and kept in 

illegal  confinement.  The  petitioner  had  also  alleged  that  when  she 

approached respondent no.2 i.e. the Incharge of Police Station, Golra, 

Islamabad namely, Muhammad Arshad, Inspector, the latter threatened 

that  other  family  members  would  also  be  arrested  unless  the  elder 

brother of the two children surrenders himself before the  Investigating 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2  W.P.No.2035 of 2019 

Officer. The petitioner had filed a petition under section 491 of the Code 

of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (hereinafter referred to as the “Cr. P. C”) 

and  pursuant  thereto  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-West, 

Islamabad  vide  order,  dated  18.05.2019  had  appointed  a  Bailiff  to 

conduct the search of the Police Station. The Bailiff after conducting the 

search  and  enquiring  from  the  concerned  officials  had  submitted  a 

written report. After perusal of the report the petition was disposed of. 

The petitioner,  thereafter, invoked the jurisdiction of  this Court under 

Article 199 of the Constitution. 

3. 

In compliance with this Court’s order, dated 24.05.2019, the 

Senior  Superintendent  of  Police,  namely  Malik  Naeem  Iqbal  had 

appeared alongwith respondents no.2 and 3. On the last date of hearing 

this Court was informed that the two children i.e. respondents no. 4 and 

5 were indeed taken into custody by the Investigating Officer, despite 

the  fact,  that  they  were  not  involved  in  any  criminal  activity.  The 

Superintendent of Police had sought time in order to take appropriate 

action. The Inspector General of Police, Islamabad Capital Territory vide 

order,  dated  27.05.2019  was  directed  to  enquire  into  the  matter  and 

take  appropriate  action  in  accordance  with  law.  When  the  case  was 

taken  up  today,  Mr.  Waqar  Ud  Din  Sayed,  Deputy  Inspector  General 

(Operations),  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  submitted  a  written  report. 

The relevant portion of the report is as follows:- 

“ 1.  Mr. Waqar-ud-Din Sayed, DIG/Operations, Islamabad 

The DIG Operations has been directed to ensure that the rule of 

law is upheld and human rights fully protected and respected. He 

has been directed to ensure that highest standards of policing are 

followed in the working of the ICT Police. He has also been 

directed to ensure that no tolerance is shown to the police officers 

who abuse the process of law. The DIG Operations has been 

 
 
 
 
3  W.P.No.2035 of 2019 

directed to once again convey the directions to all from the level 

of the Zonal Ssp to the level of the Muharrars and to ensure 

personally that the system is institutionalized (Annex-A). 

2.  Malik Naeem Iqbal, SP/Saddar Zone 

He has been issued an explanation notice on account of his 

conduct and his failure to supervise officers under him especially 

the DSP and SHO. He has been directed to submit his reply within 

03 days on receipt of which, further action will be taken. (Annex- 

B) 

3.  Mr. Ghulam Muhammad Baqir, DSP/SDPO Saddar Circle 

He has been issued an explanation notice on account of his 

conduct and his failure to supervise officers under him especially 

the SHO and I.O. He has been directed to submit his reply within 

03 days on receipt of which, further action will be taken. (Annex- 

C) 

4. 

Inspector Arshad Ali No.ID/112, SHO/PS Golra and P/ASI 

Saqib Mahmood, Investigatiing Officer 

Both the officers have been placed under suspension and 

departmental action has been initiated against them (Annex-D). 

An FIR No.233/2019 u/s 328-A/344/506 PPC, Police Station Golra 

Sharif  has  also  been  registered  against  them  and  the 

DIG/Operations has been directed to arrest them. (Annex-E).“ 

4. 

This  Court  is  satisfied  that  the  Inspector  General  of  Police, 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory  has  taken  appropriate  action  against  the 

officials who had allegedly abducted the two children and had kept them 

in illegal confinement for a considerable time. It would be appropriate 

not to make any further observation, lest it may prejudice the right of 

fair  trial  of  the  accused  before  the  competent  Court.  Moreover,  this 

Court  records  its  appreciation  for  the  timely  action  taken  by  the 

Inspector General of Police, Islamabad Capital Territory and other senior 

officers,  which  would  definitely  help  in  improving  the  culture  of  the 

Police  Stations  of  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  and  make  public 

 
 
 
 
4  W.P.No.2035 of 2019 

functionaries  more  accountable  for  their  acts  and  omissions,  which 

affect the fundamental rights of the citizens. This Court expects that the 

Inspector  General  of  Police  and  the  other  officials  of  the  Police 

department  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  will  demonstrate  the 

same zeal in bringing about a meaningful change in the culture of the 

police stations of the Islamabad Capital Territory. It is further expected 

that fair and transparent investigations would be conducted pursuant to 

registration of FIR No.233/2019, dated 27.05.2019 against respondents 

no.2 and 3. 

5. 

It is noted that the Police Order, 2002 has become effective 

and  operative  in  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  because  the  Local 

Governments  established  and  elected  under  the  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  Local  Government  Act,  2015  have  assumed  their  respective 

offices.  Subsection  (3)  of  Section  1  of  the  Police  Order,  2002  has, 

therefore, taken effect and issuance of a notification in this regard has 

become a mere formality and a ministerial act. Consequently, Chapter 

XVII  titled  ‘Offences  by  and  Punishments  for  Police  Offers’  has  also 

become operative. Section 156 of the Police Order, 2002 declares that 

an officer who without lawful authority, or reasonable cause, enters or 

searches or causes to be entered or searched any building, vessel, tent 

or  place  or  vexatiously  and  unnecessarily  seizes  the  property  of  any 

person or vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or arrest any 

person or inflicts torture or violence to any person in his or her custody, 

shall,  for  every  such  offence,  on  conviction  be  punished  with 

imprisonment for a term, which may extend to five years and with fine. 

The  Inspector  General  of  Police,  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  may, 

therefore, also consider taking action under the said provisions in the 

instant  case.  The  Federal  Government  and  the  Chief  Commissioner, 

 
 
 
5  W.P.No.2035 of 2019 

Islamabad  Capital  Territory  are  expected  to  fulfill  their  respective 

obligations  under  the  Police  Order,  2002  for  ensuring  effective 

performance  and  accountability  of  the  Police  force  of  the  Islamabad 

Capital Territory. 

6. 

The  instant  petition  is,  therefore,  disposed  of  in  the  above 

terms. 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Approved for reporting. 

Asif Mughal* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
