JUDGMENT  SHEET. 
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No.1874/2019. 

Anique  Javaid 

VS 

Higher  Education  Commission  through  its 
Chairman,  Islamabad  etc. 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. M. Bilal, Advocate. 

Respondents No.2 & 3  by: 

Mr.  Shamshad Ullah Cheema, Advocate. 

Date  of Decision: 

06.03.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAY ANI.  J :- Through  the  instant  writ  petition,  the 

petitioner  has  assailed  the  letter  dated  27.03.2019  issued  by  the  Riphah  International 

University, Islamabad/respondents No.2 & 3, whereby admission granted to the petitioner 

in  Master  of  Science  in  Engineering  Management,  Faculty  of  Management  Sciences 

(FMS) was cancelled and he was expelled from the university. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  the  petitioner  was  not  given 

opportunity of hearing  and reasonable opportunity is required to refute the  allegations of 

harassment by the petitioner;  that  disciplinary  committee  did not  conduct the  inquiry in 

fair  manner  in  accordance  with  law  as  recommendations  were  never  supplied  to  the 

petitioner as such entire process of expulsion is based upon malafide to settle the vendetta 

against the petitioner. 

3. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  university  contends  that  the 

petitioner  was  found  involved  in  the  matter  of  sexual  harassment  and  an  inquiry  was 

initiated  on  the  complaint  of  respondent  No.4/Tayyaba  Mushtaq,  where-after  the 

respondents  university  after  applying  complete  mechanism  cancelled  admission  of the 

petitioner in accordance with law. 

4. 

5. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal of the record reveals that the petitioner has been expelled from the Riphah 

International University,  Islamabad by respondents No.2 & 3  vide impugned letter dated 

27.03.2019,  wherein  the  petitioner  was  student  of  Master  of  Science  in  Engineering 

Management,  Faculty of Management Sciences (FMS), which was near to completion. I 

have  gone through  the  complaint  filed by respondent  No.4/Tayyaba  Mushtaq,  in  which 

she has alleged the creation of fake account on face book by the petitioner to defame her 

W.P.  No.1874/2019. 

2 

in  her  family  and  friends.  The  matter  was  inquired  and  an  Inquiry  Committee  was 

constituted, even explanation has been called from the petitioner,  whereby the petitioner 

has taken the stance that all the acquisitions are false rather it has been stated before this 

Court  that  disciplinary  action  is  required  against  respondent  No.4.  The  respondents 

university  has  taken  specific  stance  that  the  university  has  adopted  policy  guidelines 

notified  by  HEC  against  sexual  harassment  and  all  necessary  steps  have  been  taken, 

whereby  the  petitioner  and  his  father  have  extended  explanation  in  writing  and 

participated in the  disciplinary proceedings, even appeal has been  filed by the petitioner 

before Vice  Chancellor, which was also dismissed and the university has found both the 

petitioner  and  respondent  No.4  in  activities  against  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the 

university as a result whereof admission of both the students have been cancelled. 

6. 

The record  of university  reflects that  they  have  cancelled  the  admission  of both 

the students only on the ground that  "the current  strained  relationship  between the  two 

is likelv  to create  uglv scene  on  the  campus  ifthev  are allowed to continue".  The said 

view was given by the committee of five senior professors. 

7. 

While considering the above position of record, it is trite law that the universities 

have  their  independent  authority  to  regulate  its  internal  affairs  and  Courts  should  not 

interfere with the  policy  matters  of the  educational  institutions. Reliance  is placed  upon 

2011  SCMR  1021  (Muhammad 

Ishfaq  Ahmed  Sia/  VS  Bahauddin  Zakariva 

Universitv>.  PLD  2006 SC  564 (Sveda Muhammad  Arif  VS  University o(Balochistan). 

2015 SCMR  445 (Government  College University. Lahore  VS  Sveda  Fiza Abbas),  2016 

SCMR  134  (University  of Health  Science,  Lahore  VS  Arslan  Ali)  & 2005 SCMR  961 

(Muhammad  Ilyas  VS  Bahauddin  Zakariya  University, Multan). 

8. 

Besides  the  above  referred  legal  position,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents 

university under the instructions of the university authorities has made categorical stance 

that the university authorities are willing to issue the results and credit hours, which have 

been  achieved by the  petitioner  for his  future admission  in order to  utilize the  same for 

future studies but despite the said offer, the petitioner has refused the  same. In the given 

circumstances,  this  Court  considers  that  fair  opportunity  of hearing  has  already  been 

given to  the  petitioner  as well  as  to  respondent  No.4,  necessary  steps have  been  taken, 

even  inquiry  committee  has  given  proper  hearing 

to  the  petitioner  and 

W.P. No.1874/2019. 

3 

requirements  of Article  10-A of the  Constitution  of Islamic  Republic  of Pakistan,  1973 

have been complied with. 

9. 

In view  of  above  discussion,  the  instant writ  petition  bears  no  merits,  therefore, 

the  same  stands  dismissed.  The  petitioner  may  receive  the  certificates  of  his  passed 

subject  for  utilization  of  his  credit hours  from the  respondents  university  for his  future 

admission in other university,  which will be issued by the respondents university within 

15  days from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment. 

R.Anjam 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAY 'NI) 
JUDGE 

