HCID/C-121
ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT
ISLAMABAD

CRL. MISC. NO. 201-8 of 2020.

Salman Ejaz.
VS
The State,  etc.

S.No.  of order/
Proceedinq

Date of
hearinq

Order with signature  of Judge,  and that of pafties or
counsel,  where necessary.

08.04.2020.  Sardar MuhammadZardar,  Advocate  for the petitioner.

Mr S.M. Tayyab, DAG.
Mr Kashif, SI/I.O.  FIA with record.

The petitioner Salman Ejaz son of Ejaz Ahmed has sought

post  arrest  bail in case,  F.I.R. No. 69, dated 06.02.2020, registered under

sections 18 and 22 of Emigration Ordinance,  t979 and sections

4201468147t1t09  of Pakistan Penal  Code,  1860 (hereinafter  referred to as

the "FIR')  at Police Station FIA/AHTC, Islamabad

2. 

Brief facts as alleged in the FIR are that the petitioner  is

alleged  to have been engaged in the illegal business of human trafficking

and pursuant  thereto he had received  Rs.O.12  million  from  one Chanar Gul

for sending him and his family  abroad.  The petitioner  had also got affixed

fake arrival/departure stamps and fake visa on their passports.  Hence,

the instant F.I.R.

3. 

The learned  counsel for the petitioner has contended  that;

allegations against the latter are false, frivolous,  baseless  and concocted;

the petitioner has been falsely  involved in the instant case with malafide

intention  and ulterior  motives of the prosecution;  despite  being on

physical remand,  no incriminating  material  was recovered from him; the

-2-

Crl.  Misc. No. 201-8 of 2O2O.

petitioner has no concern whatsoever with the alleged offences;  there  is

no direct or indirect evidence against the petitioner; offences do not fall

within the prohibitory  clause  of section  497 of Cr.P.C.; the petitioner has

no criminal  record;  investigations  qua the petitioner  have been  completed

and he is no more required  for the purposes  thereof;  the petitioner has

been incarcerated for two months; story as narrated  in the FIR is false,

frivolous  and vexatious;  repoft  under section  L73 of Cr.P.C. has not been

submitted  before the learned trial Court;  offences  under  sections 18 and

22 of the Emigration  Ordinance,  L979  are not made out on the basis of

the contents of the FIR; there  is delay of four months in registration of the

instant  case; no specific date or time has been  mentioned in the FIR

regarding  the alleged offences; no inquiry was conducted  before

registration of the instant case; the petitioner  is an innocent person;  there

is no chance of abscondance of the petitioner  or tampering  with the

prosecution  evidence; further  incarceration  of the petitioner  will not serue

any usefu!  purpose; the case against the petitioner  is that of further

probe; hence the learned counsel has urged that the petitioner  be

released on bail.

4. 

The learned Deputy Attorney  Genera! appeared  alongwith

Kashif, S.I. They have contended  that; the petitioner  had received

substantial amount  from  one Chanar Gul; the petitioner  is involved in the

commission  of the alleged offences and specific role has been attributed

to him; the offences  allegedly to have been committed by the petitioner

fall within the prohibitory clause of section 497 of Cr.P.C; recovery  has

been  affected from the petitioner;  deeper  appreciation of evidence  at bail

stage is not permissible;  the petitioner  was engaged in illegal human

trafficking; hence  prayed for dismissal of the instant petition.

-3-

Crl. Misc.  No. 201-8 of 2020.

5. 

The learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned

Deputy Attorney  General has been  heard  and record perused with their

able assistance.

6. 

Perusal of record  shows that the alleged occurrence  had

taken  place in October, 20t9 but the exact date and time has not been

mentioned  in the FIR. The instant FIR was registered on 06.02.2020  i.e.

after a period of four months. The petitioner  was arrested  in the instant

case on 07.02.2020.  The petitioner  has been incarcerated  for two months.

Report under section t73 of Cr.P.C.  has not been  submitted before  the

learned trial Couft  as yet. Chanar Gul was not made  as an accused  in the

instant case. The case of the prosecution  is only to the extent  that the

petitioner is alleged  to have received  money  from  one Chanar Gul and

that when the latter presented application for obtaining  the visa, it was

revealed  that some documents were  alleged  to be forged.  The presenter

of the documents  alleged that they were given to him by the petitioner.

The Investigating  Officer could not show  sufficient  incriminating  material

to the effect that the ingredients of the offences  under sections 18 and 22

of the Emigration Act, 1979 to the extent of the petitioner  were fulfilled.

Whether or not the petitioner  had given forged documents  to the

presenter  requires further probe. This crucial  aspect  requires fufther

probe. The petitioner has no criminal record. His continued custody is not

likely to serue any useful  purpose at this stage as the investigations qua

him have  been completed.  This Court is, therefore,  of the opinion that the

petitioner  is entitled to bail.

-4-

Cr!. Misc. No. 201-8 of 2O20.

7

It has been aptly obserued  by the august  Supreme  Court  in

the case of "Manzoor  and 04 others venus The State" repofted as [PLD

1972 S.C. 811  as follows:

"The ultimate conviction and incarceration of a guilty

person can repair the wrong  caused by a mistaken relief of

interim bail granted to him, but no satisfactory reparation

an be offered to an innocent man for his unjustified

incarceration at any stage  of the case albeit his acquittal  in

the long run'i

In the light of the facts and circumstances of the present

case, refusal  of bail will tantamount  to punishing  the petitioner.

8. 

In the circumstances as mentioned above, this petition is

allowed and the petitioner  is admitted to bail, subject to furnishing  bail

bonds in the sum of Rs.2,00.000/-  (Rupees two hundred  thousand  only)

to the satisfaction  of the learned trial Court.

Needless to mention  that the obseruations recorded  in the
instant petition are based on tentative
which
will obviously not prejudice  the proceedi
before  the
learned trial Couft.

lsad t(/*

J

