IUDGMENT SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD.
IUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Criminal Appeal No.08/2011
Ch. Amir Shahzad
oersus
Muhammad  Makki  & 6 others

Appellant by: 

Respondent  by:

Mr. Mudassar  Hussain Malik, Advocate.

Ch. Gulfam  Ashraf Goray+ Advocate for
Respondents No.1 to 5
Mr. Muhammad  Atif Khokhar,  State Counsel

Date of Hearing:  05.05.2020.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,I: Through  the instant criminal appeal, the

appellant has called in question  judgment of the learned  Special Court  (Anti-

Terrorism  Court-I),  Rawalpindi, dated 18.01.2011,  whereby  Respondents  No.1  to

5 have been acquitted  in private  complaint  under  Section 365-A/34,'149,109 PPC

read  with Section 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997.

2.  Brief facts referred  in the instant criminal  appeal  are that on 15.09.2009,  at

about  09:00/09:75 p.*., when  Ch. Aamir  Shahzad/appellant  was going  towards

his vehicle  after offering Isha prayer in F-LL Markaz, he was  abducted  by two

already  known  accused persons  to appellant  namely Abdul Ghafoor  and

Muhammad  Makki  along with three  unknown  accused persons  to appellant

namely  Alam Sher, Amir Rehman  and Adnan. The  appellant  was then taken in

his own vehicle and after travelling for a while; he was shifted to another vehicle

and taken blindfolded  to some unknown place for the purpose of demand of

ransiom. Accordingly,  appellant's sister namely Shabana Kausar  got registered

FIR No.455/2009  at P.S. Shalimar, Islamabad  and during investigation  of the

matter, on 03.10.2009, Aamir Rehman/accused was  a-rrested  while in possession

of the ransom amount handed  over to him by PW-3 Ch. Muhammad Afzal. On

the pointation of said  accused  persory  a raid was conducted at Flat No.S,  Al-S#a

Heights,  Sector F-11, Islamabad, wherefrom  the appellant was recovered from

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 2

the illegal  confinement  of Muhammad  Makki and Alam Sher/accused  persons

(Respondents  No.l and 2). However,  after the recovery of appetlanf  his

statement was not recorded by the police and the appellant having apprehension

that police is not properly investigating the matter  filed an application to

Assistant Commissioner,  Islamabad  for recording of his statement  under

Section 7il  Cr.P.C., whereafter  his statement was recorded along with

statements  of four others and consequently respondents/accused  persons  were

sufiunoned, though Respondent  No.5 for being absconder was proceeded  under

Section  19(10) of the Anti-Terrorism  Act, 1997, while  the four accused persons

were  formally  charged under  Section  7(e) of. the Anti-Terrorism  Act, 7997  rcad

with Section 365-A/'1,49 PPC, who pleaded  not guilty  and claimed trial. After

recording  of pro and contra evidence/statements  of the parties, the learned trial

Court vide impugned  judgment dated  18.01.2011  acquitted respondents/accused

persons.  Hence,  the instant criminal appeal.

3. 

Learned counsel  for appellant  contends  that the learned trial Court while

taking  into account minor  discrepancies  had ignored material facts of the case

that the respondents/accused  persons themselves  admitted during the course of

trial that they abducted the appellan! that the learned trial Court had also

ignored to appreciate the factum of raid and ransom money  recovered  from the

accused person;  that the learned trial Court has not appreciated  the evidence

brought on record  by the appellant  side and acquitted  the respondents/accused

persorui  of the charge in whimsical  manner;  that the learned  trial Court has relied

uPon  defective  material  produced by the defence while  passing the impugned

judgment which is illegal,  arbitrary and against the settled  principles  of law.

4.  Conversely, learned counsel for respondents  No.1 to 5 contended that the

appellant  has miserably  failed to prove the charges  against  the said

respondents/accused  persons and the learned  trial Court has rightly  appreciated

all these facts while passing  the impugned  judgmen!  that no fact regarding  any

v-

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page | 3

erUnitJr  on the part of respondents/accused  persons  has been shown or proved

by the appellan! that the case as established  by the appellant  suffers from doubts

and the evidence produced by the appellant side is not consistent, which has

rightly been declared  inadmissible  by the learned trial Court  while  passing  the

impugned judgmen!  that a direct appeal  against judgment  of acquittal in

complaint  case  is not maintainable in terms of Section 25(4) of the ATA,1997

read with Section a17@)($ Cr.P.C.; that Ch. Amir  Shahzad/ appellant  i.e. alleged

abductee is absconder in another case FIR No.74, dated  27.02.2014, under

Sections  420,468,471,,406/U  PPC,  P.S. Shalimar,  Islamabad  and as suctu  he loses

his normal right of audience and instant appeal is not maintainable.  Similarly,

learned  State Counsel contended that instant  appeal  is not maintainable  as there

is no direct appeal provided  under the law and special  leave  to appeal  was not

obtained  by the appellant  at the first instance,  whereas this defect is not clarified.

5. 

Arguments  heard, record perused.

6.  Perusal of record  reveals that on 15.09.2009,  appellant was allegedly

abducted  from F-11 Markaz  when he dropped his family members  including

his sister Mst. Shabana Kausar/PW-l,  Mst. Ruhsar Kausar  and his wife

Mst. Tayyaba at Irfan Dental  Clinic  situated in F-11 Markaz for medical

tneatnent,  when  he never  returned back, his sister Shabana Kausar  lodged the

FIR No. 455/2009  at P.S. Shalimar,  Islamabad for his abduction.  However,

Mst. Shabana  Kausar/PW-7 received a call on her mobile No.0322-5509009  from

mobile number  of her brother Aamir Shaluad/appellant  i.e. No.0333-57m94,

whereby  the caller told her that her brother is in safe custody and his car

No.PG-237  has been parked near greenbelt Filtration  Plant,  F-11, the said caller

demanded  Rs.25  crore as ransom  for release of appellant. The said caller also

extended  threats not to inform the police and granted two days time for

arranging  the ransom. Complainant  Mst. Shabana  Kausar got submitted  the

complaint Ex.P& which was  converted  into FIR No.455,  dated 76.09.2009, U/S

Crl, Appeal No.08/2071

Page  | 4

365-A/U  PPC P.S. Shalimar, Islamabad. After initial investigation  the alleged

abductee has been recovered  and three  accused  persons were arrested,  however,

appellant  being dissatisfied with the investigation  conducted by police filed

private complaint  U/S 365-A/149/709/34  PPC read with Section  7 ATA,1997,

which was admitted for regular  hearing by the Anti-Terrorism Court,  Islamabad.

Whereafter,  the respondents  were acquitted  by the learned Trial Court  vide

judgment  dated 18.01.2011.  Hence,  the instant criminal appeal.

7. 

Learned  counsel for respondents  has raised  two objections  regarding

maintainability  of instant criminal appeal, which are as under:

Ch. Aamir  Shahzad/Appellant i.e. complainant/abductee  filed the

") 

instant criminal appeal against  judgment  of acquittal,  who hirnself  is

an absconder  in case  FIR No.74, dated 27.02.2074, under  Sections

420, 468, 471, 4M/U  PPC, P.S. Shalimar, Islamabad  and  as per the

respondent's  objection, the instant appeal is not competent as the

absconder  loses  his normal  right of audience as held in cases

reported as PLD 79&1 SC 265 (Hayat  Bakhsh os. The Statql ud,2005

P,Cr.Ll7789  Lahore  (M. Sateem Akhtar  os. $JrIA;"P.S. Chotianat.

b)  A direct appeal  has been filed by,the appellant  against judgment of

acquittal, which  is a violation of Section  AU@)(il) Cr.P.C. and

Section 25(4)  of the ATA,  7997.

Before  going into merits of the case,  we have to decide the above  referred  two

olojections raised  by the respondent  side  at first instance.

8.  To controvert  the aforementioned objections,  the learned counsel for

appellant  contends  that the olojections  of the respondent side are related to those

accused  Persons who absconded  it a.y criminal  case,  whereas in this case, the
appellant  having been declared fugitive  offender  in criminal case FIR

No.74/2074, which  has no nexus with the instant case, even otherwise, the

appellant  was not declared  absconder  at the time of filing  of instant appeal on

Crl. Appeal No.08/2011

Page | 5

25.01..2017,  while the appellant was declared  absconder on 72.07.2016 i.e. after

five years of filing of the instant  appeal,  therefore,  judgments  relied upon  by the

respondent side are not applicable to the present case. There is no cavil to

proposition  that a person fugitive  from law has no right of audience  and  even  the

case  law cited by respondent side confers this aspect, but the proposition in hand

is different, whereby  the fugitive offender  loses  his concession of bail  as well  as

joining  of court proceedings,  but the respondent  side has failed to justify the

right of representation  earlier available  to the appellant under the law, which

could not be curtailed  due to subsequent  event in another FIR after  six years of

filing of appeal. The Constitution of the Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 1973

ensures and provides  guarantee  for equal protection of law to every individual

and  as such, the case in which the appellant  is 6ul accused  has no nexus with this

case, even the presence of appellant is not required in this case. The legal

questions  and arguments  could only  be addressed by his counsel  whose power

of attorney  is still intact, the Court can decide  the appeal  even without  appellant

in terms  of Section  4?3 Cr.P.C.  Reliance  is placed upon PLD  7977  SC 223 Asif Ali

VS- The Statel- PLD 1961  Dhakka 78 (Hafiz B another o. The  Statel and PLD

7967 Karuchi  709 (Muhammad,  etc. os. The Statel.  therefore, the objection  raised

by respondent  side regarding  maintainability  of instant  criminal  appeal  on

abscondance  of appellant  is misconceived  and sarne  is hereby  rejected.

9.  Similarly, regarding  the second  objection  raised by the respondent  side,

learned counsel  for respondent  contends  that when an accused  person is

acquitted pursuant  to dismissal  of criminal complaint the complainant has to

seek  a special leaoe to aypeal in terms of general law i.e. Section  477(2)  Cr.P.C. and

this aspect was specifically  provided in Section  25(a-B) of the ATA,  1997, which is

as under:

25. Appeal. (1-) An appeal  against final judgment of an Anti Terroism
Court shall lie to a High C-ourt.

"

c

,E

4

Crl. AppealNo.0Sl2011

(2)(s)  .::

Page  | 5

(4)
(4-A)
(+B) If an order  acquittal  is passedW on Anti-terroism  Court in any
case instituted upon complaint  and the High Court, on an Application
made to it W tltc complainant in this belwlf, grant  Special leaae to
appeal from tlu ordcr of acquittal,  tlu amplninant may within thirty
days prexnt such  an appeal  to tlu High Court.

Learned counsel for respondent  while arguing  his case contended  that the

appellant  has not filed any application  for special leave before  this Court,  rather

direcfly  filed an appeal, which is not maintainable  and  as sucfu leave  could not

be granted at this belated  stage.

10.  Conversely,  learned  counsel  for appellant contended  that instant appeal

was direcfly filed on the wrong advice  of the counsel, the office of this Court had

not raised any objection  at the time of filing of irutant appeal, even this Court  has

issued  notices  to the respondents  vide order dated  04.04.2077  while considering

the law and the facts in the judgment  of the acquittal and as such,  at this stage

the appellant should not be burdened  for the mistake  and act of the Court. He

further contended  that criminal appeal has been filed within  prescribed  period

and this Court in the interest of justice c€ul  convert  one kind of proceedings  into

another  while exercising inherent powers in terms of Section  561-A Cr.P.C.

which are meant to cater such  exceptional  circumstances  in which the Court shall

not look into the technicalities at the time of admission of instant appeal.

11.  We have gone through the arguments  advanced  by both the parties and in

order to resolve  the controversy  we are fortified with the view taken by the apex

Court in cases  reported  as 2077 SCMR 56 (Muhammail Akram os.DCO  Rahim

Yar Khant. 2077 SCMR 778 (Mian Asghar  Ali as. Gooqnment ol Puniab through

Secretaryt,  PLD 2078 SC 449 (Sher  Alam Khan  os. Abdul Munimr  and PLD 2072

SC A7 (Mst, Gul lan os. Naik Muhammailr.  whereby  the apex Court, while

relying upon  the principle of Ex Debito  lustitiae  (from what  is due  to justice),  has

. converted one type of proceedings  into another by holding  that an appeal  has to

Crl. Appeal No.08/2011

Pase | 7

be converted into revision and vice versa and constitution petition  could be

converted  into an appeal and vice versa.  The Courts not only can exercise the

Powers  to advance  the cause  of justice but also to prevent  injustice, no fetters or

bars could be placed on the High  Court or on the Supreme  Court to convert and

treat one type of proceedings  into another and proceed  to decide the same.

Reliance is placed  upon  2020 SCMR  500 (Commissioner  oI lncome Tax (Legalr

RTO o. ED-Zublin AG Germanyr.

72.  In view of above  principles, laid down by the apex Court, the provisions

of Section 561-A  Cr.P.C.  rescue  the appellant  in order  to meet the ends of justice

and this Court is of the view that appellant  should not be burdened  due to

mistake of his counsel as well as of the office of this Court, who have not

considered  the law in its true perspective  at the initial stage, although  the appeal

was filed within time, but no special leave was obtained, nor any such order was

passed. However, there  is no bar to consider the instant  appeal  as an application

for special leave at this stage  and allow the same while giving  effect from the

date of admission  of instant appeal  i.e.04.04.2011, as the Court shall not sit as a

silent spectator and to watch that who has committed  the mistake.  Reliance  is

placed upon 7987 SCMR  294 (Abdur  Rahim os. The Statet Every Court has

inherited  powers to ensure  justice  is done and if foul play  is visible,  the ]udge has

to rectify  the same, whereas this Court committed a mistake while entertaining

the instant  appeal directly at its initial stage,  which  could not be considered

against the appellant although he has also not applied the law in a proper

manner,  therefore,  relying  upon  the principle of "Acfus Gtiae Neminem Gratsabi{'

that no one should  be prejudiced by the act of Court.  Reliance  is placed upon

2076 SCMR  834 (Muhammad  liaz os. Muhammail Shafit 2073  SCMR 7479

(Lanoin Tradqs. Karachi o.,Presiiling Officert and PLD  2076 SC 872 (Khushi

Muhammail  os. Mst. Eazal Bibil. The objection  of respondent  side regarding

non-filing of application for special leave  stand condoned,  the appeal  is

Crll Appeal  No.08/2011

Page | 8

maintainable while invoking the inherited powers  in terms of Section 561-4

Cr.P.C.  in order to meet the ends  of justice.

13.  In order  to decide the case on evidence available  on record,  it has been

observed  that the appellant has nominated  Muhammad Makki,  Alam Sher,

Aamir Rehman, Abdul Ghafoor and Adnan  Khan as accused  persons in a private

complaint,  however,  accused  Adnan  Khan did not appear  and absconded during

the trial, who has been tried in absentia.

14.  The initial statement was recorded  by  PW-1 Mst. Shabana

IGusar/complainant of case FIR No.455/2OW  (Ex.PA/1),  wherein no accused

was nominated by name. She did not identify  the caller  who made call for the

purpose of. ransom,  however, she acknowledged  that she knew accused

Muhammad Makki  and Abdul  Ghafoor  prior  to the said occurrence  as she and

her brother purchased  several properties  from them valuing about Rs.15 crore.

She also acknowledged that her brother/alleged  abductee was also known  to

accused persons prior to said occurrence  and she recorded supplementary

statement regarding  nomination of accused persons.

15.  The appellant has produced his other sister i.e. Mst. Rukhsar  Kausar as

PW-z,  who narrated  the entire story of the alleged occuffence,  however,  she

further stated  that she along with her sister went to airport to receive  her other

brother namely Afzal Cheema, who was in USA at the time of alleged incident

and was informed by Mst. Shabana  Kausar. She  also  acknowledged  that  she was

informed  by her sister that caller demanded  Rs.25 crore for release of her brother

and she also did not nominate any accused person in her statement before the

police.

16.  The appellant has produced  his brother i.e. Ch. Muhammad  Alzal as

PW-3, who stated that he was in USA  on 15.09.2009  when he was informed by

her sister regarding  kidnapping  of Aamir Shahzad/appetlant, where-after he

c.une to Pakistan  on76.09.2009. He further  stated that he has also  received a call

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 9

frdm the abductor  who demanded  Rs.25  crore for the release  of his brother and

in default, abductor threatened to kill his brother. Ghafoor and Makki  accused

present in the Court used to meet him and told him that they would  hetp him

tracing out his brother as both the said accused  persons called  him in their office

and told him that they would settle the issue with alleged  abductor for release of

his brother  for the sum of Rs.10 crore,  whereupon  he replied that he needs  some

time for aranging  the ransom amoun! they also assured him that they will

arrange  ransom amount of Rs.5/7 crore for him. PW-3 told all these  facts to the

police  and on the instructions  of police, he confirm  the accused  persons for

delivery of ransom amount,  upon which he was informed that amount would be

received  at ]ungle Hotel Kashmir  Highway  by the abductor.  After receiving  this

informatiory  the police has arranged  a bag containing notes  Ex.Pl, which  were

photocopies  of the original currency notes.  PW-3 reached  at Jungle Hotel at

about 04/4:30 p.m. along with police  party headed  by DIG and when he saw a

white colour Corolla  car, from which accused  Aamir  alighted, came  towards  him

and received the bag Ex.PL, he was arrested  by the police,  who during

interrogation at spot disclosed  about the place of confinement  of Aamir Shahzad

(alleged abductee)  as Flat No.5,  Al-Safa  Heights,  F-L1,  Islamabad.  Police party on

pointation of Aamir Rehman raided  the said flat and arrested  the accused  Makki

and Alam Sher while in possession of pistol Ex.P-2 (black colour) while Aamir

Shahzad/ appellant  was tied up with ropes Ex.B/1.-2.

77.  During  the course of cross-examinatioru  PW-3 Ch. Muhammad Nzal

acknowledged  that police did not record  his statement  during entire

investigation  despite the fact that police pafty visited  him at his house and he

also joined  investigationl/ 6 times, while he visited the police station for 8 times.

He did not recognize the voice  of caller who called for ransom  amount,  nor he

remember exact number on which he received the call, but he handed  over the

SIM to police.  PW-3 did not give the original currency notes of Rs.10 crore, rather

CrL AppealN o.08/2017

Pase I 10

police told him that they have arranged the photostat  currency  notes, however,

he did not remember the name of said police officer who arranged the same. He

also acknowledged  that his brother/appellant  filed a private  complaint  after four

months of recovery.  He purchased flats from  accused persons and he came to

know about the names of Aamir  Rehman and AIam Sher  in the police statiory  he

handed  over  the bag to accused Aamfu Rehman.

18.  Appellant/Ch.  Aamir  Shahzad Cheema (abductee) appeared  as PW-4 and

recorded  his statement  in the following  mErnner:-

On 1-5.09.2009, I took my sister RuWuar Kausar  and my wift Tayyba
Aamir to dental clinic in F-17 Marknz Islamabad. Tlu time was 7y7:30
P.M. I droyped tlum at tlu clinic  wlun tluy aslccd me to go to say prayer
as they will  talce  somc time for tleir cluck up. I did not go to say prayer
and remained sitting in my car tlure. Meanwhile I receiaed a teleplone
call of my friend  Rashid  for seeing tlu flats. I went to see tlu flats at tlu
plae wlure lu callcd rrc. Aftcr  visiting  tlu flats, I came back  to the abooe
said  clinic  but I did not see my family outside  tlu clinic and tlun I went  to
mosque  to ffir prayer. Meanwhile  aluaay  rain and storm started,  wlun I
came  outside tlu mosque, tlure was lnory rain outside and nobody was
present.'y'rllun  I was  going  to open tle door of my car through lcey, fioe
persons including  acqtsd Mal*i  and Abdul  Ghnfoor,  noTo present  in
hurt, cnme  tlure and tried to snatch  lcey of car from me on gunpoint. At
my resistane, acansed forcibly  got me  seated in the rear seat of my car and
one of tlu accused  namely Moki  sat with me on one sidc while  tlte otlur
acansed  namely  Abktl Ghafoor sat with me on otlur sidc. Two  accused sat
on front  seats.  Tlu accused  ilrooe tlu car and aftcr  passing  some distance
acmsed boardcd  mc in anotlur  aehicle  lilcc  Hiace.  They coaered  my eyes
with a piece of cloth and got me laid on the back seat  of abwe  said oehicle.
Afu,  traoelling  for about 1-1p.  hours,  acansed  confincd me in a room and
remwed tlu cloth  from my eyes. After some time,  both accused Makki  and
Abdttl Ghnfoor  came to me and told that tluy hnae abducted  me for
ransom  and if my family  pays  ransom  to tlum,  tluy would release  mc
otlurwise,  tluy would kill me. Tluy were  dcmnnding  ransom after  arcry
2/3 days and  were also telling me that my family was  not fulfilling tluir
demand.  Afu, 5/6 days, tlu acused  shifted  me duing  night  to some  other
plncc. Tl'uy again shiftcd  me to pranious  place on 01.10.2009.  On
03.L0.2009, police  recooered  me. W brotlur  Aful was also accompanying
tle police at that time. At tlu time of recooery,  my hnnds  and feet were
tied with rorys, Hfl-Z At the time of my recov)ery,  acansed  Maki and
Al"am  Slur were  arrestcd  from  place of my recooery.  I do not lcnow  wletlur
policc  toas accompanicd  by any accased.  Again said  acansed  Aamir
Rehman  was also present  at tlu time of recoaery but I do not lotow
wlutlur  accused Aamir Rehman  came alongwith polia or lu was already
tlure,

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 11

19.  After recording  of above  referred statement,  the appellant further stated

that he was not satisfied  with the investigation and he filed private  complaint

Ex.PB  and verified his signature as Ex.PB/1.

20.  Basharat  Hussain/ASl of P.S Shalimar appeared  as CW-L, who stated that

on 03.10.2009,  he was posted  at P.S. Shalimar,  Islamabad  and at about 03:30 p.ffi.,

he alongwith  Ghulam  Muhammad Shah, S.I, |avid Awan,  S.I, Habibullah,  ASI,

and other HCs/constables together with Muhammad  Afzal  Cheema went to

]ungle  Hotel  situated at Kashmir  Highway, Islamabad,  where at about  M:20  p.m.

whereby PW-3 Ch. Muhammad Atzal Cheema was holding a black  colour bag

containing  the ransom  money and Ghulam  Muhammad  Shah, S.I. assigned them

different positions,  PW-3  C'h. Muhammad  Alzal  Cheema went  behind  |ungle

Hotel, where a Corolla  car was parked at some distance, in which accused  Aamir

Rehman, now present  in the Court,  was sitting and when PW-3 Ch. Muhammad

AlzalCheema  proceeded  towards  said accused  Aamir  Rehman, he alighted from

his car and proceeded towards  PW-3 Ch. Muhammad  Afzal Cheema,  who

handed over the black colour  bag containing  ransom  amount  to the said accused

Aamir Rehman,  whereafter  Aamir Rehman was apprehended  by the raiding

Pafiy and the amount of Rs.10 crore was recovered,  which consisted  of 200

bundles in the denomination  of Rs.5000/-  having two colour copies  of 5000

currency  notes in which there are 98 blank papers.  The bundles  are referred  as

Ex.P5/t-200.  The  amount  was taken into possession  vide recovery memo Ex.PC

signed  by him and ]avid  Awan S.l./l.O  also took into possession  car bearing

registration  No.RLD-369, vide  recovery memo Ex.PD. On the personal search  of

accused  Aamtu  Rehman  two mobile  phones  (Exh.P6/1-2), NIC (Exh.P4  and  cash

of Rs.5010/-  (Exh.P8)  were recovered,  taken  into possession  vide recovery memo

Ex.PE.  On spot investigation, accused Aamir Rehmand disclosed that abductee

has been detained  in Al-Safa Heights,  Sector  F-77/1,, Islamabad,  whereupon

raiding prty reached  at the said place on pointation of accused  Aamir  Rehman,

Crl.

2077

lt2

door of Flat No.5 was knocked,  whereby accused Alam  Sher  was ar:rested  on

opening the door.  Muhammad  Makki present  in the Court  was also present

inside the flat, who was also arrested  and Aamir  Shahzad/ alleged  abudctee was

recovered  from the  said flat, who was tied  up  with  ropes

referred bclB/7-z. From  personal search of accused Alam  Sher and Makki

pistols  .30 bore  were  recovered. From  accused Makki his I.D card, driving

license, two bank cards, one metro card, a cheque  valuing Rs. One Lac, Nokia

mobile  phone and cash Rs.12000/-  were also recovered and taken into

possession vide Ex.PF, whereas pistol was separately taken into possession  as

Ex.PG.  Pistol recovered  from accused  Alam Sher  was taken into possession  vide

recovery memo Ex.PH,  Honda car PG-237  was also taken into possession  by I.O

through  Ex.P| and car has been presented  as P-10.

27.  CW-1 Basharat  Hussain/ASl  acknowledged  that PW-3 Ch. Muhammad

Alzal  Cheema  brought the dummy notes  to Police  Station.  At the time of arrest of

accused  Aamir Rehmary  15/20 persorui were present  at Jungle  Hotel and except

PW-3 Ch. Muhammad  Atzal Cheema, no private  person was with police  at

Jungle  Hotel.  He also stated that no pistol  was  recovered from  accused Aamir

Rehman at the time of his arrest.  The flat from where  abductee was recovered  is

situated  in the basement  of Al Safa Heights.  He acknowledged  that there is no

mention  of number  of. flat/room  in the recovery memo, which was prepared on

spot and the raiding  pilq was consisted  upon Ghulam Muhammad Shah,  S.I.,

Javid  Awan, S.I, Habib  UUah, ASI, Ghulam Shabbir, HC, Akhtar  Munir

Constable. He further  stated that he heard a news regarding  recovery of

abductee from Peshawar by DIG Binyamin.  He did not know who is owner of Al

Safa Heights,  but the key was  recooqed lrom  personal search of accused Makki

and the door was o?ened by acansed  Alam Shq on knocking  of police.  He also

stated  that pistol was  recovered from accused Makki  upon his personal search

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 13

and pistol of accused Aamir  Rehman was recovered  on his pointation from

Almtuah  in flat.

22.  Habib Ullatu ASI appeared  as Cll,l-2,  who was posted in P.S. Shalimar on

03.10.2009  and was member of raiding pafty alongwith Ghulam Muhammad

Shah, S.I, |avid Awan, S.I and others, who went to ]ungle Hotel from where they

arested accused Aamir  Rehman  and on his pointatiory  he got recovered pistol

Ex.Pll  vide recovery  memo  Ex.PK  from Al-Safa Heights and separate  FIR was

lodged under Sections  73/20/65  of the Arms Ordinance,7965.

n,  Ghulam  Shabbir HC appeared  as CW-3, who was also member of raiding

Party on 03.1.0.2009 and went to |ungle Hotel  and arrested accused Aamir

Rehman, who led the police party to Al Safa Height,  F-11 Markaz, Islamabad  and

on the knocking  of door of Flat No.S, accused Alam  Sher opened the door and

accused  Makki  was also present there, who was apprehended  and upon his

personal search a black  colour pistol alongwith  four live bullets  were  recovered

from his right dub which  were taken into possession  vide recovery  memo

Ex.PM. The pistol  has been produced as Ex.P2 and live bullets  have been

produced  as Ex.P2/1-4. Recovery  memo was also signed by him and Munir

Akthff  Constable.  Accused  Aamfu  Rehman also disclosed  and led to recovery of

pistol from Almfuah  of the said flat, which was septuately taken into possession

vide recovery memo Ex.PK  six live bullets  were also recovered  from that pistol

and at the same time pistol  was also recovered  from accused Alam  Sher.

24.  The appellant  side has produced  CW-4 Ghulam Muhammad  Shah, S.I

who lodged  the FIR Ex.PA /7 on'1.6.09.2009 on the complaint  of Mst. Shabana

Kausar Ex.PA and prepared  rough site plan Ex.PN,  recorded  statement of PWs

U/5761, Cr.P.C.  and on pointation  of Mst. Shabana  Kausar took into possession

car (PG-237)  ftom  greenbelt  filtration plant between  F-70/1, and F-11 and  also

prepared the site plan, submitted  application  for constitution  of fIT and also

applied  for CDR  of mobile  phone  number  of abductee and recorded statement  of

CrL Appeal  No.08/2011

Pase | 14

PW-2 brother of abductee. Supplementary  statements of Mst. Shabana  Kausar

were recorded on 02.10.2009  and  03.10.2009,  he alongwith ]avid Awan,  S.I, Habib

Ullah ASI, Basharat Mehmood  ASI and six constables  conducted raid in the

|ungle Hotel area and stationed  different  police parties at different places  and

when accused  Aamir Rehman received  ransom  amount, he apprehended  him

and on spot investigation  got recovered the dummy notes amounting  to Rs.10

crore vide recovery memo Exh.PC cash of Rs.5010/-,  USB, two mobile sets,

visiting  cards, etc. vide recovery memo  EX.PE. Accused Aamir  Rehman disclosed

the presence of alleged  abudctee in the AI Safa Heights upon which raid was

conducted  and on knocking  of door accused Alam  Sher  opened  the door,

who was apprehended and accused  Makki was also present in the flat and

pistol .30 bore was recovered  from accused  Alam Sher alongwith  three live

bullets.  A pistol alongwith four live bullets  was recovered from accused Makki

from his right dub. On pointation of accused  Aamir Rehman, pistol  alongwith six

live bullets  were recovered  from Almfuah and taken into possession  together

with the rope, plate, glass,  bottle and a mask,  regarding  which  separate  FIRs

U/573/20/65  of Arms  Ordinance were  registered  after recovery of three  pistols.

On personal  search  of accused  Alam  Sher, cash of Rs.22,000/  - was recovered,  site

plan Ex.PR was prepared  and on supplementary  statement  of Mst. Shabana

Kausar he arrested  accused Abdul Ghafoor in this case on 13.10.2009. He also

obtained  non bailable  warrants of arrest of accused Adnary which was not

executed,  hence submitted  the challan.

25.  During the course of cross-examinatioru  CW-4 Ghulam Muhammad

Shah/S.I. acknowledged  that PW-3 Ch. Muhammad  AfzalCheema  possessed all

the dummy  notes and he did not record his statement  at Jungte Hotel or at

Al-Safa Heights  at the time of recovery.  He acknowledged that 15/20 private

persons  were  present  at ]ungle  Hotel  at the time of raid, but none of those  private

Persons  were ready to become witness  of proceedings.  He apprehended  the

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 15

accused Aamir  Rehman with the help of police  officials.  CW4 Ghulam

Muhammad Shah further  acknowledged  that he had not taken  into possession

r cot recovered  from flat No.5 and accused  Abdul Ghafoor  was implicated in this

case in terms of Section  109 PPC and except  the statement  of Mst. Shabana

IGusar no incriminating  material  was available against  accused  Abdut Ghafoor.

CW4 denied the factum of recovery  of alleged abductee  Aamir Shahzad  from

area of P.S. Pahari Pura,  Peshawar  as per the news  item published  in newspaper

Iau,,rg,  dated  03.10.2009. He also denied  that police  of Islamabad headed  by DIG

Binyamin took the abductee  from there. He also acknowledged  that he did not

take into possession  the mobile  set of Mst. Shabana  Kausar,  nor the SIM and the

Flat No.S  containing 03 bedrooms and a kitchen  separately  referred in the Ex.PR

and all the bedrooms of flat No.S were  open and key of flat No.5 was with

accused Makki, who was present inside the flat at the time of raid.

26.  While  considering  the entire evidence  discussed above, following facts

came on record:-

i. 

The appellant  Ch. Aamir  Shahzad Cheema was abducted on

15.09.2009, from Islamabad in the territorial jurisdiction of P.S

Shalimar and complaint  Ex.PA was filed by her sister Mst. Shabana

Kausar, which was converted into FIR No.455/2009  Ex.PA/1.

ii.  No accused  person  was nominated by the complainant  (sister of

abductee).

iii.  Supplementary statement  of Mst. Shabana  Kausar was recorded

alleging therein that  ransom call  was  received

from unknown caller who claimed the amount of  Rs.25

crore on her mobile  No.0322-5509009  from  the mobile  number of

her abducted  brother/Ch. Aamir Shahzad  Cheema  i.e. 0333-

577n94.

Crl.  Appeal  No.08/2011

Pase | 16

iv.  The vehicle of the abductee/appellant  i.e. No.PG-237  was

recovered  from greenbelt  area near filtration plant on the

information  of unknown caller.

v. 

Two of the accused  persons namely Makki  and Abdul Ghafoor met

the abductee's brother  namely Ch. Muhammad  Afzal/PW-3  and

assured him that they will arrange  the release of his brother  for the

sum  of Rs.10 crore and asked him to arrange  the ransom  amount.

vi.  The time and place for payment  of ransom amount  has been  fixed

at |ungle Hotel,  Kashmir  Highway  by PW-3  Ch. Muhammad  Afzal,

who arranged Rs.10 crore ransom amount comprising  of 200

packets with white pages in shape of currency  notes with cover of

Rs.5000/- note as referred in Ex.PC,  recovery  memo, dated

03.10.2009.

vii.  The ransom amount  has been delivered  in bag Ex.P-l  at |ungle

Hotel,  at about 04/ a30 p.ffi., when  accused  Aamir  Rehman came at

spot in white colour  Corolla car and received abag,  who was taken

into custody and his car RLD-369 Toyota  Corolla XLI was also

taken  into possession  vide  recovery  memo  EX.PD,  dated  03.10.2009.

viii.  Accused  Aamir Rehman  discloses  the whereabouts  of alleged

abductee on spot to the police  near Jungle  Hotel and on his

pointation raid was conducted  at flat No.S Al Safa Heights, F-11

Markaz,  Islamabad  on 03.10.2009.

ix.  The abductee  Aamir  Shahzad was recovered  from flat No.S Al Safa

Heights, F-11 Markaz, Islamabad by the police and taken into

custody the accused Muhammad Makki  and Alam Sher who was

armed with .30 bore pistol, recovered through recovery  memo

Ex.PH with three live bullets.

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Pase | 77

x.

Abductee  Aamir Shahzad was found in one of the room of the flat

tied with white ropes length four feet approximately lying on cot

which was taken  into possessionvide recovery  memo Ex.PQ.

xi.

The raid was conducted  by Basharat  Hussairu  ASI/CW-I,  Habib

Ullah,  ASI/CIrt{-z,  Ghulam  Hussain,  HC/CW-3  and Ghulam

Muhammad  Shatu S.I/CW4.

xii.

The accused Aamir Rehman  got recovered  his pistol  alongwith  06

live bullets  vide recovery  memo Ex.PK and separate  FIR U/S

73/20/65  AO was registered  against him.

xiii.

Accused  Aamir  Rehman was arrested  on 03.10.2009  from  jungle

hotel, while receiving the ransom  amount by police.

xiv.

Accused  Muhammad  Makki was arrested on 03.10.2009 from flat

No.S Al Safa Heights, F-11 Marlcaz,  Islamabad  the place  of

abduction  of alleged abductee Ch. Aamir Shahzad Cheema and

also found in possession  of .30 bore pistol alongwith  live bullets by

the police.

xv.

The site plan for recovery  of vehicle  PG-327-[CT referred  as Ex.PO

shows that vehicle  was recovered from an open place.

xvi.

The  site plan of place  of abduction  of Aamir Shahzad Cheema  has

been  referred as  Ex.PN shows it 

is 

situated

in F-11 Markaz.

xvii.

The site plan Exh.PB  for payment of ransom  amount  Rs.10 crore

shows that it is in Jungle Hotel, Kashmir Highway when accused

Aamir  Rehman was arrested while receiving ransom  amount.

xviii.

The site plan of recovery  of the abductee  Aamir Shahzad  i.e. Flat

No.5  Al Safa Heights, F -7'I..  Markaz, Islamabad.

xix.

The site plan for recovery of pistol on the pointation of accused

Makki  alongwith M live bullets has been referred as Ex.DC.

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 18

xx.  No CDR has been placed  on record  by the I.O of this case.

xxi.  The amount of Rs.10 crore recovered  from bag Ex.P-l through

recovery  memo  Ex.PC containing 200 bundles in denomination of

Rs.5000/-. All the bundles containing two colour  copies  of

Rs.5000/- notes in which  98 blank papers. Bundles have been

placed  as Ex.P5/1,-2N  by CW-1 Basharat  Hussain  ASI, there  was

not a single  real currency note used  to pay the raruiom.

xxii. As per the prosecution  evidence of PW-3 Ch. Muhammad  Nzal

Ctreema,  the police  had arranged  the currency notes.

xxiii. CW-1 Basharat  Hussain/ASl  stated that PW-3 Ch. Muhammad

Atzal Cheema  has arranged the currency  notes for payment  of

ransom. As per site plan of recovery of alleged abductee,  the place

of recovery  is Flat No.5,  1st Floor, Al-Safa  Heights,  F-11, Islamabad,

whereas C.AI-? Habib  Ullah/S.I.  contended  that abductee was

recovered  from Flat No.S, Ground  Floor,  F-1L,Islamabad.

xxiv. The alleged  abductee  Ch. Amir Shahzad  Cheema  has never

referred the place of recovery in his complaint  or in his statement.

xxv. The unknown  caller claiming the ransom amount has not been

verified by the I.O, nor has any voice  test been conducted  for the

verification  of the person  amongst the accused persons in this

regard by the I.O.

xxvi. Abductee was recovered  on the pointation of accused  Aamir

Rehman from Flat No.5 Al-Safa Heights, F-11 Markaz,lslamabad

alongwith  accused Makki  and Alam  Sher on 03.10.2009.

xxvii.  No independent  evidence has been brought on record to verify  that

Abdul  Ghafoor, brother of Muhammad Makki/respondent  has

been involved  in this case  except  statement  of the alleged  abductee.

Crl. Appeal No.08/2011

Page  | 19
27.  We have attended  to the proposition in terms of Section 365-A PPC  as to

whether  the ingredients  of said offence have been justified  by the prosecution in

this case or otherwise  on the basis of above  factual  positiory therefore, it is

necessary to reproduce Section  365-A Prc, which is as under:-

365-A. Kiilnapping  or abduction  for ertorfing property,  oaluable
seanity,  etc ty'rlloeoer kidnaps or abilucts any Wrson for tlu purpose  of
extortingfrom  tlu person flny proryrty, wlutlur mooable  or immooable, or
oaluable  seanity,  or to compel any Wrson to amply with any other
demand  wlutlur in cnsh or otlurtoise, for obtaining  release of tlw person
kidnaVped  or abducted, shallbe ptnislud with (ileath or) impisonment for
life and shall  alsobe  linble to forfeiture of property.

28.  While considering  the above referred  requirements of kidnapping for

extorting  property, it is necessary to prove that extortion  has been  made from

any Person  who has been kidnapped  or abducted  and at least  some person has to

comply  with the demand whether  in cash or otherwise  in order  to obtain the

release  of the abducteg whereas in this case Muhammad Atzal Cheema/PW-3

the real brother  of alleged  abductee carne from USA  on 1,6.09.2009  after receiving

information  of kidnapping of his brother and he also met with accused Makki

and Abdul Ghafoor who  ensured  him for release of his brother  and suggested to

make arrangement of ransom  amount, although Muhammad Afzal Cheema

informed  the police parallel  to these  meetings and on 03.10.2009  he on the

in^structions  of unknown  caller  reached at jungle hotel  Kashmir  Highway  by

arranging  the ransom Eunount  of Rs.10  crore in Ex.Pl (photocopy  of original

currency  notes) which were handed  over to accused Aamir  Rehmary  who was

taken into custody  by the raiding  party comprising  of CW-L to CW4  police

officials, while receiving  the amount. The handing  over of ransom  amount  as

alleged  by the prosecution  has been  proved,  although  passing of ransom  amount

is not pre-requisite  to prove  the offence of Section 355-A  PPC. Reliance is placed

upon  2072  SCMR727 (Muhammad  Riaz VS Bilqiaz  Khanl.

29.  Even though  the recovered amount has been produced on record  in the

testimony  of CW4 Ghulam Muhammad Shah,  S.I which was also confirmed  by

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 20

CW-1 Basharat  Hussain, ASI being  the witness  of recovery memo  EX.PC. It is also

settled  that non-recovery  of ransom amount  has no adverse  effect  on the case of

prosecution.  Reliance is placed  upon 2003 YLR 300 (Muhammail Anwar alias

Lalu VS, The Stater. The offence  of abduction  or kidnapping for the purpose of

ransom  has to be considered  in the light of evidence  recorded  by the complainant

in this case niunely  Mst. Shahbana  Kausar/PW-1 who has lodged the FIR with

promptitude  vide FIR No.455/2009Ex.PA/7  and her stance was corroborated by

the alleged abductee Aamir Shahzad Cheema/PW4, who narrated  the entire

story in his statement  referred  in Para 18 of the instant judgment and confirmed

that he was recovered  on 03.10.2009  by the police  in presence  of his brother

Muhammad  Atzal,  who  accompanied  the police.  He also confirmed that his

hands  were tied up with rope  and accused  Makki and Alam  Sher  were arrested

from the place of recovery  along with incriminating  articles, which fact further

substantiated  through  recovery of  .30 bore pistols. The statement of

appellant/abductee  remained consistent with the testimony  of complainant/PW-

1, his brother PW-3  as well as Atl-7/ Basharat Hussain, ASI and CW-4/Ghulam

Muhammad  Shah,  S.L

30.  The most important  aspect of this case is the exclusive knowledge  of

accused Aamir Rehman  regarding the place of captivity of abductee  Aamir

Shahzad,  which falls within the concept of Article  122 of Qanun-e-Sluhadnt  Order,

1984 as on his pointation the abductee  was recovered  from Flat No.5 Al Safa

Heights,  F-11 Mark az, lslamabad and this aspect was also confirmed by the

police officials/CWs  appeared in this case. The exclusivity of knowledge  of

accused regarding  different aspects of the occurrence  was a piece of evidence

inexorably pointing  upon his culpability. Reliance  is placed  upon 2079 SCMR

2039 Waqar  A, ShamsiVS The State\. wherein it has been held that"uthat  ans

to be essentially seen  was uthether  prosecution  utas able to come foruard with

the aoailable  eoidence,  possible under the ciranmstances of a case and that

uhether  such  oolume or nafine of eoidence is sufficient to sustain  the charge."

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2071

Pase | 27
31.  We have considered the chain of evidence  from the point of disclosure  by

the accused  Aamir Rehman  on 03.10.2009  when he received the rculsom amount

of Rs.1.0 crore  through Ex.Pl from brother of abductee/PW-3  Ch. Muhammad

NzalCheema and was arrested by police, who disclosed  the location of abductee

to police, and the said disclosure in terms of Article  40 of the Qanun+-Sluhndat

Order,  1984 has to be considered  as an information  received  from accused  which

has been discovered  in consequence of such information during the course of

investigation of the offence and such information  lead to a discovery  of a new

fact which was not earlier known to the I.O i.e. the place of abduction of the

alleged abductee/appellant  Aamir Shahzad  i.e. Flat No.S Al Safa Heights, F-11,

Martaz,Islamabad.  The information  supplied by the accused Aamir Rehman in

police  custody under Article 40 of the Qanun+-Shnlnilnf  Order,  19&t would be

admissible only to the extent  that it relates  to the disclosure of a new fact.

Reliance is place upon 2003 YLR 770 6hq Dil VS The  State\.  This aspect has

been considered by the Apex  Court in judgment  reported as 2079 SCMR  7330

(Muhammail Azail  VS The State) in the following  rlanner:-

Eoents,  though few,laweoer  taking  place  in quick sucession,  iruxorably,
r@oloe around  the appellnnt's ailpability;  most  important being
disclosure  within tlu contcmplatbn  of Article 40 of tlu Qanun<-
Shduikt  Order, L984 pursuant wlureto he led to tlu discooery  tlw corpse
on tlu basis of his exclusioe  lenowledge; gtaen  the briefest  timeframe,  to tlu
exclusion of any otlur hypothesis,  it can be safely  infened, without being
conjectural,  that lE alone knew  wlwt belell upon the child and wlure lu
was dumped.  Ctll phone dnta,  generated  through automated system,
operating  beyond human  intcrference  confirmed conoersation  between tlu
afpellant  and  the complainant.  Tlure  was hardly any time or occasion  for
tlu fumily to concoct  or cook up a story on suspicions or consultations.
Inaestigatioe  conclusions  point towards tlu appellant as well.
C-otnplainant  and his brotlur, with no axe to ynd, crosslxamined  at
length,left  tlu witness box unscathed;  recooeries  haoe been prwetfu the
witnesses,  equally steadfast. Tlure is no earthly reason  to suspect
aVpellant's  iilentity or entertain  theory of substitution.  Appellant's  guilt
is pruted to tlu hilt on tlrc basis of cluin of ciratmstances  tlough  few in
number, nonetluless,  well synchroniztd  tuith  one anotlur, intrinsically
anfidene inspiing;  lu lus nghily been conoicted.

Crl.  Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 22
32.  While considering  the above  approach settled  by the Apex Court, we are

of the considered view that abductee  remained  consistent  with the prosecution

version despite  lengthy cross-exafldnation  and as suctr,  the defense  absolutely

failed to shatter his testimony,  even otherwise, the abductee  and police

officials/CWs  have no ill will to falsely involve the accused  persons in this case,

whereas  in similar  situation the conviction  has been maintained  by the superior

courts in case  reported  as 2077 YLRN 278 (Zeeshan  VS Statd.

33.  We have gone through  the statements of respondents/accused  person

recorded U/S  342 Cr.P.C. whereby accused Aamir Rehman denied his

involvement  in the aHuction  of appellant, who while answering Question No.20

took a specific stance and has also taken a similar  stance  in answer to Question

No.23,  which is as under:-

I was irutolaed in this case falsely  W tlu policc  in connhtance  with tlu
mmpl"ainant  party on flccount  of enmity  and PWs haae  also  deposed
against me through  falsely  concocted,  coolced ilp, baseless,  self
contradictory  story. My co-acarced  Abdul Ghafoor and his brotlur Abdul
Shakoor  haoe busiruss dis?ute as complainant  party  hnd  purchnsed 17
Flats from tlum aaluing Rs.L5 Crore and complainant  Wrty wanted that
they sluuld  talce  those Flats back and ?ay tlu money  to com?lainant ?arty
in form of Dollars.  Because  at tlu time of purchasing.  tlu aalue  of Dollar
was lower. Abful Ghafoor and his brotlur Abdul Shalaor refused and
cornplainant  party bore  grudge  and in connioance  with police concocted,
false  andbaseless story  relating  to recoaery  of abductee  (PW4) from afore
mentionedflat  just to defame us.

U.  Similarly, principal  accused  Muhammad  Makki has also denied  his

involvement  and given a similar  stance  recorded  by accused  persons namely

Alam Sher and Aamir  Rehman in questions  No.20,  22 and 23. For ready

reference,  the answer  to of Question No.20 given by Muhammad  Makki/accused

is reproduced  as under:-

"It is incorrect. Tlu alleged abductee  (PW4) wfrs not recooered  from  Flat
No.5, Al SaIa Heights. In fact tle abfuictce  (PW-4)  was  reportedly
abductedby  some Pathans and was  recooered  from Pesluwar  by Binyamin
D.I.G.  Operation Police lslamabad who brought him to Islamabad. This
fact has been  publislud/reported in oaious  neTos  pryrs  and as well as
lectronic media  such as Nawa+-waqat  Islamabad, Subah News

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Pase | ?3

Peshawar, Daily  lang, Geo Neus,  etc. Tlu plwto  state copies of neuts
publislud in afore  mentbned neu)s paryrs flre produced  as Mark "A" to
Mnrk  "D". After tlu alleged recooery  of abductce (PW4) from Peshawar,
police in conniaane  with complainant  party, who are aery  influential
Wrson and with whom I and my brotlur  Abdul Glu{oor and Abdul
Shalaor haoe  busiruss dispute  as mmplainant party had  purchase  1.7 flats
from us aaluing Rs.1.5/- crore and tluy wanted tlut we should talce tlase
flats back and  pay tlwm money according to Dollar.  Because  at tlrc time of
ptrchasing tlu oalue of Dollar was lower,  we refused  due to which  they
bore grudge concocted, a false  and baseless  story  relating to recoaery  of
abductce (Pw4) from  aforementioned  flat just to defame us and lower
down tlu oalue  of Al-Safa Heights.  I along with my brotlur Abdul
Glwfoor,  my diaer Alam  Slur and my Mnnager Aamir Rehman  was
anested W C.l.D. Police  Party in tlu night between 2/3 October  2009  at
about  02:30 AM from Al Safa  Heights F-1.1/1  Islamabad.  Tlu police party
Luaded by Khnlid  Masood D.S.P. C.I.D.  took us to C.LD.  Ctntre
Baharalcnhu,  Islamabad,  wlure police searclud me and from my personal
search Rs.12,000/- cash, Dioing  Licence, ID Card, Metro Card, ATM
Card, Cheque  oaluing  Rs.7,00,000/-  and Mobile plwne Nokia  were
recooered.  The polia plninted on me Pistol P-2, just to strengtlun  tlu
rcmplninant/prosecution case and recoaery  memo  Exh.PF is forged  and
foln. Klulid  Mnsoud D.S.P. CID C*ntre Bhara  IGhu  Islamabad,
demanded  from me illegal  gratification for our release from ilbgal
detention  and compelled  me to pay bibe amounting  to Rs.S/-  lac to him
and as a consequence  of his compellation  and for our him to pay tlu afore
mcntioned  bibe amount to him, resultantly I haae paid him a sum of
Rs.S/- Lac as bibe and then my brotlur  Abdul  Sluloor reported tlu
matter  to l.G. Police lslamabad and enquiry was ordered W LG. Polia
Islamabad. During tlu course  of enquiry tle amplnint was found true
and as a result of tlut D.s.P.  Khalid Mnsuod  was dismissed  from seruice
W tlu order of LG. Islamabad. Cnfy of his dismissal  order dated
23.10.2009  is produced as lvlark  "E". Hotoeaer,  I don'tknow  about tlu
personal search of Alam slur. Tlu police  as mentioned  abooe in
conniaane with amplainant  party prepared  false recoaery  memos of
dummy notes,  recot)ery  of alleged detenu from  Al-Safa  Heights  and
prepared  all otlur tnemos  of recoaery of pistols  from myself, *y manager
and my drfuer and  conducted  illegal imtestigations  and inooloed  mE, my
brotlur  Abful Ghafoor  and driaer Alam Slur and mannger Aamir
Rehman  falsely through concocted  and baseless  story of complainant  and
tle oersions  of tlw complainant  and tlu police are falx,  concocted  and  self
contradictory  and mutually destructiae  and all tlu rrcrsions are absolutely
untrue and  false."

35.  We have gone  through  the defense version  highlighted  in the statements

of accused/respondents  under Section  342 Cr.P.C. in which it was referred  that

Abdul Ghafoor and Abdul  Shakoor  have some  business dispute wittr

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page | 24

complainant's  party regarding  purchase of flats worth of Rs.15 crore  but no such

evidence  has been brought on record, even another  aspect  was broadly

highlighted  that accused Alam Sher  driver of Abdul  Ghafoor and Muhammad

Makki  alongwith numager  Aamir Rehman  were arrested by CID police in the

night between 2/3 October, 2009, at about 02:30 a.m. from Al-Safa Heights,

F-17/T,Islamabad  and they have been taken by Khalid Masood  DSP CID who

planted  pistols upon  them and has received  an amount  of Rs.5,00,000/  - as illegal

gratification  and in consequence of this illegal  action  Khalid Masood,  DSP was

dismissed from service  vide order  dated 23.70.2009.  Th"y have  also taken

another  plea that the alleged  abductee  Ch. Amir Shahzad  was recovered from

Peshawar  by Islamabad  Police and this news was published  in different

newspapers,  and in this rcgard, they have produced copy of Daily Subah

Peshawar  edition, dated  04.10.2009, Mark 'A' to Mark 'D', Darly Nawa-i-Waqt

Rawalpindi/Islamabad,  dated 04.10.2W9, in which DIG Operations,  ICT

Muhammad  Binyamin has recovered the abductee who was abducted  for

ransom  of Rs.25 crore.

%.  The above referred  stance was confronted  to CW-1  Basharat  Hussain, ASI,

CItV-z  Habib  Ullah,  ASI and CW4 Ghulam Muhammad Shatu S.I but all police

officials  have categorically  denied  this fact and despite their denial the defense

n has not opted to call DIG Binyamiry  whose  press  conference has been  referred in

this case.

37.  We have meticulously  gone  through  the judgment  of learned bial Court

and observed that the learned  trial Court has passed order of acquittal on the

following grounds:-

(u) Complainant has not alleged in his private  complaint that he

was confined  in or recovered  from  Flat No.5,  Al-Safa  Heights,

i 

Islamabad and even this fact was not referred in his

Crl. Appeal No.08/2011

Page  | 25

application  Ex.DA and affidavit  Ex.DB filed before  Assistant

Commissioner/  Magistrate.

(b) No statement  U/S L61 Cr.P.C. of the alleged abductee was

recorded by the police at the time of alleged  recovery  from

Al-Safa  Heights,  Islamabad, rather his statement of affidavit

was received  later on as Exh.DB.

(c) CW-1 acknowledged that Afzal Cheema  was not present  at

the time of recovery  of abductee  and recovery  memo of the

abductee was prepared inside  flat.

(d) CW-z & CW-3 were present  at the time of alleged  recovery of

abductee, have not stated in their examination-in<hief  that

abductee was recovered  from Al Safa Heights, Islamabad.

(e) No private person of locality  was associated in the recovery

proceedings  despite availability  of private  persons.

(0  The documents, news items/press clipping, Mark A to Mark

D, (Daily Subah,  Peshawar,  Nawa-e-Waqt  and Jang) disclose

that abductee Aamir Shahzad  was recovered from  Peshawar

by the DIG Operations Islamabad  namely Binyamin.

(g) The learned Trial Court  has heavily relied upon judgments

reported as PLI 7998 SC 27 (Muhtarma Benazir Bhutto os.

Earooq  Ahmail Khan  Leghari.  etc.r. PLD 7976 SC 57 $slamic

Republic  of Pakistan  os. AbilulWali Khant.  PLD  TggA  SC 475

(Mian Muhammail  Nawaz  Shaif o. Presiilent  of Pakistant

and 2008 MLD 74A Karachi (Umair Ashral os. The Statd.

38.  The above  referred  factors have  heavily been relied by the trial Court by

considering  them as dent in the prosecution  case, whereas all these factors are

just defence pleas taken by the respondents/accused  side which have not been

substantiated  through any mode or manner. However,  rt the defense  version

CrL  Appeal  No.08/2077

Page  | 26

fails, even then the prosecution  has to stand on its own legs. The trial court has

relied  uPon the above pleas,  therefore,  it is the duty of this court while

considering the matter in appeal to thrash  out each and every aspect while  '
considering the principle  of law in terms of Articles  117 to 122 ol Qanun+-

Shaludat Order, 79{34, whereby  concept  of burden  of proof has been explained in

the manner that, "wlure  any ?erson  desires  any court to gfue iudgment  as to any of

legal rtght or a liabilit! deryndent on tlu existence  of fact whichlu assert  must wwe tlwt

tlase facts exists"  arrd in this regard  the initial  burden lies upon the prosecutioru

but the respondent/defense  side is also under obligation  to bring  evidence on

record  qua their pleas,  therefore,  it was necessary to call Binyamin,  DIG

operations,  ICT as a witness or reporters of Daily  Jang  newspaper, Nawa-i-Waqt

newsPaPer or Daily Subah newspaper, but no such effort has been made by the

defense side for the reasons best known to them.  It has usually  been  observed

from general  conduct  of the senior police officers that they do not participate  in

the investigation,  but subsequenfly  take credit  and same has been  observed  from

this case, where Binyamin  /DIG got published  some news in the newspaper

referred by the defense  side  regarding recovery  of alleged  abductee but not a

single news  discloses  that the alleged  abductee  was recovered from  Peshawar,

even the entire  police record is silent to that extent. The respondents/accused

have been confronted  with this aspect to the CWs/police  officials  who were

unanimous that DIG Binyamin  has never investigated  this matter  nor any JIT

conducted raid for recovery  of alleged  abductee and they remained consistent  to

this aspect,  hence the view taken  by the trial Court regarding  news items on the

strength of statements of CW-1 & CW4  was wrongly  conceived as both  these

witresses have denied this factum in the following  nvulner:

"It is not in my loowledge  tlut a neu)s  item was publislud  in tlu
tuwspaper  lang dnted  3.1.0.2009  that  thc abductee  Aamir Sluhzad  was
recooered  from Peslwwar by a police party  of Islamabad  luaded  by

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Pase | 27

Binyamin DIG lslnmabad.  It is not in my knowledge  that the abductee
Aamir  Shahzad Cheema  was found roaming in the area of P.S
Bahaipura  Peshawar from where  lu uas talccn by police of P.S
Baluripura  and shiftedhim  to P.S. Bahnipura".

All these aspects clearly  establish  that CW-1 & CW4 had no knowledge  of news

items or Press clipping and it is not the duty of police  witness  to answer a

publication/news  items  in *y  mzrnner.

39.  The trial Court has heavily placed  its reliance  upon press  clippings/news

items  on the touchstone  of PLI 7998 SC 27 (Muhtarma  Benazir Bhutto os. Farooq

Ahmad Khan Leghart,  etcr,  which in fact relates  to a different proposition,  which

is as under:

(LXXVII) Press Clippings-
"Press  Chppings-kgal Status-Contention  thnt reportings from
foreign  and local nelocpflpers, should not be relied upon as their
autlunticity  cannot be oouchsafed  and mostly  one sidc oersion  of
incidents  is described therein-  Supreme  c-ourt  is not impressed  by his
contentions  for reason that presently we are in era  zolure journalism  hns
also talcen great strides in tlu field of inaestigatioe  reporting  and general
impression  is that such reports  are  made after  proper  aeification of facts
and figures from relinble and dependable  sources  and  releoant
quarters - C-ontention repelled."

(LXXXI)  Press Clippings-
"Press  Chpptngs-kgal  Status-In  tlu present doy media reaolution,
acessibility  nnd inaestigative  nature of reporting,  unless  report  is
immediately  contradicted  or is palpnbly false nnd is contradicted  by somc
similar contemporaneous  reports, Courts and Tibunals  and persons,
wln are not required  to form an opinion on the basis of strictly  proaed
eaidence as requiredby k* of anidcnce,  can rely upon  such reports."

We have also  considered  the other judgment  relied upon by the learned  trial

Court i.e. PLD 7976  SC 57 Qslamic Republic  of Pakistan  os. AbilulWali  Khanl,

whereby it has been settled  that:

(q) Eoiilence Act (l of 7872)
"5. 3-Newspaper-Reports of contemporaneous  eaents in news papers-
Admissible  in etsidence,  particularly when such  eaents of local interest
or of such public nature as zoould be generally  lenown througlaut
community and testimony  of eye-witness  not aoailable-  Person not
aoailing of opportunity to contradict or question truth fulness of

Crl. Appeal  No.08/201.1

Page  | 28

statement attributed to him and uidely publislud in news  pnpers-
Cnnnot complain of use of such  pfilication  against him -Such user,
luld, not hit by rule of hearsay. lt cannot  be denied tlwt so far as
newspilper reports of contemporaneous  wents are concerned.  they may
be admissible,  particularly whcre  they happen  to be eoents  of local
interest or of such a! public nature as would be generally  lorcwn
througlaut tlu community and testimony of an eye witness  is not
readily aoailable.  Tlu contemporary  newspaper  account may well  be
admittcd  in eoidence in such circumstances  as has often been  done by
Courts  in tlu United  States of Ameica not because they are 'business
records' or " Ancient  doanments'  but because  they may  well be treated as
a trustutortlry  contemporaneous  account  of eaents or hnppenings  which
took place  a long  time ago or in a foreign country which cannot  easily  be
proaedby  direct ocular oral testimony. Thus, if aperson does not noail  of
tlu opportunity  to contradict  or question the truthfulness  of the
statemcnt attibuted  to him and widely publislud  in newspapers  lu
cannot  complain  if that publication  is used against  him. Such nn user
would not be hit W tlu rule of hearsay."

(o) Eoidence  Act (I of 7872)
"Ss. 35 8 2l-Press Notes  and White  Paper  issued  by Goaernment
regarding  certain  incidcnts  in country-Not  such fficial  records  as proue
themselaes  or presumed to be factually true-Such  docaments bhd
Gooernment  as admissions  but could  not be used against  a third party."

40.  Likewise,  the learned trial Court has also relied upon judgment  reported

as PLD  7993  SC 473 (Mian Muhammail Nautaz  Sharif a, President o! Pakistad,

wherein  it has been held that:

" Eaidence --P re ss reports-Eaidentiary  a alue :
It is true that  Press  reports  are not to be accepted as proof  of facts stated
tlurein  but wlure such  reports  were  not contradicted by' the concerned
authoity or person  at tlu releaant  time and are subsequently  relied by
either  side in a case, thcse  may be talcen into consideration  for forming
an opinion generally  as to the yeoailing state of ffiirs at the releaant
tima."

It has been observed  from the aforementioned  judgment that the evidentiary

value  of press report has been discussed by the apex Court after the removal  of

Mian Muhammad  Nawaz Sharif  from the office  of Prime Minister on the issue

related  to resignation  of MNAs, which is as under:

"The resignations produced  before us are to be considered  in tlu wale of
eoents which preeded the dissolution of Nntional  Assembly  on 18-4-
L993. Both sides hwe filed  large  number of press anttings and relied on

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 29

tlum to shoto tlu prasailing politicnl  climate in tlu cotmtry during pre-
dissolution  period, lt is true that press reports  nre not to be accepted  as
proof of facts  stated tlurein but tolrcre such reports  were not contradicted
b y tlu concerned nutlarity or person at tlu releoant time and are
subsequently  relied by either  side in fl case, tluse may  be talcen  into
consideration  for forming an opinion  generally as to the preoailing  state
of ffiirs at tlv releoant  time. Tlu press reports for the pertod
immediately  preceding  the dissolution of National  Assembly  do show,
that elements lnstile to petitioner's Gooernment  were being  entertained
regulnrly at tlu Presiilent's House  and after tlrcir meeting at the
Presidency these elements gaae tlte impression thnt tlu petitioner's
Gooernment  was going  to be dissolaed  oery soon. In this background,
receipt  of tluse  resignations, addressed  to the Spealcer  of National
Assembly,  by tlu President  and not fonoarding  them to tlu Spealcer,
eoen after passage  of considerable  time aryars not only an unusual
course  but also lends support to tlu contentions  of tlu petitioner  that
these  resignations  uere not gle, to the President  W tl" members  of
National  Assembly  but only  to prooide a lanerage for bargaining with
tlu petitioner  and for destabilizing  the Gooernment  of petitioner."

Perusal of the judgments  referred supra  reveals that the same are related to press

reports,  which  were  taken into account by the apex Court for the purpose to

settle a political question in the cases of Abdul Wali Khan,  Muhtarma  Benazir

Bhutto and Mian Muhammad Nawaz Shanf supra,  wherein the contents have not

been denied  by the Government  on certain  pretext  and there is chain  of events

noted  in these cases,  like in the case of Abdul Wali l(han  suryq there are reports

from Qabul Times, where his speeches  were referred and in some  matters  the

Government's  point of view  has been  published, although  no record has been

produced.  Similarly, in the case of Minn Muhammad Nmoaz  Shnrif supra it was

settled that the press  reports  are not to be accepted as proof of facts stated

thereiru  but where  such reports were not contradicted  by concerned  authority  or

Person  at the relevant time and are subsequently  relied upon by either side,  these

may be taken  into consideration for forming an opinion  generally  regarding

prevailing state  of affairs at the relevant time.

41'. The meticulous  study of the aforementioned  case  laws reveals that the

same relates to entirely a different connotation  and principle  of law, which have

CrL  Appeal  No.08/2011

Pase | 30

no relevancy in this case, but the trial Court  has wrongly appreciated  the point of

law, which otherwise renders  the impugned judgment  as perverse, illegal and

based upon wrong appreciation  of law, benefit of which having  been extended

by the trial Court to the accused  persons is considered  to be illegal and nullity in

the eye of law. The  conduct  of the trial ]udge  seenu  to be that he lacks the basic  r

information  and knowhow of the admissibility  of any publication  of news and

Press clipping of the media.  The learned Trial Court  heavily  relied upon  these

judgments and made basis of acquittal  of respondent  as referred atPage-2l  of the

impugned judgment, but surprisingly  the learned Trial Court has not gone

through  the judgment  reported as 7996  SCMR  1747 (Muhammad  Ashra| Tareen

os. The State, etr.l wherein it was held that, "newspaper afitings  in criminal case,

cannot  be used either in faaour of prosecution  or in faaour  of defence,  unless author of tlu

same  is examined  in tlu court  as a witness.

42.  In view  of the case of Muhammad  Ashraf  Tareen supra,  the findings of the

learned Trial Court  based in Para-25  of the impugned  judgment  are declared  to

be illegal having no effect  and stand excluded, hence  the said findings are

discarded as the press clippings could not be relied in criminal  cases,  especially

when no author,  editor or reporter  of the said newspaper  was called as a witness

by the accused side in their favour.

43.  The record  further reflects  that the respondent/accused  side has filed an

application on 27.12.2070 for summoning of four witnesses namely (i)

MuhammadEayyaz  I(han  the then S.H.O. P.S. Pahari  Pura, (ii) Fazal Sher Khan,

S.I. P.S. Pahari Pura, (iii) ]aved Siddique,  Resident  Editor, Nawa-e-Waqt

Newspaper and (iv) Zafar  Iqbal,  Management  Director  of Al-Safa  Heights-I,  F-11,

Islamabad as defence  wihresses,  which was allowed by the learned  trial Court

vide order  dated 22.72.2010,  whereby  the respondent/accused  side undertook  to

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 31

pay traveling expenses of those witnesses,  but on 06.01.2011, the respondents

recorded  their stance before  the learned  Trial Court thaf

"Acansed  submit that except  bail order  dated  22.70.2009,  tlrcy do not
want to produce  any defence eaidence.  Tlu statement  in this regnrd  has
been recorded  separately  in which they after producing  the abooe  said
bail order has  closed tluir defence  eaidcnce. To come  for final arguments
on 70.0L.201.7.'

The above  referred  order clearly spells out the adverse  inference  against  the

respondent/accused persons, who intentionally  withdrew  from their defence

evidence despite  the fact that the same was  called  by the learned  Trial Court,

hence the adverse inference in terms of Article 129(9)  of the Qanun-e-shahadat

Order,  L9&[ comes on record  against the respondent  /accused.  This Court

assumes that if those witnesses could have been sununoned,  they would not

support  the case of respondent/accused,  therefore,  the defence  version on the

basis of Mark'A' to Mark'D'  relating  to newspaper  clippings/items  lost their

evidentiary  value.

M.  We are of the view  that the facts  and the law have not been appreciated  in

a ruulner  required in such type of cases, especially  when the abduction  is proved

from record and even wrongful  confinement  is apparent  as subsequent  to the

registration of FI& the alleged abductee  i.e. PW4 Ch. Aamir Shahzad  Cheema

was recovered  handcuffed  on the pointation of accused  Aamir  Rehman from Flat

No.5, AI-Safa Heights, F-1L Markaz,lslamabad  in presence  of accused  Makki and

Alam  Sher.

45.  The offence U/S 365-A PPC abduction  or kidnapping  for ransom  has been

mentioned in Section 5(2)(e)  of the Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997, whereby  in order to

prove this offence,  it is necessary  for the prosecution  to prove that such offence

was committed  with design or purpose referred in Section 6 of the ATA, 1997, in

which allegation  made  in the FIR, material collected,  surrounding circumstances,

intention artd mens  rea has to be considered for the purpose  of culminating  into

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 32

intimidatio&  awe, fear and insecurity in the public or society.  Reliance is placed

upon  2077  P.Cr.L.I  505 $hah Sim Khan VS The Stater, PLD 2076 SC 7 $hahbaz

Khan aliasTipryVS  S?ecial  Luilge  AntiTerrorism  Court 3 Lahorel, PLD  2020 SC

67 (Ghulam Hussain  os. The Statel.  However, in this case the element  of

insecurity in a general  public or a society has not been reflected from the

evidence  collected  by the prosecution  or brought  by the appellant  side, even the

evidence  does not reflect  that the requirements laid down  in the case  of Ghulnm

Hussain supra  are met.

46.  We have  considered all these aspects in detail with the element of fear in

society or public at large with reference  to the concept of Section  6 &.7 of the

ATA, 1997, which  is missing, even the unknown caller who asked for ransom

amount was not identified  nor the ransom  demanded was proved

independenfly,  but on the other side the simple abduction  in terms  of Section  365

PPC with intent to cause that person "to be secretlu and

confined".

has been  proved on record which has been justified from  the recovery of alleged

abductee  Pw-4  Aamir  Shahzad  from Flat No.5, Al Safa Heights,  F-11.  Markaz,

Islamabad  and in such  situation  the Apex Court while deciding  the matter in

case reported as 2009 SCMR 558 (Shahiil

lias Kaloo os. The Statel has

converted the offence under  Section  365-4. PPC to Section  365  PPC only as doubt

emerges  to the extent  of ransom  in the following manner:

7. 
.,there  is some doubt as to uhether or not any demand of
ransom  was  made from tlu complainant tle benefit of which  must  be
graen to him. C-onsequently, the ffince committed  by tlu appellant  as
well as co-conoict  Asif toould be cooered  undcr  section  365,  P.P.C. aiz,
abduction  simpliciter  for which tlu maximum punishment  is seaen
yeflrs.

47.  The view rendered by the Apex Court while appreciating the facts on

record  resulted  into new situation that the prosecution  has successfully proved

the charge of abduction  as well as of wrongful confinement  or secretly  confining

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Page  | 33

the appellant in Flat No.5 Al-S#a  Heights,  F-11 Markaz, Islamabad by the

respondents/accused  Muhammad  Makki, Alam  Sher and Aamir Rehman.

Hence,  they are held guilty of the charge of offence U/5365  PPC and liable to be

convicted.

48.  It is the duty of appellate Court  to consider  the evidence  on the touchstone

of principle  of law and where  the trial Court has committed serious  illegality on

the basis of wrong  appreciation of law and facts, the appellate court is

empowered  to rectify  those  mistakes,  although in such eventuality  cases would

have to be remanded to the trial Court to rectify such discrepancies  as

highlighted  tn 2077 MLD  7987  (Ansar  Ali VS Stater.  whereby  the Hon'ble High

Court held that the case was registered  in the year  2009 and it was not justified to

remand the case only to rectify discrepancy,  rather the High Court  had taken into

account  the evidence  together  with the discrepancies  and convicted  the accused

person  on the charges of offence under  Sections  365-A,392,  41'1.  PPC and Section

7 ATA,7997.  Similarly, we are also fortified  with the view and approach  adopted

by the apex Court in case reported  as PLD 2019 SC 261

iia Siililiaui  os.

ShahHussainl.whereby  the apex Court  has held that:

"1.8. We haae noticed that some  downight misreading of tlu eaidcnce
lud been committed by the High Court and for some of tlu rensons
preoailing with it tlu High C-ourt  hnd ignored  many critical aspects  of
tlu case aoailable  in tlu eaidence  brought  on tlu record. Tlu exercise  of
apprecintbn of eoidence in this case by the High C-ourt  has,  thus,  been
found by us to be laconic  and misreading and non-reading  of the record
by th, High Cnurt  has been found by us to hmte led the said Court  into a
seious  enor of judgment  occasioning failure of justice and clamouing
for interference  in the matter  by this Court. A judgment of acquittal
suffenng from seious  misreading  or non-reading  of thc eoidence
materially fficting the final outcome of ttu case  is nothing short  of
being Wruerse and, lunce,  not immune from interference.  Apart  from
thnt tlu High  C-ourt  ought  to haoe apprecinted  thnt it was only seized of
reaision petitions  and not an appeal  and in exercise of its rcoisional
juisdiction  the High Court  ought to h"aoe  confined  itself to correctness,
lcgality, regulaity or propricty of the proceedings  of tlu courts below
rntlter  thnn embarking upon  a full-fledged reappraisal of the eoidence,  an
exercise  fit for appellate  jurisdiction."

Crl. Appeal  No.08/2011

Paee  I 34

49.  While considering the entire background as well as the evidence in the

light of case laws discussed above, it has been proved  that the learned  trial Court

has committed  a serious error  while not relying upon the evidence of CW-1 to

Crlrl4,  who are official witresses of recovery  of ransom  amount, arrest of accused

Aamir Rehman, who  disclosed  the place of recovery of the alleged  abductee Ch.

Aamir Shahzad  and as such all the CWs are independent  witnesses  having  no

grudge or motive to  falsely implicate the respondents  in  this  case.

The prosecution  witnesses remained  consistent upon the recovery  of appellant

(abductee), weaporu  used in the said crime and ropes with which  appellant  was

tied up in flat No.S, Al Safa Height,  F-lL Markaz,lslartabad,  whose  key was

recovered  from the principal accused Muhammad  Makki. Similarly  the trial

Court has relied upon the press clipping  contrary to the provisions  of. Qanun<-

Sluhadnt Order, 1984 and even disregarded  the case law settled by the Apex

Court in the case of Muhnmmad  Ashraf Tareen  supra, whereby  newspaper cutting

in criminal case cannot  be used either in favour of prosecution  or in favour of

defense, unless author of the same  is examined  in the Court as witness,  such

blatant  illegality by the trial Court resulted  into the judgment  of acquittal  of the

respondents,  hence, this Court  is fully competent to reappraise the evidence,  to

pass the judgment  of conviction while exercising  the powers  U/S 366 read with

Section  376Ct.P.C.

50.  In view of above, instant  criminal  appeal  is ALLOWED  and judgment

dated  18.01.2011,  passed by the learned Special ]udge, Anti Terrorism  Court

Rawalpindi/Islamabad is  hereby SET ASIDE and respondents  namely

Muhammad  Makki, Alam Sher and Amir Rehman are hereby CONWCTED  and

sentenced  to undergo R.I. for 07 years with fine of Rs.5,00,000/  - each to be paid

to the appellant/Aamir  Shahzad Cheema. In default  of payment  of fine,

respondents/accused  shall further  undergo  simple imprisonment for 06 months

i 

crt. Appeal No.08/2011

Page | 35

Th.y  be taken into custody  and sent to jail to serve their remaining  sentence. All

the accused  persons  are also entitled to benefit of Section  382-B  Cr.P.C., which is

extended.  However,  the acquittal  of accused  Abdul  Ghafoor  is IVIAIMITINED  as

no role or participation  to his extent  has been  seen in the entire case nor any

evidence  by the prosecution has been brought  on record. The status  of

Muhammad  Adnan,  who remained as (P.O.)  shall be the same as referred by the

Learned Trial Court.

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ)
IUDGE

(MOHSTN  AKHTAR
IUDGE

Announced  in open  Court  on

o7

{,rh

?4\).

GE

IUDGE

KhalidZ.

