Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

 Tax Reference No. 07 of 2007 

M/s Federal Bank for Co-Operatives 

VS 

Commissioner of Income Tax, Companies Zone 

 DATE OF DECISION: 

26.01.2021 

APPLICANT BY: 

Hafiz  Muhammad  Idrees  and 
Syed  Farid  Ahmed  Bukhari, 
Advocates. 

RESPONDENT BY: 

Ishfaq  Hussain  Naqvi, 

Syed 
Advocate. 

BABAR  SATTAR,J.-  Through  this  consolidated 

judgment,  we  will  decide  the  instant  Tax  Reference  and  Tax 

Reference  No.  08/2007  titled:  ‘M/s  Federal  Bank  for  Co-

operatives  VS  Commissioner  of  Income  Tax,  Companies 

Zone’.  

2.   

In  these  Tax  References  the  question  of  law  before 

us is as follows: 

“Whether  under  the  law  and  circumstances  of  the  case 

the learned ITAT was justified in holding that section 80D 

is  a  special  provision  and  will  prevail  over  section  38  of 

Federal Bank for Co-operative Act 1977?” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

3.   

Let  us  reproduce  para  2  and  3  of  the  order  of  the 

learned  Appellate  Tribunal  that  summarize  the  controversy 

and  the  findings  of  the  learned  Commissioner  (Appeals)  and 

relevant para 5 that contained the reasoning of the Appellate 

Tribunal  

“2.  Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  assessee,  an 

individual  derives  income  from  various  sources  such  as 

interest, service charges and other receipts etc. Since the 

income  of  the  assessee  was  exempt  from  payment  of 

income tax during the period relevant to assessment year 

1998-99  and  1999-2000  under  section  38  of  the  Federal 

Bank 

for  Co-operative  Act  1977  which 

is  hereby 

reproduced here as under: 

“Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Income  Tax 

Ordinance,  1979  (XXXI  of  1979),  the  Gift  Tax  Act  of 

1963  (XIV  of  1963),  the  Wealth  Tax  Act,  1963  (XV  of 

1963) or any  other law in force relating to Income  Tax, 

Super  Tax,  Wealth  Tax,  Gift  Tax  of  Business  Profit  Tax, 

The  Bank  shall  not  be  liable  to  pay  any  such  tax  on  its 

income, profits, gains, wealth or gifts.” 

Therefore,  levy  of  minimum  tax  u/s  80-D  was  discussed 

by  the  assessing  officer  with  learned  AR  who  contested 

the  levy  of  tax  under  section  80-D  taking  the  same  plea 

as in the previous year. 

“The  Federal  Bank  for  Cooperatives  Act,  1977  having 

jurisdiction 

over 

special 

set 

of  peoples 

and 

circumstances  for  specific class  is  a  Special  law.  On  the 

other  hand,  the  Income  Tax  Ordinance,  1979  does  not 

have  jurisdiction  over  special  set  of  peoples  and 

circumstances for specific class is a general law.” 

3.  In  the  First  Appeal  learned  CIT(A)  has  observed  as 

under: 

“The  legislative  has  given  overriding  effect  to  the 

provision  of  section  80-D  even  the  bank  is 

otherwise  exempt  under  the  provision  of  Income 

3. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

Tax Ordinance, or any other law for the time being 

in  force.  No  specific  exemption  to  assessee  bank 

has  been  granted  from  the  levy  of  section  80-D 

under  any  provision  of  Second  Schedule  to  the 

Income  Tax  Ordinance  1979,  hence  the  version  of 

assessee  bank  for  the  exemption  from  the  levy  of 

minimum  tax  leviable  on  turnover  u/s  80-D  of  the 

Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 is not acceptable…” 

5.  The  learned  AR  states  that  assessee  a  statutory  body 

was  exempt  from  payment  of  income  tax  u/s  38  of 

Federal  Bank  of  Co-Operative.  Special  Law  overrides  the 

general  law.  It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  this 

special 

law  was  subsequently  withdrawn 

for 

the 

assessment  year  2000-01  and  onward.  Needless  to 

mention  here  that  section  80-D  of  the  Income  Tax 

Ordinance, 1979 is subsequent than section 38 of Federal 

Bank for Cooperatives Act 1977, where two provisions are 

irreconcilable,  the  provision  last  in  order  of  position  may 

prevail,  since  it  is  the  latest  expression  of  the  legislative 

will. If a new enactment that has been added is to some 

extent,  in  conflict  with  the  previous  existing,  the  new 

enactment  must  by  implication,  be  deemed  to  have 

annulled  or  altered  the  earlier  enactment.  Parallel 

statutes operating in different fields or even if the subject 

is the same one may be more extensive in scope than the 

other.  Occasion  for  implied repeal  would only  arise  if  the 

two statutes cannot at all coexist, and when existence of 

one  will  make  redundant  the  other.  Where  two  statues 

operate  in  the  same  field  independently,  through  they 

may contain different provisions in this behalf, if by giving 

effect to the provisions, one of the provisions of the other 

are  rendered  or  are  likely  to  be  rendered  nugatory,  the 

two statues clash. They are inconsistent with each other, 

and  the  provisions  of  the  latter  statue  (or  the  statute 

which  the  legislature  intended  to  be  dominant),  on  its 

true  construction,  was  intended  to  cover  the  whole 

grounds, it would, to the extent of the ground covered or 

intended to be covered, supersede and displace the other 

statute. This argument of the learned AR that section 80-

D  is  a  general  law  being  part  of  Income  Tax  Ordinance, 

4. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

1979 is not true. Section 80-D is not a general law. It is 

special  law  which  gave  concept  of  presumptive  tax 

regime, despite embodied in Income Tax Ordinance. Yet it 

cannot  be  considered  as  general  law.  It  is  a  special  law 

which has given overriding effect to all of the existing law. 

So this maxim generalia specialibus non derogant has no 

applicability in  this case. Section 80-D is also special law 

which  has  overriding  effect  qua  section  38  of  Federal 

Bank  for  Cooperatives  Act,  1977.  So  the appeals  filed  by 

the  assessee  are  without  any  merit  hereby  stand 

dismissed.” 

4.   

Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that the 

Federal  Bank  for  Cooperatives  and  Regulation  of  Cooperative 

Banking  Act,  1977  (“Cooperatives  Act”)  is  a  special  law 

pursuant to which the applicant bank was created and section 

38 of the Act is a specialized provision excluding applicability 

of  any  charge  or  liability  under  the  Income  Tax  Ordinance, 

1979 (“Ordinance of 1979”), Gift Tax Act, 1963 and Wealth 

Tax Act, 1963 to the extent of Federal Bank for Cooperatives 

(“Bank”) established under the said Act. The leaned counsel 

further submitted that the Cooperatives Act is a special law in 

the  context  of  tax  affairs  of  the  applicant  and  the  Ordinance 

of 1979 is a general law and that any conflict between special 

law  and  a  general  law,  the  special  law  must  prevail 

notwithstanding  which  law  is  later  in  time.  That  the  Income 

Tax  Ordinance  of  2001  (“Ordinance  of  2001”)  contains 

section  54  which  now  provides  that  for  exemption  to  be 

granted  from  provisions  the  Ordinance  of  2001,  such 

exemption  must  emanate  from  the  Ordinance  of  2001  itself. 

He stated that no provision in the Ordinance of 1979 was pari 

matria  to  section  54,  which  reflects  that  there  existed  no 

5. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

legislative  intent  that  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of  1979 

would  have  overriding  effect  over  exemptions  from  income 

tax  provided  under  other  special 

laws  such  as 

the 

Cooperatives  Act.  The  learned  counsel  relied  on  Muhammad 

Mohsin  Ghuman  and  others  VS  Government  of  Punjab 

through Home Secretary and others (2013 SCMR 85) wherein 

it was held that: 

10. The  question  of  applicability  of  general  and  special 
Laws was also considered by the Privy Council in Montreal 
Corporation  v.  Montreal  Industrial  Land  Company  (AIR 
1932 PC 252) wherein it was laid down as follows: 

its 

 attention 

"When the legislature had given 
 to  a 
separate  made provision for it, the  presumption  is  that  a 
subsequent general enactment is not intended to interfere 
with  the  special  provision  unless  it  manifests  that 
intention very clearly. Each enactment must be construed 
in that respect according to its own subject-matter and its 
own terms." 

The learned counsel further relied on Commissioner of Income 

Tax,  Companies  Zone,  Islamabad  VS  Messrs.  Geofizyka 

Krakow Pakistan Ltd. (2015 PTD 1169), wherein the following 

was held;  

10. In case titled 'Arif Hussain Shah v. Operation Director' 
reported  as  (PLD  1979  Lahore  603)  it  was  observed  as 
follows: 

"The  word  'non  obstante'  means  'notwithstanding'.  It 
means "despite" or "in spite of ". A "non obstante" clause 
is used in a provision to indicate that the provision should 
prevail despite anything to the contrary in any provision. 
While interpreting 'non obstante' clause, it should first be 
ascertained what the enacting part of the section provides 
on  a  fair  construction  of  words  used  according  to  their 
natural and ordinary meaning as a "non obstante" clause 
is to be understood as operating to set aside as no longer 
valid anything contained in relevant existing law which is 
inconsistent  in  the  new  enactment.  The  enacting  part  of 
the  Statute  must,  where  it  is  clear,  be  taken  to  control 

  
 
  
6. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

the  non  obstante  clause  where  both  cannot  be  read 
harmoniously for, even apart from such clause a later law 
abrogates an earlier law clearly inconsistent with it." 

11. The discussion of above-mentioned case law makes it 
clear that  the  purpose  of non  obstante  clause is  that  the 
Legislature intends that a particular provision which starts 
with  'notwithstanding'  should  prevail  over  any  other 
inconsistent provision.” 

5.   

The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  department 

submitted that the Ordinance of 1979 was the special law for 

purposes  of  taxation  and  not  the  Cooperative  Act  and 

consequently  section  80D  of  the  Ordinance  of  1979  must 

prevail  over  section  38  of  the  Cooperatives  Act.  He  further 

submitted that in order to determine which law is special and 

which  is  general,  the  pith  and  substance  of  the  said  statutes 

would  need  to  be  seen  and  given  that  it  is  the  Ordinance  of 

1979 that regulates the subject matter i.e. income tax liability 

of  the  assessee,  the  Ordinance  of  1979  would  be  the  special 

law  to  be  given  overriding  effect.  He  relied  on  Sui  Northern 

Gas  Pipeline  Limited  through  General  Manager  v.  Director 

(Legal) President Secretariat (Public) and 2 others  (PLD 2018 

SC  51)  wherein  relevant  precedents  on  the  question  of 

interpretation  of  special  law  was  discussed  in  the  following 

terms: 

18. In  view  above  discussion  on  two  special  laws,  it  can 

safely be concluded that when two special laws deal with 

similar  situation,  then  question  of  jurisdiction  has  to  be 

seen in the light of its nature, object, scope and remedial 

portion  provided  therein  in  ordinary  meaning  which  is 

called  as  literal  approach  of  reading  a  statute  to 

understand  its  true  legislative  intent.  It  is  also  settled 

proposition  of  law  that  special  statute  prevails  over 

general  statute  and  similarly,  general  provisions  and 

  
7. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

special  provisions  in  same  statute  would  have  different 

effect, when the plain and simple meaning of a provision 

of  law  is  clearly  understandable  without  any  ambiguity 

then nothing is to be presumed or imported from outside. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  2014  SCMR  671  (The  State  v. 

Syed  Ali  Baqar  Naqvi  and  others).  Even  otherwise,  the 

Courts  have  to  decide  any  question  in  accordance  with 

law and every citizen has right to be dealt in accordance 

with law under Article 10-A of the Constitution of Islamic 

Republic of Pakistan 1973. It is also settled proposition of 

law that  in  construing  and interpreting  a  special  law,  the 

Court  has  to  look  at  the  reasons  and  background,  which 

influenced  the  mind  of  the  legislature  in  enacting  the 

special law and the history of events, which had occurred 

preceding  the  enactment  of  the  special  law.  Similarly,  in 

construing  and  interpreting  Statute,  the  fundamental 

principle  is  to  discover  the  true  intent  of  the  legislature 

enacting  a  particular  law  to  meet  a  particular  situation 

and  to  confront  a  specific  emerging  threat  or  situation. 

Reliance is placed upon 2017 5CMR 1572 (Waris Ali and 5 

others v. The State). 

19. It is also settled proposition of law that when there is 

conflict  between  two  special  laws  containing  overriding 

clauses, generally statute later in time would prevail over 

the  statute  prior  in  time.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2017 

SCMR  1218  (Syed  Mushahid  Shah  v.  Federal  Investment 

Agency and others). 

20. Similarly,  another  rule  of  interpretation  of  statutes  is 

that  if  two  special  enactments  contain  provisions,  which 

give overriding effect to the provisions contained therein, 

then  the  Court  is  required  to  consider  purpose  and  the 

policy  underlying  the  two  Acts  and  the  clear  intendment 

conveyed  by  the  language  of  the  relevant  provisions. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  AIR  2012  SC  11  (Employees 

Provident  Fund  Commissioner  v.  O.  L.  of  Esskay 

Pharmaceuticals Limited) and 1956 SCR 603 (Shri Ramah 

Narain v. The Simla Banking and Industrial Co., Ltd.). The 

apex  Court  while  considering  all  the  case  laws  has 

rendered  following  principles  in  judgment  reported  as 

8. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

2017  SCMR  1218  (Syed  Mushahid  Shah  v.  Federal 

Investment Agency and others). 

(i) If  the  provisions  of  a  later  Act  are  so  inconsistent 

with  those  of  an  earlier  Act  that  both  cannot  stand 

together,  the  earlier  stands  impliedly  repealed  by  the 

later.  This  principle  is  based  on  the  maxim  leges 

posteriores  priores  contrarias  abrogant.  In  other 

words,  it  means  that  the  latest  expression  of  the  will 

of  the  Legislature  must  prevail.  This,  of  course,  is 

subject  to  the  condition  contained  in  the  next 

principle. That is: if the prior enactment is special and 

the  subsequent  enactment  is  general,  the  earlier 

special  Legislation  will  not  be,  indirectly,  repealed, 

altered  or  derogated  from  merely  by  force  of  the 

general  words  of  the  later  statute,  without  any 

indication of a particular strong intention to do so. 

(ii) A  general  later  law  does  not  abrogate,  by  mere 

implication,  an  earlier  particular  or  special  law  which 

deals with a special object or a special class of objects. 

This  principle  is  based  on  the  maxim  generalia 

specialibus  non  derogant.  But  when  a  general  Act  is 

incorporated  into  a  special  one,  the  provisions  of  the 

latter would prevail over any of the former with which 

they are inconsistent. If one statute enacts something 

in  general  terms,  and  afterwards  another  statute  is 

passed  on 

the  same  subject,  which,  although 

expressed  in  affirmative  language,  introduces  special 

conditions and restrictions, the subsequent statute will 

usually  be  considered  as  repealing  by  implication  the 

former,  for  "affirmative  statutes  introductive  of a  new 

law  do  imply  a  negative".  However,  if  a  subsequent 

statute  merely  creates  an  exception 

from 

the 

operation of a previous statute, the previous statute is 

not necessarily repealed. 

(iii) When  the  later  of  two  general  enactments  is 

couched in negative terms or in such affirmative terms 

which  unequivocally  involve  negative  which  proves 

fatal  to  the  earlier  enactment,  the  earlier  one  is 

impliedly repealed. 

9. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

(iv) When  the  two  statutes  are  expressed  in  negative 

terms,  they  may  be  affirmative  inter  se  and  may  not 

be  contradictory  to  each  other;  though  the  effect  of 

both may be that they are negative as regards a third 

statue  'at  which  both  of  them  may  have  made  some 

inroads'. When seen in  this  light,  an apparent conflict 

of  two  statutes  is  found  as  without  any  reality. 

Because  they  (sic)  objects  may  be  different  and  both 

may be parallel; and each may be restricted to its own 

particular subject or locality. 

(v) If the co-existence of the two inconsistent statutes 

would  be  destructive  of  the  object  for  which  the  later 

was passed, the earlier would be deemed to have been 

repealed. 

(vi) In so far as the Penal Acts are concerned, if a later 

statute again describes an offence created by a former 

one,  and  provides  a  different  punishment,  creates  a 

new jurisdiction and remedy and varies the procedure-

modifying the manner or changing the forum of trial or 

appeal, the earlier statute is impliedly repealed by the 

later  unless,  of  course,  both  of  them  can  exist  in 

parallel  application  to  different  localities,  subjects  or 

objects. 

(vii) When  the  words  are  clear  and  capable  to  proper 

operation,  the  revocation or alteration  of a statute  by 

construction  is  not  permissible.  The  Legislature  is 

normally  not  presumed  to  have  intended  to  keep  two 

contradictory enactments on the statute-book with the 

intention  of  repealing  the  one  with  the  other,  without 

expressing  an  intention  to  do  so.  Such  an  intention 

cannot  be  imputed  to  the  Legislature  without  some 

strong  reasons  and  unless  it  is  inevitable.  Before 

adopting the last-mentioned course, it is necessary for 

the  Courts  to  exhaust  all  possible  and  reasonable 

constructions  which  offer  an  escape  from  repeal  by 

implication. 

(viii) All  other  consideration  being  equal, 

if  the 

inconsistency, in spite of applying all general principles 

of  interpretation  of  statutes,  cannot  be  resolved,  a 

statute more beneficial in remedy or method of taking 

10. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

action  will  override  the  statute  which  is  not  so 

beneficial." 

6.   

In  Syed  Mushahid  Shah  and  others  VS  FIA  and 

others  (2017  SCMR  1218)  the  august  Supreme  Court 

considered whether the Banking Courts constituted under the 

Financial Institutions (Recovery of Finances) Ordinance, 2001 

have  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  try  offences  to  the  exclusion  of 

Special  Courts  established  under  the  Offences  in  Respect  of 

Banks (Special Courts) Ordinance, 1984 and ordinary criminal 

courts  under  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898  and  the 

Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and held that:   

“When  there  were  two  special  laws  both  of  which 

contained  overriding  clauses,  and  there  was  a  conflict 

between  them,  generally  the  statute  later  in  time  would 

prevail  over  the  statute  prior  in  time.  Said  presumption, 

however,  was  not  automatic,  instead  a  host  of  other 

factors  including  the  object,  purpose  and  policy  of  both 

statutes  and  the  legislature’s  intention,  as  expressed  by 

the language employed therein, needed to be considered 

in order to determine which of the two special laws was to 

prevail”. 

7.   

The  Indian  Supreme  Court  has  also  reflected  on  the 

principles  that  guide  interpretation  of  statutes  in  case  of 

statutory  conflict,  including,  inter  alia,  interpretation  of 

seemingly  conflicting  provisions  between  a  general  and  a 

special  law  as  well  as  seemingly  conflicting  provisions 

between two special laws. 

(i) 

In  Maruti  Udyog  Ltd  v  Ram  Lal  [(2005)  2  SCC 

638] Supreme Court of India observed that “It is law 

settled  that  when  both  statutes  containing  non 

 
11. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

obstante  clauses  are  special  statutes,  an  endeavor 

should  be  made  to  give  effect  to  both  of  them.  In 

case of conflict, the later shall prevail”. 

(ii) 

In Maharashtra Tubes Ltd. VS  State Industrial 

and  Investment  Corporation  of  Maharashtra  Ltd  and 

another [1993(2) SCC 144] the question was that of 

inconsistency  between  two  special  laws,  the  Finance 

Corporation  Act,  1951  and  the  Sick  Industries 

(Special  Provisions)  Act,  1985,  wherein  both 

contained  non-obstante  clauses.  It  was  held  that, 

“The  1985  Act  being  a  subsequent  enactment,  the 

non-obstante  clause  therein  would  ordinarily  prevail 

over  the  non-obstante  clause  in  Section  46-B  of  the 

1951  Act  unless  it  is  found  that  the  1985  Act  is  a 

general  statute  and  the  1951  statute  is  a  special 

one…" 

(iii) 

In  Solidaire  India  Ltd  vs  Fairgrowth  Financial 

Services  Ltd.  and  others  [(2001)  3  SCC  71],  it  was 

held by the Supreme Court of India that: 

“9. It is clear that both these Acts are special Acts. 

This Court has laid down in no uncertain terms that 

in  such  an  event  it  is  the  later  Act  which  must 

prevail… 

10.  We  may  notice  that  the  Special  Court  had  in 

another  case  dealt  with  a  similar  contention.  In 

Bhoruka Steel Ltd. v. Fairgrowth Financial Services 

Ltd. 

it  had  been  contended 

that 

recovery 

proceedings under the Special Court Act should be 

stayed  in  view  of  the  provisions  of  the  1985  Act. 

Rejecting  this  contention,  the  Special  Court  had 

come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Special  Court  Act 

being  a  later  enactment  would  prevail.  The  head-

note  which  brings  out  succinctly  the  ratio  of  the 

said decision is as follows: 

“Where  there  are  two  special  statutes  which 
contain non-obstante clauses the later statute 

 
 
 
12. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

must  prevail.  This  is  because  at  the  time  of 
enactment of the later statute, the Legislature 
was  aware  of  the  earlier  legislation  and  its 
non-obstante  clause.  If  the  Legislature  still 
confers  the  later  enactment  with  a  non-
obstante  clause  it  means  that  the  Legislature 
wanted  that  enactment  to  prevail.  If  the 
Legislature does not want the later enactment 
to  prevail  then  it  could  and  would  provide  in 
the  later enactment  that  the  provisions  of the 
earlier enactment continue to apply. 

(iv)  In  ShriRam  Narain  VS  Simla  Banking  and 

Industrial  Co.  Ltd.  (AIR  1956  SC  614)  the  Supreme 

Court  of  India  considered  the  Banking  Companies 

Act,  1949  and 

the  Displaced  Persons  (Debt 

Adjustment) Act, 1951, both of which had provisions 

giving  overriding  effect  to  their  own  provisions  over 

any other law. The Court observed: 

“(7)  …Each  enactment  being  a  special  Act,  the 
ordinary  principle  that  a  special  law  overrides  a 
general  law  does  not  afford  any  clear  solution  in 
this  case…It  is,  therefore,  desirable  to  determine 
the  overriding  effect  of  one  or  the  other  of  the 
relevant  provisions  in  these  two  Acts,  in  a  given 
case,  on  much  broader  considerations  of  the 
purpose and policy underlying the two Acts and the 
clear  intendment  conveyed  by  the  language  of  the 
relevant provisions therein”.   

(v)  In  Ashoka  Marketing  Ltd.  and  Another  v.  Punjab 

National Bank and Others (AIR 1991 SC 855) it was held 

that: 

“55. The Rent Control Act makes a departure from 

the  general  law  regulating  the  relationship  of 

landlord  and  tenant  contained  in  the  Transfer  of 

Property  Act  inasmuch  as  it  makes  provision  for 

determination  of  standard  rent,  it  specifies  the 

grounds on which a landlord can seek the eviction 

of  a 

tenant, 

it  prescribes 

the 

forum 

for 

adjudication  of  disputes  between  landlords  and 

tenants  and  the  procedure  which  has  to  be 

followed in such proceedings. The Rent Control Act 

can,  therefore,  be  said  to  be  a  special  statute 

regulating  the  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

in the Union territory of Delhi. The Public Premises 

Act  makes  provision  for  a  speedy  machinery  to 

secure  eviction  of  unauthorised  occupants  from 

public  premises.  As  opposed  to  the  general  law 

which  provides  for  filing  of  a  regular  suit  for 

recovery of possession of property in a competent 

court and for trial of such a suit in accordance with 

the  procedure  laid  down  in  the  Code  of  Civil 

Procedure,  the  Public  Premises  Act  confers  the 

power  to  pass  an  order  of  eviction  of  an 

unauthorised  occupant  in  a  public  premises  on  a 

designated officer and prescribes the procedure to 

be followed by the said officer before passing such 

an order. Therefore, the Public Premises Act is also 

a 

special 

statute 

relating 

to  eviction  of 

unauthorised  occupants  from  public  premises.  In 

other  words,  both  the  enactments,  namely,  the 

Rent  Control  Act  and  the  Public  Premises  Act,  are 

special  statutes  in  relation  to  the  matters  dealt 

with  therein.  Since,  the  Public  Premises  Act  is  a 

special  statute  and  not  a  general  enactment  the 

exception  contained 

in  the  principle  that  a 

subsequent  general  law  cannot  derogate  from  an 

earlier  special  law  cannot  be  invoked  and  in 

accordance  with  the  principle  that  the  later  laws 

abrogate earlier contrary laws, the Public Premises 

Act must prevail over the Rent Control Act”. 

“61.  The  principle  which  emerges  from  these 

decisions  is  that  in  the  case  of  inconsistency 

between the provisions of two enactments, both of 

which  can  be  regarded  as  Special  in  nature,  the 

conflict  has  to  be  resolved  by  reference  to  the 

purpose and policy underlying the two enactments 

and  the  clear 

intendment  conveyed  by  the 

language of the relevant provisions therein”. 

(vi) 

In Allahabad Bank v Canara Bank and another 

[(2000)  4  SCC  406]  the  Supreme  Court  of  India 

held that:   

 
 
 
14. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

“38.  At  the  same  time,  some  High  Courts  have 
rightly  held  that  the  Companies  Act  is  a  general 
Act and does not prevail under the RDB Act… 

39.  There  can  be  a  situation  in  law  where  the 
same statute is treated as a special statute vis-a-
vis  one  legislation  and  again  as  a  general  statute 
vis-a-vis  yet  another  legislation.  Such  situations 
do arise as held in LIC of India v.  D.J.Bahadur. It 
was there observed:  

“... for certain cases, an Act may be general and 
for certain other purposes, it may be special and 
the court  cannot  blur  a  distinction when  dealing 
with the finer points of law”. (emphasis supplied) 

For example, a Rent Control Act may be a special 
statute  as  compared  to  the  Code  of  Civil 
Procedure. But vis-a-vis an Act permitting eviction 
from  public  premises  or  some  special  class  of 
buildings,  the  Rent  Control  Act  may  be  a  general 
statute.  In  fact  in  DamjiValji  Shah  v.  LIC  of  India 
(already referred to), this Court has observed that 
vis-a-vis  the  LIC  Act,  1956,  the  Companies  Act, 
1956  can  be  treated  as  a  general  statute.  This  is 
clear  from  para  19  of  that  judgment.  It  was 
observed:  

“Further,  the  provisions  of  the  special  Act,  i.e.,  the 
LIC  Act,  will  override  the  provisions  of  the  general 
Act, viz., the Companies Act which is an Act relating 
to companies in general”. 

Thus,  some  High  Courts  rightly  treated  the 
Companies  Act as  a  general  statute,  and  the  RDB 
Act  as  a  special  statute  overriding  the  general 
statute. 

40.  Alternatively,  the  Companies  Act,  1956  and 
the  RDB  Act  can  both  be  treated  as  special  laws, 
and  the  principle  that  when  there  are  two  special 
laws,  the  latter  will  normally  prevail  over  the 
former  if  there  is  a  provision  in  the  latter  special 
Act giving it overriding effect, can also be applied. 
Such a provision is there in the RDB Act, namely, 
Section 34…” 

8.   

In  view  of  the  case  law  cited  above,  the  following 

principles of interpretation can be deciphered while construing 

the  meaning  of  seemingly  conflicting  provisions  between 

special laws: 

i. 

While applying seemingly conflicting provisions 

of  two  statutes  a  court  must  seek  to  interpret  them 

in  a  manner  that  affords  harmonious  construction 

 
 
 
15. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

and  prevents  the  emergence  of  a  conflict  between 

their provisions. It is to be assumed that in the event 

the  legislature  wished  to  override  an  existing  law  it 

would  do  so  explicitly  and  thus  the  doctrine  of 

implied  repeal  is  not  to  be  readily  or  mechanically 

invoked.     

ii. 

Special law prevails over general law. And in a 

conflict  between  two  special  laws  the  one  later  in 

time  will  ordinarily  prevail  for  being  an  embodiment 

of the latest expression of the legislature intent. But, 

as  aforesaid,  this  principle  is  not  to  be  mechanically 

applied as being aware of an earlier special law, the 

legislature  could  override  the  same  through  explicit 

language  in  a  subsequent  special  law  if  it  is  so 

wished. 

iii. 

In  the  event  that  there 

is  contradiction 

between  the  provisions  of  two  statutes  it  is  to  be 

presumed  that  the  statute  within  the  provision  of 

which  the  legislature  has  included  a  non-obstante 

clause is to be given overriding effect over provisions 

of the other statute that it is in conflict with, in order 

to give effect to expressed legislative intent. (In the 

event  that  both  statutes  contain  non-obstante 

clauses, the special law will prevail over general law, 

and  the  law  later  in  time  will  ordinarily  prevail  in 

case of conflict between two special laws). However, 

a  non-obstante  clause  is  also  not  to  be  given 

overriding  effect  in  a  mechanical  fashion  as  the 

underlying  object  of 

the 

interpretive  project 

undertaken  by  the  court  is  to  discover  the  meaning 

of  words  used  by  the  legislature:  a  non-obstante 

clause  is  usually  employed  to  suggest  that  the 

provision referred to in the non-obstante clause is to 

prevail  over  other  provisions  of  the  statute,  but 

repugnancy  between  non-obstante  clause  and  other 

clauses  is  not  to  be  presumed  and  overriding  effect 

16. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

is  to  be  accorded  only  in  case  of  irreconcilable 

conflict.  

iv. 

In  the  event  that  harmonious  construction 

cannot  be  accorded  to  the  provisions  of  two  special 

statues without giving tortured meaning to the words 

used  in  the  text,  the  object,  purpose  and  policy  of 

the  statutes  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  order  to 

discover  the 

legislative 

intent  regarding  which 

statute  is  to  be  given  overriding  effect  and  to  be 

treated as the special law with overriding effect over 

another special law. It is possible that a law is to be 

treated as a special law vis-a-vis one enactment and 

general law vis-a-vis another enactment.  

9.   

Before  we  apply  these  principles  to 

interpret 

provisions of the Cooperatives Act and the Ordinance of 1979, 

it will be useful to cite sections 6 and 8 of the General Clauses 

Act, 1897: 

6. Effect of repeal – Where this Act, or any (Central Act) 

or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, 

repeals  any  enactment  hitherto  made  or  hereafter  to  be 

made,  then,  unless  a  different  intention  appears,  the 

repeal shall not revive anything not in force or existing at 

the  time  at  which  the  repeal  takes  effect,  or  affect  the 

previous  operation  of  any  enactment  so  repealed  or 

anything  duly  done  or  suffered  thereunder,  or  affect  any 

right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 

incurrent under any enactment so repealed, or affect any 

penalty,  forfeiture  or  punishment  incurred  in  respect  of 

any  offence  committed  against  any  enactment  so 

repealed,  or  affect  any  investigation,  legal  proceeding  or 

remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, 

liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid.  

8.  Construction  of 

references 

to 

repealed 

enactments – (1) Where this Act, or any (Central Act) or 

regulation  made  after  the  commencement  of  this  Act, 

 
17. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

repeals  and  re-enacts,  with  or  without  notification,  any 

provision  of  a  former  enactment,  then  references  in  any 

other enactment or in any instrument to the provision so 

repealed  shall,  unless  a  different  intention  appears,  be 

construed as references to the provision so re-enacted. 

  10.  

The  effect  of  section  8  of  the  General  Clauses  Act, 

1897,  was  considered  recently  by  the  august  Supreme  Court 

in  Zarai  Taraqiati  Bank  Limited  v.  Said  Rehman  (2013  SCMR 

642)  wherein  it  cited  with  approval  the  judgment  of  the 

Supreme  Court  of  India  in  Rajya  v.  Gopikabai  (AIR  1979  SC 

79) which held as follows: 

“Broadly  speaking,  legislation  by  referential  incorporation 

falls  in  two  categories:  first  where  a  statute  by  specific 

reference  incorporates  the  provisions  of  another  statute 

as  of  the  time  of  adoption.  Second,  where  a  statute 

incorporates  by  general  references  the  law  concerning  a 

particular  subject  as  a  genus.  In  the  case  of  the  former, 

the subsequent amendment made in the referred statute 

cannot automatically be read into the adoption statute. In 

the  case  of latter category,  it  may  be presumed  that  the 

legislative  intent  was  to  include  all  the  subsequent 

amendments also made from time to time in the general 

law  on  the  subject  adopted  by  general  reference.  This 

principle  of  construction  of  a  reference  statute  has  been 

aptly summed up by Sutherland thus:  

“A  statute  which  refers  to  law  of  a  subject 

generally  adopts  the  law  on  the  subject  as  of  the 

time  the  law  is  invoked.  This  will  include  all  the 

amendments  and  modifications  of 

the 

law 

subsequent  to  the  time  the  reference  statute  was 

enacted.”  

In Zarai Taraqiati Bank the principle of construction stated by 

Sutherland and cited by the Supreme Court of India Rajya v. 

Gopikabai  has  been  employed  in  relation  to  inclusion  of  the 

 
18. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

provisions  of  another  statute  by  reference  and  when 

subsequent  changes 

in  the  provisions  of  the  statute 

incorporated  by  reference  would  also  automatically  be  read 

into  the  statute  incorporating  such  provisions.  There  seems 

no  logical  reason  why  the  same  interpretive  principle  would 

not  be  applicable  in  relation  to  exclusion  of  the  provisions  of 

another  statute  by  reference  as  in  case  of  the  Cooperatives 

Act in juxtaposition with the Ordinance of 1979. In the event 

that  a  statute  excludes  the  provisions  of  another  statute 

explicitly, it would be arguable that even subsequent changes 

in  the  excluded  statute  would  remain  excluded  and  the 

doctrine of implied repeal would not be mechanically invoked 

to  override  the  exclusion  clause  in  the  statue  excluding  the 

applicability  of  another  statute,  unless 

intent  can  be 

deciphered  from  the  language  used  by  the  legislature  in  the 

amended  provisions  of  the  excluded  statute  to  express  a 

contrary intention. 

11. 

Let  us  now  reproduce  section  80D  of  the  Ordinance 

of 1979. 

[80D.  Minimum  tax  on  income  of  certain  [persons]. 

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance 

or any other law for the time being in force, where no tax 

is payable [or paid] by a company or a registered firm [an 

individual, an association of persons, an unregistered firm 

or a Hindu undivided family which, not being a company, 

does  not  qualify 

for  assessment  under 

the  self 

assessment scheme  under  sub-section  (1)  of  section  59] 

resident in Pakistan or the tax payable or paid is less than 

on-half  per  cent  of  the  amount  representing  its  turnover 

from  all  sources,  the  aggregate  of  the  declared  turnover 

shall be deemed to be the income of the said company or 

19. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

a registered firm [an individual, an association of persons, 

an  unregistered  firm  or  a  Hindu  undivided  family  which, 

not  being  a  company,  does  not  qualify  for  assessment 

under  the  self  assessment scheme  under  sub-section (1) 

of  section  59]  and  tax  thereon  shall  be  charged  in  the 

manner specified in sub-section (2). 

[Explanation.-  For  the  removal  of  doubt,  it  is  declared 

that the expression "where no tax is payable or paid" and 

"or the tax payable or paid" apply to all cases where tax 

is  not  payable  or  paid  for  any  reason  whatsoever 

including any loss of income, profits or gains or set off of 

loss  of  earlier  years,  exemption  from  tax,  credits  or 

rebates  in  tax,  and  allowances  and  deductions  (including 

depreciation)  admissible  under  any  provision  of  this 

Ordinance or any other law for the time being in force.] 

(2) The company or a registered firm [, an individual, an 

association  of  persons,  an  unregistered  firm  or  a  Hindu 

undivided  family  which,  not  being  a  company,  does  not 

qualify for assessment under the self assessment scheme 

under  sub-section  (1)  of  section  59]  referred  to  in  sub-

section (1) shall pay as income tax- 

(a)   an  amount,  where  no  tax  is  payable  or  paid 

equal to one-half per cent of the said turnover; and 

(b)   an amount, where the tax payable or paid is 

less  than  one-half  per  cent  of  the  said  turnover, 

equal to the difference between the tax payable [or 

paid] and the amount calculated in accordance with 

clause (a). 

Explanation: For the removal of doubt it is declared 

that "turnover" means the gross receipts, exclusive 

of trade discount shown on invoices or bills, derived 

from the sale of goods or from rendering, giving or 

supplying services or benefits or from execution of 

contracts. 

[(3)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  apply  to  an  individual, 

an association of persons, an unregistered firm or a Hindu 

 
 
 
 
 
 
20. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

undivided  family  in  respect  of  any  assessment  year 

commencing  on,  or  after,  the  first  day  of  July,  2001.] 

12.  

Before we proceed to consider the Cooperatives Act, 

let  us  also  consider  section  54  of  the  Ordinance  of  2001. 

While  the  tax  year  under  consideration  is  prior  to  the 

promulgation  of  the  Ordinance  of  2001  and  therefore  its 

provisions are not attracted, the intent of the legislature with 

effect from the entry into force of the  Ordinance of 2001, as 

reflected in the text of section 54 is meaningful: 

54.  Exemptions  and  tax  provisions  in  other  laws.—

No provision in any other law providing for —  

(a) an exemption from any tax imposed under this 

Ordinance;  

(b)  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  tax  imposed  under 

this Ordinance;  

(c)  a  reduction  in  tax  liability  of  any  person  under 

this Ordinance; or  

(d)  an  exemption  from  the  operation  of  any 

provision  of  this  Ordinance,  shall  have  legal  effect 

unless also provided for in this Ordinance; 

Provided  that  any  exemption  from  income  tax  or  a 

reduction in the rate of tax or a reduction in tax liability of 

any  person  or  an  exemption  from  the  operation  of  any 

provision of this Ordinance provided in any other law and 

in  force  on  the  commencement  of  this  Ordinance  shall 

continue to be available unless withdrawn. 

The proviso to section 54 was omitted by Finance Act, 2008.  

13. 

The provisions of the Cooperatives Act most relevant 

for our purposes are being reproduced below: 

Section 3. 

Act  to  override  other  laws.-(l)  Except  as  provided  in 

sub-section (2), this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 

anything  contained  in  the  Banks  (Nationalization)  Act, 

 
 
 
 
21. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

1974 (XIX of 1974), or any other law, excepting the State 

Bank  of  Pakistan  Act,  1956  (XXXIII  of  1956),  and  the 

Banking  Companies  Ordinance,  1962  (LVII  of  l962),  as 

amended  by  this  Act,  for  time  being  in  force  or  any 

instrument  having  effect  by  virtue  of  any  law  or  any 

agreement,  contract,  award  or  memorandum  or  articles 

of association or other instrument.  

(2) Nothing in-  

(a)  section  36  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  Act, 

l956  (XXXIII  of  l956),  shall  apply  to  the  chairman 

or a Director, other than the Managing Director;  

(b)  clause  (iv)  of  sub-section  (l)  of  section  14  of 

the  Banking  Companies  Ordinance,  1962  (LVII  of 

1962),  shall  apply  to  shares  of  the  Bank  held  by 

the State Bank;  

(c) section 27, section 28, clause (b) of sub-section 

(6)  of  section  40,  clause  (c)  of  subsection  (l)  of 

section  42,  parts  Il  and  IV,  or  section  89  of  the 

Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 (LVII of 1962) 

shall apply to the Bank;  

(d) clause (c) of sub-section (l), or sub-section (2), 

(3),  (4)  and  (5)  of  section  11,  sub-section  (3)  of 

section  14,  sections  15,  15-A,  l5-B,  l5-C  or  20, 

sub-section (3) or (6) of section 25, sub-section (4) 

or (5) of section 40, or section 41-A, 41-B, 41-C, or 

83 of the Banking Companies Ordinance, l962 (LVII 

of 1962), shall apply to the Chairman or a Director 

other than the Managing Director. 

Section 4. 

Power  to  exempt, and  suspend  operation  of  Act,  in 

certain  cases.-The  Federal  Government  may,  by 

notification  in  the  official  Gazette,  and  subject  to  such 

conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt 

the Bank from, or suspend the application to the Bank of, 

all or any of the provisions of this Act, either generally or 

for such period as may be so specified. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

 Section 38. 

Exemption  of  the  Bank 

from  certain  taxes.-

Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Income  Tax 

Ordinance,  1979  (XXXI  of  1979),  the  Gift-tax  Act,  1963 

(XIV of I 963), the Wealth Tax Act, 1963 (XV of 1963), or 

any  other  law  in  force  relating  to  income  tax,  super  tax, 

wealth-tax, gift tax or business profits tax, the Bank shall 

not  be  liable  to  pay  any  such  tax  on  its  income,  profits, 

gains, wealth or gifts.  

Section 39. 

Exemption  from  stamp  duty,  etc.-The  Bank  shall  not 

be liable to the payment of any stamp duty, court fee or 

registration fee payable under any law for the time being 

in force relating to stamp duty, court fees or registration 

of documents.  

14. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  the  text,  object, 

purpose  and  policy  of  the  Cooperatives  Act.  Through  the 

Cooperatives Act, the legislature created the Bank, the shares 

of  which  were  subscribed  by  the  Federal  Government,  the 

State  Bank  and  the  governments  of  the  four  provinces. 

Section  3  provides  for  an  unequivocal  overriding  clause  and 

includes  within  it  the  exceptions.  Section  4  delegates  to  the 

Federal Government the power to suspend application of any 

provisions  of  the  Cooperatives  Act  to  the  Bank.  Section  38 

creates  an  explicit  carve-out  from  the  Bank  from  the 

application  of  various  taxation  statutes, 

including  the 

Ordinance  of  1979.  Section  39  provides  exemption  from 

stamp duty and court fees etc. Section 41 creates a carve-out 

for  the  law  relating  to  winding  up  of  companies  and  banks. 

Section  44  prohibits  the  police  from  investigating  offences 

under  the  Act  except  on  the  request  of  a  bank  official 

authorized in such behalf. Section 45 prohibits all courts other 

 
 
 
 
23. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

than  the  High  Court  from  taking  cognizance  of  any  offences 

under  the  Act.  Sections  48  and  49  go  on  to  amend  the 

Banking  Companies  Ordinance,  1962  and 

the  Banks 

(Nationalization)  Act,  1974.  The  language  used  in  the 

Cooperatives  Act  suggests  that  Parliament,  while  acting  in 

exercise of powers conferred upon it by provincial assemblies 

under  Article  144  of  the  Constitution,  enacted  a  standalone 

law  for  regulation  of  all  affairs  of  the  Bank  for  owned  jointly 

by the Federal Government, the State Bank and the Provincial 

Governments, and deliberately excluded the application of all 

other laws, including special laws on the subject of taxation or 

winding up etc. In the event that the Parliament subsequently 

wishes to subject the income of the Bank jointly owned by the 

federal  and  provincial  governments  to  federal  income  tax  it 

would  do  so  using  explicit  language  to  amend  or  override 

section 38 of the Cooperatives Act.  

15. 

It  is  evident  from  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of 

1979  in  juxtaposition  with  section  54  of  the  Ordinance  of 

2001,  that  while  the  Ordinance  of  1979  was  special  law  the 

legislature  did  not  mean  for  it  to  occupy  and  address  the 

subject-matter  of  taxation  wholly  and  to  the  exclusion  of  all 

other  laws  as  it  did  in  case  of  the  Ordinance  of  2001  by 

including  section  54  within  it.  As  the  legislature  cannot  bind 

itself,  it  is  still  possible  for  the  legislature  to  create  a  carve-

out for an entity from the provisions of the Ordinance of 2001 

in  another  special  law.  But  given  the  explicit  language  of 

section 54 of the Ordinance of 2001, such exclusion will need 

24. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

to be introduced through explicit language and in view of the 

afore-stated principles of interpretation, courts would be slow 

to  employ  the  doctrine  of  implied  repeal  in  face  of  explicit 

language in a special law. However, it is not the application of 

provisions of the Ordinance of 2001 that is before us but that 

of  the  Ordinance  of  1979  that  does  not  contain  a  provision 

that is pari materia to section 54 of the Ordinance of 2001.  

16. 

The question before us is whether section 80D of the 

Ordinance  of  1979  overrides 

the  provisions  of 

the 

Cooperatives  Act.  To  hold  so,  we  would  either  need  to  hold 

that the Ordinance of 1979 is a special law that excludes the 

Cooperatives  Act,  which  is  a  general  law,  or  employ  the 

doctrine  of  implied  repeal  to  hold  that  by  virtue  of 

promulgation  of  section  80D,  it  must  be  implied  that  the 

legislature  wished  to  override  section  38  of  the  Cooperatives 

Act. The two problems with such conclusion are as follows: (i) 

the Cooperatives Act is a special law, as discussed above, and 

in  view  of  the  text,  object,  purpose  and  policy  employed  in 

the said act, it seems that the legislature wished for it to be a 

stand-alone  enactment 

to 

the  exclusion  of  all  other 

enactments  when  it  came  to  regulating  the  affairs  of  the 

Bank, including, inter alia, its tax affairs; and (ii) in the event 

that the legislature intended for section 80D to repeal through 

implication  contrary  provisions  in  any  or  all  other  special 

enactments,  there  was  nothing  preventing  it  from  using 

language such as that used in section 54 of the Ordinance of 

2001 to make its intent clear.   

25. 

T.R No. 07/2007 

17. 

In  view  of  the  above,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that 

section 80D of the Ordinance of 1979 cannot be treated as a 

special law ousting the carveout created by section 38 of the 

Cooperatives Act for tax purposes. In our present context the 

Cooperatives Act is the special law the provisions of which are 

to  be  given  overriding  effect  in  the  relevant  tax  year  in  case 

of any conflict between section 80D of the Ordinance of 1979 

and  section  38  of  the  Cooperatives  Act  and  the  learned 

Appellate Tribunal erred when it held otherwise. We therefore 

answer the question raised before us in the affirmative.  

            (CHIEF JUSTICE)   

   (BABAR SATTAR)   
    JUDGE 

  Announced in open Court on 05.04.2021. 

    (CHIEF JUSTICE)   

           JUDGE 

Saeed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
