ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl. Misc. No. 798/2020 

IMRAN KHAN. 

   VS

   THE STATE.    

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Yasir Sultan Yousafzai, Advocate. 

Complainant by: 

Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, Advocate. 

State by: 

Ms. Ruqayya Sami, AAG. 
Mr. Adnan Khan, A.D, FIA. 

Date of Hearing:   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

17.07.2020. 

LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ; J:   

This  petition  for  bail  after  arrest  u/s  497 

Cr.P.C has been filed by Imran Khan, who has been arrested on the complaint of 

one  Liaqat  Ali  Khan,  in  case  FIR  No.30,  dated  22.10.2019,  for  offences  under 

section  20,21,24  of  the  Prevention  of  Electronic  Crime  Act,  2016  read  with 

Section  500,  506  &  109/34  PPC,  registered  at  Police  Station,  Cyber  Crimes 

reporting Centre, Islamabad. 

2. 

The facts in brief are that, the above cited FIR against the petitioner along 

with other accused  persons was registered on the complaint of Liaqat Ali Khan, 

for  sending  immodest  and  indecent  pictures  of  the  complainant  and  his  family 

members  and  messages  with  abusive  language  through  What’sapp  cell  phone 

Nos.  0345-5975421  &  0349-5401030  and  through  following  created/operated 

Facebook profiles:- 

(i)  

Imran Khan (cousin of Awais Khan), at Facebook Profile Khan 
URL: 
Imran 
www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100016078606630; 

having 

Khan 

(ii)   Shahbaz Khan, at Facebook profile Shahbaz Khan having URL: 
www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100015141307153; 

(iii)  Waqas  Ahmed  Khattak  at  Facebook  profile  URL: 

www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=1000025429658699; and 

(iv)  at  webpage 

URL: 
https://www.facebook.com/KhaN.Group.ChaKMaNsOoR.786/.  

“ChakMansoor 

having 

News” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Misc.798/B of 2020 
Imran Khan v. The State 

2 

3. 

Allegedly,  the  accused  used  to  upload  superimposed  and  fabricated 

sexually  explicit  pictures  with  derogatory  and  filthy  language  by  using  above 

mentioned links and means of social media with the intention to harass, defame 

the complainant, his wife, sons and daughters including a minor daughter.  

4. 

Learned  Counsel  for  the  Petitioner/accused  submitted  that  he  has  been 

involved  in  the  case  on  account  of  enmity  between  the  families  of  the 

complainant and his real brother, the father of co-accused Awais Khan who have 

more  than  15  years  old  history  of  family  animosity  over  properties.  The  hatred 

between  them  was  developed  when  Tariq,  the  son  of  the  complainant  broke 

engagement  with  said  co-accused’s  sister.  Learned  counsel  argued  that  the 

present  FIR  is  a  counter  blast  of  another  FIR  registered  by  family  of  the  co-

accused  Awais  Khan  for  same  offences  under  PECA  2016,  against  son  of  the 

complainant,  whose  bail  petition  has  also  been  rejected  by  the  Hon’ble  Sindh 

High  Court;  that  the  petitioner  is  a  civil  servant  and  has  unblemished  service 

record; that no specific role has been assigned to the Petitioner in the FIR; that 

the petitioner although received those pictures but has not transmitted the same 

onward; that the petitioner has been involved in fake, frivolous, baseless and ill-

founded  case;  that  the  petitioner  has  voluntarily  surrendered  himself  to  the 

authorities after the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 07.04.2020 as he 

was  released  on  bail,  vide  order  of  the  Hon’ble  Islamabad  High  Court  dated 

20.03.2020;    that  the  petitioner  has  no  criminal  history;  that  the  case  is  of 

further inquiry and the investigation in respect of the petitioner has already been 

completed  thus  his  incarceration  would  serve  no  useful  purpose;  that  there  is 

also  no  possibility  of  tempering  the  prosecution  evidence  or  record  by  the 

petitioner.  Learned  Counsel  placed  reliance  on  case  of  Muhammad Hayat 

Khan VS The State (2019 Cr.L.J472) and  submitted  that  in  view  of  settled 

principles u/s 497(2) CPC, the petitioner is eligible for grant of bail in the instant 

case. 

5. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  Counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently 

opposed  the  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  accused/petitioner  and 

objected the grant of bail to the accused while submitting that the petitioner has 

been  nominated  with  specific  role  in  the  FIR  for  having  created  the  face  book 

links  for  the  purposes  of  uploading  and  transmitting  the  fabricated  derogatory 

pictures and indecent material by using whatsapp having cell phone sims in  his 

name, against the family  of the complaint, more particularly against the  female 

 
Crl. Misc.798/B of 2020 
Imran Khan v. The State 

3 

family  members,  thus  has  direct  nexus  in  the  criminal  activity  under 

consideration  along  with  his  cousin  Awais  Khan  and  other  co-accused  persons; 

that  the  petitioner  has  been  removed  from  service  as  such  is  no  more  a  civil 

servant;  that  the  offences,  though,  do  not  fall  within  the  prohibitory  clause  of 

section 497 Cr.PC but the offences are extremely immoral which involve question 

of reputation of a respectable family and more importantly dignity and modesty 

of ladies who are school & college students. Learned counsel further contended 

that grant of bail cannot be claimed as of a right and each and every case is to 

be dealt with on the basis of its own facts and circumstances, that the bail of his 

co-accused  namely  Awais  Khan  has  also  been  rejected  by  this  Court  vide  Crl. 

Misc  No.  109-B/2020  dated  09.03.2020.  Thus  having  common  set  of  facts  and 

circumstances, the accused is not entitled for concession of bail and this petition 

is also liable to be dismissed. 

6. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  rival  parties  and  have  also 

perused the relevant record submitted by the IO through State Counsel. 

7. 

Examination  of  the  record  revealed  that  the  complainant  and  all  the 

accused are relatives and allegations against all  of them are similar, comprising 

the  offence  of  superimposing,  fabricating,  preparing  and  transmitting  illicit, 

immoral pictures of the family members of complainant using different means of 

social media i.e facebook and whatsapp by also using filthy, abusive, derogatory 

and  defamatory  language.  It  is  noted  that  another  FIR  has  been  registered 

against son of complainant Tariq in FIA, Cyber Crime Reporting Center, Karachi 

invoking the provisions of Sections 16, 20, 21 of PECA 2016 r/w 419 & 109 PPC 

and  the  bail  of  accused  Tariq  has  been  rejected  by  the  Hon’ble    Sindh  High 

Court, Karachi. Moreover, the Criminal Petition No. 1028 of 2019 against the said 

bail refusal order has also been dismissed by Hon’ble Supreme Court.  

8. 

I have also gone through the bail rejection order dated 09.03.2020 of the 

other  co-accused  namely  Awais  Khan  who  happens  to  be  the  nephew  of  the 

complainant. Record transpired that the contention of the Learned Counsel of the 

Petitioner regarding old enmity between rival party is correct, but that cannot be 

made  ground  for  considering  the  grant  of  bail  when  investigation  record  of 

subscriber  information  of  the  creator  of  Facebook  ID  and  link  as  well  as  cell 

phone number against which Whatsapp account was created depicts the name of 

the petitioner and point towards his direct connection with the offence and also 

 
Crl. Misc.798/B of 2020 
Imran Khan v. The State 

4 

shows uploading and transmitting the indecent, offensive and vulgar pictures and 

material  against  the  complainant  and  his  family  member  from  those  accounts. 

The  argument  of  non-assigning  of  specific  role  to  the  petitioner  has  no  weight 

thus rejected. 

9. 

The  case  record  produced  by  FIA  shows  that  petitioner,  during 

investigation,  admitted  receiving,  transmitting,  sharing,  uploading  derogatory 

and  indecorous,  fabricated  photos  of  the  complainant  and  his  family  members 

including female members for the purposes of defaming them. Data of facebook 

and whatsapp collected from cell phones of the accused/petitioner and other co-

accused  was  retrieved  and  also  sent  for  forensic  analysis  and  examination.  In 

addition, information in respect of facebook URLs created and operated by all the 

accused were also obtained by the facebook authorities. All the information/data 

of conversation at whatsapp, forensic examination report of the cell phones and 

information  and  verification  of  URL  and  IDs  received  from  facebook  authority 

prima  facie 

constitute 

sufficient 

incriminating  material  against 

the 

accused/petitioner 

shows 

existence  of 

reasonable  grounds  of 

the 

accused/petitioner’s involvement in the alleged offence and disentitle him for the 

concession of bail. Learned Counsel for the Complainant also informed the Court 

that  Awais  Khan  was  released  on  bail,  vide  order  dated  20.03.2020,  passed  by 

the  Hon’ble  Islamabad  High  Court,  on  the  outbreak  of  Covid-19  pandemic, 

however,  after  setting  aside  of  the  said  order  by  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  on 

07.04.2020,  he  is  now  absconder.  Moreover,  the  other  co-accused  have  also 

been declared proclaimed offenders.  The contention of the Learned Counsel for 

the Petitioner that offence in the present case do not fall within the prohibitory 

clause has no force as the law has also been settled in this regard that mere fact 

that the offence does not fall within the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.PC, 

does not mean that  the offence becomes bailable, as it is also well settled that 

the  concession  of  bail  cannot  be  claimed  as  a  right.  The  concession  of  bail  is 

legally allowable where nature of offence is not heinous and against the society; 

where there is no possibility of repetition of offence; where there are prima facie 

evidence  of  fake  and  frivolous  involvement  of  the  petitioner;  where  there  is  no 

chance of abscondence; when there is no chance of tampering with evidence of 

prosecution  and  that  petitioner  is  not  a  habitual  offender  has  no  previous 

criminal  history  and  that  the  concession  of  bail  will  not  be  misused  by  the 

Petitioner.  All  these  possibilities  are  taken  into  consideration  while  considering 

 
Crl. Misc.798/B of 2020 
Imran Khan v. The State 

5 

the present petition for grant of bail after arrest. Regarding accepting/refusing of 

bail involving similar offence as in the instant case, the Hon’ble Sindh High Court 

in  case  titled  Farhan Kamrani VSThe State (2018 YLR 329) on  the 

arguments  that  offence  being  out  of  the  prohibitory  clause  of  section  497  CPC, 

has held as under:- 

“9. Although, the offence under section 21 of the Act does not fall within 
the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. being punishable up to five 
(05) years, but in such like cases the grant of bail is not a right of the 
accused but a concession and since the accused is prima facie involved in 
a case of superimposing a photograph of the face of a woman over 
sexually explicit image, he is not entitled to the concession of bail simply 
for the reason that he is connected with such offence, which seriously 
affect the whole society. The accused has apparently gone to grotesque 
lengths  to  humiliate  the  complainant  online,  which  may  cause  a 
detrimental effect on her. It may be observed that the impact of 
uploading on internet the superimposed porn photographs of a woman is 
more than the shame and shock that one might feel when she discovers 
herself to be the victim of this crime. The immediate real time effect is 
the social stigmatization of the victim by blaming her for the pictures and 
questioning her character. This may lead to depression, social alienation 
and in some extreme cases suicide attempts by the victim who cannot 
handle the pressure of dealing with such targeted vengeance. Under the 
circumstances, the accused is not entitled to the concession of bail; 
therefore, this application is dismissed, accordingly”.. 

10.  Respectfully  following  the  above  cited  judgment  and  keeping  in  view  the 

facts and circumstances of the present case, instant bail petition, being devoid of 

any merit, is hereby dismissed. However, the learned trial Court  is directed  to 

conclude  the  trial  of  the  case  in  accordance  with  law,  expeditiously,  preferably 

within a period of four (4) months from receipt of copy of this judgment. 

11. 

It  is  made  clear  that  the  observations  made  hereinabove,  being  tentative 

in nature, shall not prejudice the case of either party. 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
Blue Slip added 

Adnan/- 

(LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
