ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.3879/2019 
The  Jurists  Foundation  through  its Chairman  Riaz  Hanif  Rahi,  ASC. 
VS
Federation  of Pakistan through  Secretary  Ministry  of Interior  & 5  others 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr.  Riaz  Hanif  Rahi,  Advocate. 

Respondents  By: 

Rai Azhar  Iqbal  Kharral,  Syed  Mumtaz  Mazhar 
Naqvi  and  Ms. Huma  Noreen Hassan, 
Advocates  for  Ministry  of Railways. 

Raja Muhammad  Aftab  Ahmed,  AAG. 

Muhammad  Saleem  Khan,  Joint  Director, 
Ministry  of Railways. 

Sajjat Butt,  D.G. Legal,  Headquarters,  Lahore. 

Khalid  Mehmood  Khan,  Deputy  Secretary, 
Ministry  of Interior. 

N isar  Ahmed,  Section  Officer,  Ministry  of 
Interior. 

Date  of Decision: 

18.09.2020. 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  J:-  Through  this  writ  petition, 

the 

petitioner  has  prayed  for  the  following  reliefs: 

i. 

u. 

tu. 

zv. 

v. 

to  issue  notification  under 

the 
Direct  the  respondent  No.1 
Pakistan  Commission  of Inquiry  Act,  2017 to hold impartial and 
independent  inquiry  with  the  help  of  Certified  Fire  Protection 
Specialists. 
Direct  the respondents  to pay  the  compensation  to  the  identified 
victims  of the incident  without  any further  delay and at earlists. 
Respondent  No.6  may please be required to  take resignation from 
respondent  No.5  by following  the  same  principle  as  demanded 
from  the Minister  of PML(N). 
Fire fighting  & safety  equipments  including  alarms  may  please 
be ordered to be installed in all trains. 
Railway  reforms may please be ordered as  this Honourable  Court 
may deem fit and proper. 

W.P.  No.3879/2019 

Page2 

vi. 

Compensatory  cost  be  also  ordered  to  the  respondent  No.3,  be 
paid  to  the  petitioner for  bringing  public  interest  cause  to  the 
Court. 

2. 

Brief facts referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  brought  in  shape  of public 

interest  litigation  are  that  on  31.10.2019, an  unfortunate  incident  occurred  when 

fire  broke  out  in  two  bogies  of  Economy  Class  i.e.  No.12460 &  12469 together 

with  one  bogie  of Business Class  i.e. 11306 of the  "7  Up/Tezgam  Express Train" 

resulting  into  74 casualties  and  40 injured,  though  no  FIR was  registered  in  the 

concerned  police  station  i.e. Liaqat  Pur  (Punjab),  rather  it  was  registered  in  the 

Railway  Police  Station  Khanpur  (Punjab).  Later  on,  Sheikh  Rasheed  Ahmed, 

Federal  Minister  for  Railways  (Respondent  No.5)  announced  compensation  of 

Rs.1.5  Million  and  Rs.0.5  Million  for  the  families  of  deceased  and  injured, 

respectively,  though  no compensation  has  yet been paid  to the  identified  victims. 

Hence, instant  writ  petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  all  the  express  trains  are 

being operated  without  proper  security  and  safety measurements  i.e. fire fighting 

equipments  and  fire alarms;  that  Respondent  No.5 has  announced  compensation 

to  be  given  to  the  families  of  deceased  persons  and  injured  persons  of  the 

7  Up/Tezgam  Express  Train  but  no  such  compensation  has  ever  been  given  to 

the  affectees;  that  independent 

inquiry  under  the  Pakistan  Commission  of 

Inquiry  Act, 2017 is essential  in  the  special  circumstances  of this  case, therefore, 

Respondent  No.1  may  kindly  be  directed  to  issue  notification  to  hold  impartial 

and  independent  inquiry  together  with  reforms  in Railways. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  AAG  and  learned  counsel  for  Ministry  of  Railways 

together  with  representatives  of  Ministry  of  Railways  and  Ministry  of  Interior 

opposed  the  filing  of instant  writ  petition  on  the  grounds  that  petitioner  has  no 

locus  standi  to  file  the  instant  writ  petition  and  is  not  maintainable  for  non- 

joinder  of necessary  parties,  as such, Pakistan  Railways has its own  mechanism  to 

inquire  into  the  accidents  under  the  Railways  Act,  1890  and  in  this  regard, 

W.P.  No.3879/2019 

Page3 

Federal  Government  Inspector  of  Railways  (FGIR)  has  already  finalized  the 

inquiry  report,  which  is under  review  and  is likely to be finalized  in a few days; 

that  responsible  officers/ officials  of  the  Pakistan  Railways  have  already  been 

dealt  with  in accordance  with  impartial  inquiry;  that  instant  writ  petition  is based 

on  apprehension  and  want  to  supersede 

the  provisions  of  special  law  i.e. 

Railways Act, 1890, therefore,  same is liable to be dismissed. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner  has  filed  this  public  interest 

litigation  with  multiple  prayers  mainly  on the grounds  that  a direction  be passed 

to 

the  Federal  Government 

for 

issuance  of  notification  under  Pakistan 

Commission  of  Inquiry  Act, 2017 to  hold  an  impartial  and  independent  inquiry 

with the help  of certified  fire fighter  specialists. 

7. 

The representatives  of the  Pakistan  Railways  in attendance  contend  that  a 

proper  inquiry  has  already  been  conducted  by  the  Ministry  of  Interior  and 

Ministry  of  Railways,  even  FIR  No.46/2019,  dated  21.10.2019, P.S.  Railways 

Police Shahpur,  District  Rahim Yar Khan has  already  been  registered.  The report 

available  on  the  incident  of outbreak  of fire in coaches  of 7-Up/Tezgam  Express 

Train  on  31.10.2019 between  Liaquatpur  -  Chanigoth  Stations  on  Khanpur  - 

Lodhran  (Double  Line Section) of Multan  Division  spells  out  that  the  competent 

authority  has  inquired  into  the  matter  and  given  the  findings,  dated  05.12.2019, 

through  Federal  Government  Inspector  of  Railways,  which  highlighted 

the 

delinquent  officials and  negligence  observed  during  the  said  incident.  As a result 

whereof,  15 officials have  been  proceeded  against  in  terms  of the  Railways  Act, 

1890 and  Pakistan  Railways  Police Act, 1977. 

8. 

This  Court,  vide  order  dated  17.02.2020,  had  also  directed  Ministry  of 

Railways  to submit  a report  detailing  therein  the  action  taken  against  delinquent 

officials and  compensation  paid  to the legal heirs  of deceased  persons  died  in the 

fire  incident  of  7  Up/Tezgam  Express  Train.  In  compliance  of  said  order,  the 

W.P.  No.3879/2019 

Page4 

Ministry  of Railways  has  placed  on  record  a  report,  which  reflects that  75  dead 

bodies  have  been  identified  and  the  families  of  deceased  persons  have  been 

compensated  in  terms  of  the  notified  package,  however  10 of  the  dead  bodies 

have  not  yet been  identified  due  to non-availability  of DNA profiles, however  it 

has been  ensured  by the  Ministry of Railway as well as by the  Police authorities 

that  as  and  when  any  sufficient material,  evidence  or judgment  of the  Court  is 

received,  the  same  will  be  complied  with  in  terms  of packages  to  the  bereaved 

family. 

9. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  petitioner  holds  a  contrary  view 

that  majority  of  the  family  members  are  still  looking  for  the  death  certificates, 

which  have  not  yet  been  released  by  the  competent  authority.  This  aspect  was 

also  duly  noted  by  the  Federal  Government  Inspector  of Railway  as  well  as  by 

the  District  Administration  of  the  concerned  district.  In  such  eventuality,  the 

injured  person  or  family  members  of  any  deceased  person,  who  are  still  not 

aware  of  the  status  of  their  loved  ones,  may  have  to  approach  the  court  of 

competent  jurisdiction  to  get  a  declaratory  decree  and  may  seek  declaration  to 

the  effect  of  presumptive  death  under  the  law,  whereafter  the  Ministry  of 

Railways shall award  the compensation  package accordingly. 

10. 

I  have  also  confronted 

learned  counsel  for  petitioner 

regarding 

maintainability  of  instant  writ  petition  qua  the  prayer  clause  (iii) i.e. regarding 

issuance  of direction  to  the  Prime  Minister  of Pakistan  to  take  resignation  from 

Federal  Minister  for  Railways,  but  no  valid  justification  has  been  brought  on 

record  by  the  counsel,  except  that  it  is  moral  obligation  of  the  Minister 

concerned  to  resign  from  such  position  in  the  wake  of  said  incident,  which 

occurred  due  to negligence of Pakistan Railways and its officials. 

11. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  has  also  drawn  attention  of  this  Court 

towards  prayer  clauses  (iv)  &  (v)  i.e.  regarding  railway  reforms,  as  such, 

para-wise comments  submitted  by the Federation  of Pakistan reveal that Ministry 

W.P.  No.3879/2019 

Pages 

of Railways  has  already  taken  cognizance  of the  railways  reforms  and  has  taken 

measures  with respect  to (i)  tenders  for 2000 fire extinguishers  for all types  of fire, 

(ii)  creation  of  separate  directorate  of  safety  in  Headquarters  Office  at  Lahore 

under  the  Chief  Operating  Superintendent/Safety 

(BPS-20) with  the  role  to  hold 

periodical  meetings  on  monthly  basis  and  (iii)  conduct  safety  conferences  at 

Headquarters  and  Divisional  Levels on monthly/  quarterly  basis  to discuss  safety 

related  issues. 

12. 

In  view  of  above  position,  the  prayer  made  in  instant  writ  petition  has 

already  borne  fruit  as  reflected  from  the  above  referred  report  and  para-wise 

comments,  therefore,  instant  writ  petition  stands  DISPOSED  OF. 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Khalid  z. 

