ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLA]IIABAD HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAD
J U DIC lAL DEPARTTI'I ENT
C rl. M isc. No. 383-Bl  2O1 I
Shehbaz Ahmed
VS
The State and another

S. No. oforder  /
proceedinqs

Date  of order/
Proceedinqs
10.06.2019  Mr. Qaslm Mehmood, Advocate for tfie petitioner

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel
where necessarv.

Mr. Sadaqat  Ali Jahanglr, learned State Counsel
with Gulfaraz S.l.

Through the instant criminal miscellaneous
petition, the petitioner,  Shehbaz  Ahmed  S/o Amjid
Mehmood,  seeks bail after arrest in case  F.l.R.
No.502, dated 20.12.2018, under Sections 380, 411

and 457 of the Pakistan  Penal Code, 1860 ("P.P.C.")

registered at Police Lohi Bher, lslamabad.
l. "  Earlier the  petitioner's  post-arrest  bail
petitions were also dismissed  by the learned  Gourts
below, vide orders dated 02.04.2019 and
24.04.2019. Thereafter, the petitioner  filed the

,  instant  petition for post-arrest bail.

3.  Learned counse! for the petitioner  submitted
that the petitioner was not nominated  in the FIR; that
there is a substantial  delay in lodging  the FlR, which
makes the prosecution's  case doubtful;  that during
the investigation,  nothing has been recovered from
the accused/petitioner;  that recovery, if any, has
been planted by the police and the same is violative
of mandatory  provisions  of Section  103 Cr.P.C.;  that
the co-accused,  Muhammad  Kamran Bukhat has
already been granted  bail by the learned  Additional
Sessions  Judge,  vide order dated 30.01.2019;  that
the petitioner  is also entitled to the concession  of
bail on the principle  of consistency;  that the case
against the accused/petitioner is one of  further

2

Crl.Misc.No  .383 -8120  19

inquiry within the meaning  of Section 497(21  of the
Cr.P.G.;  and that the petitioner  is behind  bars since
his arrest and is no more required  by the police for
further investigation. Learned counsel prayed for
the petition to be allowed  and for the petitioner to be

released on bail.
4.  On the other hand, learned State Counsel
opposed the bail petition by stating that although the
petitioner is not nominated in the F.l.R., but during
the course of investigation, stolen items were
recovered  from the petitioner, which prima-facie
connects him with the commission  of alleged  crime;
that the complainant  had forgiven the co-accused,
Muhammad  Kamran Bukhat on the basis of which he

was released on bail by the learned  Trial Court;  and
that the partial recovery  of alleged stolen  items from
the petitioner  disentitles  him for the discretionary
relief of post-arrest bail even on the rule of
consistency.  Learned State Counsel prayed for the
bail petition  to be dismissed.
5. 
I have heard the contentions of the learned
counsel for the contesting parties and have perused

the record  with their able assistance.
6.  The prosecution  story narrated in the FIR by
the complainant,  Sohail Qaiser, is that on 29.11.2018
at about  12:OO a.m. when he along with his family
came  back to his house after attending  a marriage,
they saw that the house  lock was broken and their
luggage was found scattered. Upon this, the
complainant informed the Bahria Security  Office. lt
is also reported  in the FIR that Allah Ditta Waqas
personnel of Police Station Lohi Bher was on duty,
who along with Bahria Security came at the place of
occurrence/the  complainant's  house, and after
checking the house Rs.21,50,000/-  eight tolas of

J

Crl.Misc.No  .3 83 -B  I 20 19

gold, four gold necklace,  one Rado watch, one black
berry Z-1O mobile phone,  a computerized  number
plate (UW.946), and a BMW Receiver, were found
missing.
7.  The FIR in question  was registered against
unknown  persons who were alleged to  have
committed theft in absence  of the complainant.  The
record shows that on 22.12.2018 at about 4:20 p.m.
Shaheen lqbal Constable C.l.A. Staff was on patrol
duty at Express Highway Service Road  Khanna East
lslamabad. ln the meanwhile,  two persons riding  on
a Honda City Car came from Service Road. The
C.l.A. staff stopped  the said car and checked  the
persons sitting  in it. On inquiry,  the person sitting on

the driving seat disclosed  his name as Muhammad
Kamran Bakht,  while the person sitting on the front
seat disclosed his name  Shehbaz Ahmed (the
present petitioner).  On his personal  search, 30 bore
pistol along with  rounds were recovered.
Furthermore,  a token bearing No.543 issued by
NADRA Registration  Authority for national identity
card, and a mobile  phone set were recovered.  On
the inspection of the dickey of the vehicle, a bag
(army  commando  colour)  was recovered  and on its
further search, a silver colour receiver  DWN, lead
(black in colour), two sets of plastic gloves, one
wrench,  one cutter, and one set of mask were
recovered.
8.  Undoubtedly,  the items recovered  from the
petitioner are altogether  different from the items
alleged to have been stolen for which the FIR in
question  had been registered against the unknown
persons. Furthermore, there is a delay of about
twenty two days in lodging the FlR. All such factors
make the case against the petitioner  as one of

4

Crl.Misc.No  .383 -B /20 19

further inquiry. Perusal of  the order dated
30.01 .2019 shows that the post-arrest  bail was
granted to the co-accused  by the learned  Additiona!

Sessions  Judge,  on the basis of the statement  of the
complainant to the effect that "he has forgiven  the
accused  in the name of Almighty  Allah and he has no
objection if petitioner be released  on bail and in this
regard he also sworn  affidavit  Mark-A."  Whereas
the learned Additional  Sessions Judge vide order
dated 24.04.2019 dismissed the petitioner's post-
arrest  bail petition with the observation lhat " record
further  divulges  that after arrest the petitioner  has
got recovered stolen articles." As mentioned above,
the petitioner and his co-accused (who was granted

bail) were arrested on 22.12.20.,|-8  at about 4:20 p.m.
the C.l.A. Staffs who were on patrolling duty at
Express Highway Service Road Khanna East
lslamabad and the items lying in the vehicle  were
recovered jointly from the petitioner and his co-
accused.  Therefore, in my view, the learned
Additional Sessions  Judge should have extended
discretionary  relief of post-arrest  bail in favour of
the petitioner as well after ascertaining  the record
thoroughly by applying the principle of consistency.
9.  For the reasons mentioned above,  the instant
petition is allowed and the petitioner is admitted to
bail subject to furnishing  of bail bonds  in the sum of

Rs.1,00,000/-  with two sureties in the like amount to
the satisfaction  of the learned Trial Court. lt is
clarified that the observations  made herein above
are tentative in nature and the same shall not
prejudice either  party d

ng the course  of the trial.

Qamar Khan*

(MTANGUL

AURANGZEB)

JUDGE

