ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P. No.2993/2021 
Abbas Mustafa Kassam 
VS 
Senior Civil Judge / Judge Family Court (West), Islamabad & 02 others  

Petitioner by: 

Respondents by: 

Barrister Omar Somro and Mr. Omair 
Saleem Malik, Advocates. 

Barrister Muhammad Saad Buttar and Mr. 
Tahir Hussain Anchan, Advocate for 
respondents No.2 & 3 

Date of Decision: 

29.09.2021 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J: Through this writ petition, the 

petitioner  has  called  in  question  order  of  the  learned  Senior  Civil 

Judge(I)  /  Judge  Family  Court  (West),  Islamabad,  dated  29.01.2021, 

whereby visitation schedule of the petitioner with his minor daughter 

has been granted in a restricted manner.  

2. 

Succinctly,  Abbas  Mustafa  Kassam  (petitioner)  tied  the  knot 

with Kiran Mazari (Respondent No.2) on 01.07.2008, who were blessed 

with a daughter namely Noor Kassam (Respondent No.3 / minor) and 

were permanently living in Dubai. On 20.12.2018, Respondent No.2 in 

a  clandestine  manner  left  Dubai  for  Islamabad  along  with  the  minor 

and informed the petitioner that she has no intention of returning back 

to Dubai, as such, proceedings in the Family Court, Dubai had already 

been commenced, where mediation proceedings were pending. Per se, 

Respondent  No.2  filed  two  cases  against  the  petitioner  immediately 

after arriving Islamabad i.e. (i) suit for custody and guardianship of the 

minor and (ii) suit for recovery of dower amount and maintenance of 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2993/2021 

Page | 2 

minor, however the suits were dismissed for lack of jurisdiction but the 

petitioner  allowed  respondent  No.2  to  have  the  custody  of  minor  on 

the  understanding  that  she  will  not  stop  the  minor  from  meeting  the 

petitioner  (father),  though  since  then  the  petitioner  has  been  denied 

access to the minor by respondent No.2. Resultantly, petitioner moved 

an application for fixation of visitation rights before the learned Family 

Judge,  whereupon  the  learned  Judge,  vide  impugned  order  dated 

29.01.2021, has granted visitation rights not in the manner requested by 

the petitioner. Hence, instant writ petition.  

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  contends  that  the  learned  trial 

Court has passed the impugned order in a hasty manner as visitation 

at special occasions, such as Eid, birthday, vacations, etc. has not been 

considered  by  the  learned  trial  Court;  that  the  direction  to  meet  the 

minor  in  presence  of  respondent  No.2  is  not  fair  as  the  minor  would 

not  openly  express  her  feelings  with  the  petitioner  being  her  father; 

that  the  learned  trial  Court  has  failed  to  consider  the  fact  that 

respondent  No.2  had  illegally  brought  the  minor  to  Islamabad 

depriving  the  petitioner  of  his  rights  of  visitation;  that  the  impugned 

order is not in accordance with the dictum laid down by the  superior 

Courts  and  the  learned  trial  Court  has  failed  to  grant  a  balanced, 

comprehensive  and  fair  visitation  schedule  to  the  petitioner  for 

meeting with the minor.  

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.2  &  3  opposed 

the  instant  writ  petition  on  the  grounds  that  the  same  is  not 

maintainable as appeal under Section 14 of the Family Court Act, 1964 

 
 
W.P. No.2993/2021 

Page | 3 

before  the  learned  District  Judge  was  available  to  the  petitioner;  that 

the  learned  trial  Court  has  rightly  observed  each  and  every  aspect  of 

the  case  and  passed  the  impugned  order  in  accordance  with  law,  as 

such,  respondent  No.2  has  been  facilitating  the  visits  in  every  way 

possible as she herself has increased the visits from two days a month 

to  four  days  a  month;  that  respondent  No.2  did  not  object  to  the 

visitation  of  petitioner  with  minor  on  special  occasions  despite  not 

being ordered by the learned trial Court.  

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal of record reveals that the petitioner is aggrieved with the 

interim order dated 29.01.2021, passed by learned Guardian Court qua 

the visitation schedule of his minor daughter primarily on the ground 

that  visitation  granted  by  the  Trial  Court  is  restricted  in  all  sense, 

which is not congenial for the brought up of the minor, therefore, the 

order  in question may be reviewed by extending the visitation rights. 

He has also raised his grievance that mother is always roaming around 

during the visitation hours, which effects the meeting of the petitioner 

with her daughter.  

7. 

In  order  to  resolve  the  controversy,  I  have  gone  through  the 

impugned order. The operative part of the said order is as under:- 

“Till  Further  orders,  Friday  &  Saturday  of  First  and  Third 
Week  of  every  forthcoming  month  from  03:00  p.m  to  05:00 
p.m  will  be  the  meeting  days  and  time,  for  meeting  of  father 
with  the  minor,  at  the  Residence  of  Plaintiff/Mother.  In  case 
the  defendant/father  intends  to  take  her  daughter  to  some 
playground  or  picnic  spot  within  the  Jurisdiction  of 
Islamabad, on Saturday (s), he will settle his Programme with 
the  consent  of  plaintiff/mother,  parents  will  be  allowed  to 
accompany the minor during outings. In case of any dispute, 
the parents will have right to approach the Court.”  

 
 
 
W.P. No.2993/2021 

Page | 4 

8.  While  going  through  the 

impugned  order 

including  the 

operative  part  of  the  order,  it  reveals  that  the  impugned  order  is  of 

interlocutory  nature  and  same  is  not  of  permanent  character,  rather 

Family Court has specifically referred in the last line that “in case of any 

dispute,  the  parents  will  have  right  to  approach  the  Court”,  such  aspect 

further  discloses  that  the  same  is  interlocutory  in  nature  and  if  any 

party  is  aggrieved  with  any  of  the  visitation  schedule,  he  may 

approach the Court of first instance, although the reasonable visitation 

schedule  has  already  been  awarded  by  the  Trial  Court  while 

considering the requirements, needs and brought up of the minor viz-a-

viz the relationship of the parties. 

9. 

Besides  the  above  referred  background,  this  Court  is  also 

convinced  that  the  impugned  order  seems  to  be  an  order  of  consent, 

passed on 29.01.2021, which has been followed by both the parties till 

the  filing  of  this  writ  petition  i.e.  17.08.2021  after  the  elapse  of 

approximately  07  months,  such  conduct  also  goes  against  the 

petitioner  father,  this  shows  that  the  visitation  schedule  has  already 

been  followed,  but  later  on  the  petitioner  has  raised  his  concern 

without approaching the Court of first instance before filing the instant 

writ  petition.  The  respondent’s  side  has  raised  the  question  of 

maintainability  of  instant  writ  petition  primarily  while  relying  upon 

PLD 1989 Lahore 38 (Mst Yasmin Zafar VS Muhammad Anwar Khan 

and  others)  primarily  on  the  ground  that  the  impugned  order  is 

appealable  in  terms  of  Section  14  of  The  Family  Courts  Act,  1964, 

similar  view  has  also  been  taken  in  2021  YLR  1989  Lahore  (Sarosh 

 
 
W.P. No.2993/2021 

Page | 5 

Sikandar and others VS Guardian Judge Lahore and others), PLD 2018 

Lahore  830  (Tasaduq  Nawaz  VS  Masood  Iqbal  Usmani  and  others). 

The  counsel  for  respondent  also  contends  that  if  any  appeal  has  not 

been filed, the order would deemed to be final, but without going into 

that  controversy,  this  Court  believes  that  the  order  in  question  was 

interim  in  nature,  as  such  instant  writ  petition  is  not  competent, 

especially  when  the  petitioner  has  not  approached  the  Judge  Family 

Court at the first instance as reflected in the impugned order.  

10. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  writ  petition  is 

misconceived  and  same  is  hereby  DISMISSED  with  the  observation 

that  petitioner  may  approach  the  Family  Court,  if  so  advised  by 

considering  the  change  of  circumstances  as  highlighted  by  the 

petitioner or comes on record, the Judge Family Court may reconsider 

the  visitation  schedule  including  the  apprehension  of  the  respondent 

mother, who feels threatened by the extended visitation, such intricate 

questions  requires  a  strong  evidence,  which  could  not  be  measured 

without its recording by the Family Court.  

RAMZAN  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
