      ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Writ Petition No. 1003 of 2022 
Muhammad Rafique  
VS
Judge Family Court, Islamabad and others 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 
Proceedings 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel 
where necessary.  

14.03.2022  Raja Qaiser Kamal, Advocate for the petitioner.  

The petitioner assails the order dated 19.01.2022 fixing 

interim maintenance for his 11 children at Rs.5,000/- each per 

month on the ground that the said quantum is excessive given 

that the children reside in the same house with him and that he 

incurs expenditure on their various requirements which has not 

been taken into account by the learned Judge, Family Court.  

2 

The  petitioner’s  counsel  refers  to  section  10(2)  of  the 

Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  to  assert  that,  on  the  date  the 

impugned  order  was  passed, 

the  case  was  fixed  for 

reconciliation/pre-trial  proceedings  and  the  Family  Court 

could  not  have  recorded  the  petitioner’s  statement  in  the 

absence  of  his  counsel.    I  find  no  force  in  this  submission 

because the impugned  order notes that the case was fixed for 

both the reconciliation proceedings and arguments on fixation 

of interim maintenance (the latter, to cater for the contingency if 

the reconciliation  failed) on the relevant date and the petitioner 

had his statement recorded without requesting the Court for his 

counsel to be present  and, even if the counsel were present, I 

have  not  been  shown  what  difference  it  would  have  made.  

Section  10(2)  speaks  of  the  Family  Court  hearing  the  parties 

and  their  counsels;  hearing  entails  reducing  into  writing  the 

substance  of  what  was  heard  by  the  Family  Court,  and  his 

counsel’s presence was for the petitioner to ensure.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No. 1003 of 2022 

                                      -2- 

3 

 The impugned order notes that the petitioner expressed 

his  willingness  before  the  Family  Court  to  pay  Rs.35,000/- 

instead  of  Rs.55,000/-  fixed  by  the  Court.    The  impugned 

order notes that it was passed “[K]eeping in view the financial 

needs  of  plaintiffs  No.01  to  11  as  well  as  financial  capacity 

and statement of the defendant….”   

4 

It  is  settled  law  that  an  interim  order  for  maintenance 

cannot ordinarily be assailed in the Constitutional jurisdiction,  

for  it  entails  delving  into  a  factual  controversy  around  the 
means of the husband/father and the needs of the wife/minors.1  

That is not to say that a Constitutional petition could never be 

maintainable; it might lie in extreme cases, for instance, where 

the  interim  maintenance  awarded  is  so  outrageous  that  no 

reasonable Court could have awarded it, but the assertion that 

the interim maintenance should be what the petitioner claims it 

should be without more cannot be looked at in a Constitutional 

petition.   

5 

In  today’s  time  and  age,  Rs.5,000/-  per  child  does  not 

appear excessive.  It translates into Rs. 55,000/- only because 

the  petitioner  chose  to  have  11  children  (may  they  all  be 

blessed)  and  the  tab  for  their  maintenance  would  naturally  be 

high  whether  it  came  voluntarily  or  through  an  order  of  a 

Family Court.  If the petitioner is spending somewhat more for 

his  children,  he  is  not  doing  anything  which  a  dutiful  father 

would not do.  Further, the order is only of an interim nature; 

the Family Court is meant to go into a deeper financial means 
test while deciding the suit2 and one of the principles it has to 

bear in view is that the minors cannot be unjustly enriched at 

the  expense  of  the  father.    If  the  suit  for  maintenance  is  not 

decided  within  six  months  from  the  date  of  institution,  the 

petitioner can always seek a review of the interim maintenance 

order at that stage.  

1 PLD 2016 Lahore 73 
2 PLD 2018 SC 819 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Writ Petition No. 1003 of 2022 

                                      -3- 

5 

For the foregoing reasons, this petition is meritless and 

is dismissed in limine.  

Imran  

       (SARDAR EJAZ ISHAQ KHAN)          
      JUDGE         

 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
