JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P  No.970/2018. 

Ghulam Abbas  Naqvi 

VS 

Syeda  Iftikhar Bibi etc. 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Abdul Shakoor Paracha & Ms. Wajiha 
Pervaiz Raja, Advocates. 

Respondent No. I  by: 

Mr. Naseer Anjum Awan, Advocate. 

Date  of Decision: 

14.02.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:- Through the  instant writ petition,  the 

petitioner  has  assailed  the  judgment  &  decree  dated  I4.02.20I8,  passed  by  learned 

Additional  District  Judge  (West), Islamabad, whereby  suit filed by  respondent  No. I  has 

been  decreed  to  the  extent  of 3 I Yz  Tolas  gold  ornaments  or  the  amount  equivalent  to 

prevailing market rate of gold. 

2. 

Brief facts referred  in the  instant writ petition  are that respondent  No. I  filed suit 

for  recovery  of  maintenance,  dowry  articles  and  dower  on  I9.03.2014  against  the 

petitioner  before  Family  Court,  Islamabad  with  the  claim  that  she  was  married  to  the 

petitioner  on  07.02.1998  against  the  dower  of  Rs.1,00,000/-  and  a  house,  whereas 

Rs.65,000/-  were  paid  in  the  shape  of  gold  ornaments  at  the  time  of  marriage. 

Respondents  No.I  deserted  by  the  petitioner  on  26.01.2013  in  three  clothes  and  the 

petitioner  contracted  second  marriage  without  obtaining  permission  and  pronounced 

divorce. The suit was decided by Family Court vide judgment  & decree dated 02.11.2016 

to the extent of grant of maintenance at the rate ofRs.15,000/-  per month for Iddat period 

only  and  amount  of Rs.35,000/-  as  remaining  amount  of dower  alongwith  interest.  The 

relief to the  extent  of dowry articles  was turned  down including the  claim of 3 I Yz  Tolas 

gold  ornaments.  Respondent  No.1  feeling  aggrieved  with  the  judgment  &  decree  of 

Family Court  filed an appeal  before the  Court of Additional  District Judge to the  extent 

of recovery  of 31 Yz  Tolas,  which  was allowed vide  impugned judgment  & decree  dated 

14.02.2018. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that learned Additional District Judge 

Islamabad  ignored  the  evidence  on record  and  gave his  findings  due  to  misreading  and 

W.P. No.970/2018. 

2 

non-reading of the facts and circumstances of the case; that evidence of respondent No. I 

is silent qua snatching  of gold ornaments by the petitioner,  even no such event has  been 

referred  in  her  plaint  nor  in  her  affidavit;  that  receipts  Exh.P .10  to  Exh.P .13  of gold 

ornaments have  been  placed  on  record through  subsequent  order  by  way  of application 

filed  by  respondent  Nol.  Vide  order  dated  06.l l.20I5  without  any  sufficient  cause, 

which were  not  available  at the time of filing of the  suit nor any other witness has been 

produced to justify  the receipts of gold ornaments and as such the documentary evidence 

is contrary to law. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No. I  contends  that  3 I Y2  gold 

ornaments have been referred in Exh.P.8, list of dowry at serial Nos. 80 to 86, which was 

available  on  record  at  the  time  of filing  of the  suit  and  as  such  the  petitioner  has  not 

refuted  the  claim  in  expressed  manner  and  specific  issue  has  been  framed  by  the  Trial 

Court i.e. issue No.3,  which was decided  in favour of respondent  No. I  by the Appellate 

Court; that learned Trial Court allowed the application for submission of receipts through 

which  gold  ornaments  were  purchased  from  Prince  Jewelers  Sarafa  Bazar,  Rawalpindi, 

06.12.1997 &  10.02. I 998/Exh.P .10 to Exh.P .13  vide order dated 06. I l.20 I 5  and reasons 

have duly been appreciated by learned Family Court. 

5. 

6. 

I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 

Perusal of the record reveals that the petitioner is mainly aggrieved with the relief 

granted by learned Additional District Judge in appeal vide impugned judgment  & decree 

dated  I4.02.20I8  to  the  extent  of 3I7'2  gold  ornaments  or  the  equivalent  amount  at the 

prevailing market rate of gold in the market in favour of respondent No.I  (ex-wife of the 

petitioner).  The  petitioner  and  respondent  No.I  married  to  each  other  on  07.02.1998, 

however,  the  differences  cropped  up  and the  petitioner  divorced  respondent  No. I,  who 

filed  suit  for  recovery  of maintenance,  dowry  articles  and  dower  against  the  petitioner, 

which was  decided  vide judgment  &  decree .dated 02.I I.2016,  whereas  claim  of dowry 

articles to the extent of 3 I Y2  Tolas gold ornaments was rejected through findings on issue 

No.3, which was assailed by respondent No. I  by way of filing appeal, which was allowed 

by learned Appellate Court. 

7. 

Regarding claim of3I% Tolas gold ornaments specific issue was framed, which is 

reproduced as under:- 

W.P. No.970/2018. 

3 

"3.  Whether  the  plaintiff 

is  entitled  to  recover  gold  ornaments 
31 %  To/as  or  alternatively  price  of  gold 

weighing 
ornaments?OPP" 

8. 

Learned Trial Court has given its findings on above referred issue in the following 

manner:- 

that  usually 

in  villages,  people  keep  save 

"Plaintiff  keeps  her  ornaments  in an  iron box and  same  was found 
broken during local commission proceedings  and since report  is  not 
challenged  by defendant  that means defendant  has  accepted factum 
in  cross 
of  broken 
iron  box.  Moreover,  defendant  admitted 
their 
examination 
ornaments  in  boxes,  these  points  established,  that  defendant  has 
taken  all  gold  ornaments  of plaintiff  from  said  box.  However,  this 
court is not in concurrence with this formulation,  on the ground that 
record  transpires  that plaintiff  has  mentioned  in  EXP-1  that  these 
gold  ornaments  weighing  31 %  to/as  were  snatched  by  defendant 
from  her,  whereas  in  cross examination she  has stated  that she  has 
left  these  articles  while  leaving  the  house.  Plaintiff  has  not  uttered 
single  word  in  plaint  describing  date  and  manner  in  which 
ornaments were snatched from  her.  She has also admitted that these 
gold  ornaments  are  usually  available  with  her.  She  also  admitted 
that  since  marriage  till  2014  gold  ornaments  remained  in  her 
possession.  In  these  circumstances, plaintiff  has failed  to  establish 
through  cogent  and  confidence 
that  gold 
ornaments  were  sanctioned  from  her.  Accordingly  this  issue  is 
decided in negative. " 

inspiring  evidence 

9. 

The  above  mentioned  findings  were  assailed  before  the  Appellate  Court,  who 

rendered contrary view in the following manner:- 

"In support  of claim of the appellant, she not only appeared herself 
that  she  was  kicked  out from  her  matrimonial  home  on  26.01.2014 
while snatching  the gold ornaments, she also produced  documentary 
evidence  to  prove  ownership  of gold  ornaments  and  the  receipts 
thereof  Respondent  has  also  claimed  that  he  and  his family  gave 
gifts  to appellant  but the gold  ornaments given  as gifts  to appellant 
cannot  be claimed by respondent, which are otherwise  the exclusive 
ownership  of  appellant.  During  cross-examination  the  appellant 
clearly  mentioned  that  from  where  the  gold  ornaments  were 
purchased  by the parents  of appellant which fact is supported  by the 
tangible evidence viz receipts  of gold ornaments.  On the other hand 
respondent  take  clear  stance  of  taking  along  the  gold  ornaments, 
to 
valuable  articles  and  cash  amount  but  he  has  badly  failed 
establish  his  stance.  It  is  very  much  important  to  note  that  the 
appellant has only claimed dowry articles as per  agreement. Almost 
all the articles were handed over to appellant,  thus it is proved  that 
the appellant has no exaggeration by filing  the suit which shows that 
she was in fact claiming her own items. As per  said list,  she claimed 
gold  ornaments  and  local  commission  who  supervised  delivery  of 
articles  clearly mention  that the  locks of jewelry  were  broken when 
she received dowry articles. 

The  most  important factor  for  deciding  this  issue  is  that  the 
appellant  is  a lady living far away from  her parent's  house and was 
all alone where she was living with respondent, thus she was not in a 
position  to  take  her  valuable  articles,  gold  ornaments  alongwith 
cash amount etc in presence  of respondent's family  members and she 
was  not so  daring  to carry gold  ornaments  etc on public  transport. 
Thus  the  stance  of  respondent  has  also  not  acceptable  when  he 

W.P.  No.970/2018. 

4 

himself  claimed  that  she  took  alongwith  the gold  ornaments  etc  in 
presence  of his family  members but the respondent withheld the best 
evidence.  For  whatever  is  discussed  above  in  this  issue,  it  is 
apparent from  the record and evidence that the appellant  is entitled 
for  the  relief  of  gold  ornaments  of  31 ¥2  Tolas  or  the  amount 
equivalent  to prevailing  rate of gold,  therefore, this  issue is decided 
in favour  of appellant and to this extent the impugned judgment  and 
decree is set aside. " 

10. 

The above referred  contradictory view of both the  Courts below have been taken 

into account with  able assistance of learned counsel for the  parties.  However, following 

facts are reflected from the record:- 

the 
(i)  Respondent  No. l  ex-wife  has  specifically  mentioned 
snatching  of gold ornaments by the petitioner  in her plaint  in para-II 
and in her prayer  explaining the claim of 31 ¥2  Tolas gold ornaments. 

(ii) Respondent  No. l  has  also  appended  Exh.P.'8 alongwith plaint, 
which  refers  the  jewelry  of  31¥2  Tolas  at  serial  Nos.80  to  86 
comprising  of six  bangles,  two  "Karas",  rings,  two  gold  sets,  one 
"Locket"  set,  "Bindhia and ear ring separately. 

(iii)The petitioner  has  denied  the  version  of respondent  No.1  and 
referred  in para  No.4  that  respondent  No.J  herself  "took  away  all 
her gold  ornaments  and  other similar  valuable  articles".  Similarly, 
he  has  referred  in para-6  of on facts  that  he  has  attached  the  list 
with written statement, whereby he is ready to return those items and 
respondent No. l  is also directed to return the gold ornaments as per 
list attached  This fact was reiterated in para-12  also. 

(iv) Respondent  No.I  appeared  as  P. W 1  by  way  of filing  affidavit 
Exh.P.l  and  has  referredthe  list of dowry articles  Exh.P.8  and  the 
receipts of jewelry  Exh.P. l 0 to Exh.P.13 in para-5. 

(v)  During  the  course of cross-examination, respondent  No.I  stated 

that:- 

-T--'1 V-iJI ,L.._,t./;(.::.-~v'-LL;:f  "'ti. .::.-1.Jf)'--/-I 26.01.2014-t" 

-tf--"h~ij ,,ttExh.P .8§(;)~1.--..:.--)-r 

J {-L'--~j  "-U~,1.1.11;~.J1/ ;)JJJ {.::.-1.Jf)-L'--~j  "',j /  l).1L...,t..::.-1.1,tJ-"' 
"-VJJ.J JP'.::.-1.+;- .1fl/JJ  ;1'f--r.[,;.:.J1~~ /,1}:,J.!f ..JLL;)  JJ 

11. 

The  petitioner  while  appearing  as  D.W.1  referred  his  evidence  as  Exh.D.1  m 

shape of affidavit and stated in para-6 that:- 

~J.Ui...:).::.-1.1,t;J.UvL,)i1J,.f-< ,1.-1,(;1,..J:l f-<  ,1.L,1)1.1,L(.:)1,ci;.£1.1,1...)lli:( _1" 
,1.J1PL·.1,1J LeVl'f-1-< ,1.LY1LJJ'( h4:-J (,,/ J.;(;)Ll.--..:.--) 

-VJv~£1...,t.~L-< 

...,t.,>1£1..;Ji,;,.::.-1.1tJ.1J;.::.-1.1,tJ(liJ1P~.1,1/ JLeV1'f-lLY1Lir"-/~1(liu-<,1._r 

"-VJ 

W.P. No.970/2018. 

5 

12. 

Keeping  in view above position,  it can safely be concluded that respondent No.1 

has justified  her  claim  of her  gold ornaments  in shape of receipts  Exh.P .10 to  Exh.P .13 

issued on 06.12.1997,10.02.1998 by Prince Jewelers Sarafa Bazar Rawalpindi, which was 

issued  in  the  name  of father  of  respondent  No.1  and  if these  receipts  are  put  in juxta 

position  with  claim  of  respondent  No.1  ex-wife,  who.  has  given  her  detailed 

circumstances  in the  affidavit  as well  in her plaint  and detail  of jewelry  was referred  in 

Exh.P.8, respondent  No.1  has  successfully proved  her  claim,  whereas  the  petitioner  has 

failed to justify  his counter version.  Learned Appellate Court has rightly appreciated the 

record  in  proper  manner  and  gave  its  detailed  findings  while  appreciating  status  of 

documentary  evidence.  The  claim of respondent No. l  has been  visible  from the  date  of 

filing of the  suit till closing of evidence and documentary evidence  supports her version. 

Respondent No.1 was deserted from matrimonial abode on 26.01.2014, which is apparent 

from  record  and  similarly  statement  of  respondent  No.1  coupled  with  documentary 

evidence  is  consistent  and  no  discrepancy  has  been  noted  qua  her  claim,  even  the 

petitioner has not refuted Exh.P.8 in any manner, which contains list of jewelry  articles. It 

is well  settled  law that provisions  of Qanun-e-Shahdat Order,  1984 are not  stricto sensu 

applicable  to  family  matter  and  the  objection  of petitioner/husband  regarding  proof  of 

receipts  without  production  of author  of  such  receipts  was  misconceived.  Reliance  is 

placed  upon  2017 SCMR  393 (Shatique Sultan  VS  Mst. Asma  Firdous and others). 

Similarly  solitary  statement  of  wife  was  sufficient  to  prove  claim  of  dowry  articles. 

Reliance is placed upon 2012 MLD  756 (Mst. Shakeela Bibi VS  Muhammad Israr and 

others) as the  same was consistent and corroborated with list of dowry articles Exh.P .10 

to Exh.P.13. 

13. 

Keeping  in view  above position, it is  settled law that  in case  of reverse  findings, 

the judgment  & decree given by the Appellate Court has to prevail as the Appellate Court 

has  rightly  appreciated  the  evidence  in  proper  manner  although  it  is  not  rule,  which  is 

applicable in each case, however, in present  case findings of learned Trial  Court are not 

justified,  whereas  findings  of  Appellate  Court  are  in  detail  while  appreciating  every 

aspect, therefore,  view taken by the Appellate Court is more convincing in this situation. 

Learned counsel  for the  petitioner  has failed to point  out any illegality  in the  impugned 

judgment  of Appellate Court. 

W.P. No.970/2018. 

6 

14. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  instant  writ  petition  bears  no  merits, 

therefore, the same is dismissed. 

R.Anjam 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR_ KA y ,,{NI) 
JUDGE 

