HOD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 

ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

CRL. MISC.  NO. 794-B of 2019. 

Sanaullah. 
VS
The  State,  etc 

S.No.  of order/  Date of 
heannc 
Proceedmo 

Order with  signature of Judge, and that  of parties or 
counsel, where necessary. 

27.01.2020.  Mr Aamir Abbas Malik, Advocate for the  petitioner. 

Syed  Muhammad Tayyab, Deputy Attorney  General. 
Mr Fazal  Maabood, S.I.  FIA  with  record. 

The  petitioner  Sanaullah  son  of  Muhammad  Ramzan  has 

sought post arrest bail in  case,  F.l.R. No.  23, dated 05.07.2019,  registered 

under  sections 500,  509,  377,  109/34  of  Pakistan Penal  Code,  1860 and 

20,  21,  22  and  24  of  the  Prevention  of  Electronic  Crimes  Act,  2016 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ''FIRj at  Police  Station  FIA, Cyber Crime 

Reporting Centre, Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief facts as  narrated in  the  FIR  are that  the  petitioner  was 

alleged to  have uploaded, generated and  posted objectionable  pictures of 

the complainant on social  media. Hence the instant petition. 

3. 

The  learned  counsel for  the  petitioner  has  contended  that; 

allegations  against  the  latter  are  false,  frivolous  and  vexatious;  the 

petitioner  has  been  falsely  involved  in  the  instant  case just  to  harass, 

pressurize and  blackmail  him;  the  offences are  not  attracted  against the 

petitioner;  the  petitioner  has  not committed  the  alleged offences;  medical 

.exarnlnatlon  of  the  petitioner  was  not  conducted  so  as  to  attract  the 

-2- 

Crl. Misc. No. 794-B  of 2019. 

offences  under  sections  377  of  PPC  and  22  of  PECA;  no  incriminating 

material was recovered from  the  petitioner and at the  most section 109  of 

PPC  is  attracted  against the  present petitioner;  the  petitioner  was  driving 

the  vehicle  of  the  co-accused; the  petitioner  has  not  used  an  electronic 

device by transmitting  explicit  material  relating  to  the  complainant;  there 

is  no  allegation  that  the  present  petitioner  has  used  his  personal cellular 

phone  for  transmitting  or  sending  explicit  material  to  another  person; 

investigations qua the  petitioner  have been completed and he is  no  more 

required for the  purposes thereof;  the  petitioner  has  been incarcerated for 

more than  six months; further  incarceration of the  petitioner  will  not serve 

any  useful  purpose;  recovery if  any  is  fake  and concocted; the  petitioner 

is  previously  non-convict  and  non-record  holder;  there  is  no  chance of 

abscondance of the  petitioner  or tampering with  the  prosecution evidence; 

the  case  against the  petitioner  is  based  on  malafide and  ulterior  motives 

of the complainant;  the  offences do not fall within  the ambit of  prohibitory 

clause of  section 497  of  Cr.P.C.;  report  under  section  173  of  Cr.P.C.  has 

been  submitted  before  the  learned  trial  Court;  the  case  against  the 

petitioner  is  that  of further  probe; the story as  narrated in  the  FIR is false, 

frivolous  and  baseless; hence the  learned counsel urges the  petitioner  to 

be  released on bail. 

4. 

The  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  appeared  alongwith 

Fazal  Maabood S.I.  FIA.  They  have  contended  that;  recovery  has  been 

affected 

from 

the  petitioner; 

the  petitioner  has  been  specifically 

nominated  in  the  FIR;  the  petitioner  has  deliberately  uploaded  personal 

and  objectionable  pictures  of  the  complainant;  the  said  act  of  the 

petitioner  has  destroyed the  honour and  modesty of  the  complainant  not 

only  in  family  but  also in  the  community;  investigations qua the  petitioner 

-3- 

Crl.  Misc.  No.  794-B  of 2019. 

have  been completed  and  report  under  section  173 of  Cr.P.C.  has  been 

submitted  before  the  learned  trial  Court;  the  trial  of  the  case  will  be 

concluded shortly;  hence urges for dismissal of bail. 

5. 

The  allegation against the  present petitioner  is  to  the  extent 

that  he was accompanying another  person who is  the  main accused in  the 

case in  hand. There  is  nothing  on  record to  show that  the  number  used 

for  sending the  objectionable  pictures and  messages was  in  the  name of 

the  petitioner  or  in  his  use.  Furthermore, the  present petitioner  is  not the 

main accused. Investigations  qua the  petitioner  have been completed and 

further  incarceration of the  latter will  not serve any useful purpose. Report 

under  section  173 of  Cr.P.C.  has been submitted  before the  learned trial 

Court. Whether  or  not  the  offences mentioned in  the  FIR are attracted  to 

the  extent  of  the  petitioner  needs further  probe.  Deeper appreciation  of 

evidence at  this  stage  is  not  permissible. The  petitioner  does not  have a 

criminal record.  His  continued custody is  not  likely to  serve any  beneficial 

purpose at  this  stage.  Nothing has been placed on  record to  indicate that 

the  petitioner  may  abscond  if  he  is  released  on  bail.  This  Court  is, 

therefore,  of  the  opinion  that  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  be  released by 

extending the concession of  bail. 

6. 

It  has been aptly  observed by the  august  Supreme Court in 

the  case of  ''Manzoor and  04  others  VSThe  State"  reported  as  [PLD 

1972 S.C.  81]  as follows: 

"The ultimate  conviction and  incarceration  of a guilty 

person  can repair  the  wrong caused by  a  mistaken  relief of 

interim  bail  granted  to  him,  but  no  satisfactory  reparation 

-4- 

Crl. Misc. No. 794-B  of 2019. 

can  be  offered  to  an  innocent man  for  his  unjustified 

incarceration at any stage of the case albeit his acquittal in 

the long nm": 

In  the  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances of  the  present 

case,  refusal of  bail  will tantamount  to  punishing the  petitioners. 

7. 

In  the  circumstances as  mentioned  above,  this  petition  is 

allowed and the  petitioner  is  admitted to  bail, subject to  furnishing  bail 

bonds in  the  sum  of  Rs.20,00,0001-  (Rupees two  million  only)  with  one 

surety in  the  like amount to the  satisfaction of  learned trial  Court. 

Needless to  mention  that  the  observations  recorded  in  the 
instant  petition  are  based  on  tentativ,r  assessment, which 
will  obviously  not  prejudice  the  prq4eedings  before  the 
learned trial  Court. 

Asad!(/* 

(CHIEF  JUSTICE) 

