Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.3760/2020 

Sajjad Ahmed. 

VS

Asma Sajjad, etc. 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

: 

: 

M/s Rakhshanda Azhar and Akseer Ahmed 
Abbasi, Advocates. 

 Ch. M. Javed Gujjar, Advocate. 
 Islamabad.  

Date of Decision 

: 

25-01-2023. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J.-  Through  this  Writ 

Petition, the petitioner namely, Sajjad Ahmed has assailed the order, 

dated  05.11.2020,  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Jude  1st  Class/Family 

Court-(West), 

Islamabad,  whereby  application 

filed  by 

the 

respondent/plaintiff  for  submission  of  additional  documents  was 

allowed. 

2. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  Asma 

Sajjad  has  filed  suit  for  maintenance  for  herself  as  well  her  minor 

children, which is still pending before the learned Judge Family Court. 

An  application  was  earlier 

filed 

for  submission  of  additional 

documents  to justify  the  quantum  of  maintenance allowance,  but no 

document was mentioned which was dismissed and later on she filed 

the  second  application,  as  a  result  whereof  the  same  was  allowed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page - 2 
W.P. No.3760/2020 

vide  the  impugned  order,  dated  05.11.2020  without  considering  this 

aspect  that  previous  application  was  dismissed.  It  has  lastly  been 

contended  that  the  order  impugned  before  this  Court  has  not  been 

passed in accordance with law and the respondent be only permitted 

to place those documents which were relied upon by her at the time 

of filing of her suit. 

3. 

Conversely,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  contends 

that  the  no  hard  and  fast  rule  is  applicable  in  the  family  jurisdiction 

nor CPC and Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, is applicable in stricto 

sensu. The learned counsel has further contended that the documents 

submitted before the court will help the Judge Family Court to reach 

at  the  just  conclusion  to  determine  the  financial  status  of  the 

petitioner.  

4. 

The learned counsels for the parties have been heard and 

the record perused with their able assistance.  

5. 

  Perusal of the record reveals that the respondent Asma 

Sajjad  has  filed  a  suit  for  maintenance  for  herself  as  well  as  for  her 

minor  children  against  the  petitioner  based  upon  the  marriage 

contract,  dated  09-08-1997.  The  suit  was  contested  and  at  present 

application has been filed for submission of additional documents i.e. 

lease agreement, dated 30.08.2012, lease agreement dated October, 

2018,  attested  copies  of  periodical  record  of  rights  of  the  petitioner 

qua  his 

land  and 

residential  properties, 

the  educational 

charges/tuition  fee  challan  fee  of  the  minors  plaintiff  Nos.2,  3  &  4, 

electricity  and  sui  gas  bills  of  the  rented  premises  were  appended 

with the application to prove the quantum of maintenance as well as 

 
 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.3760/2020 

the  expenses  borne  by  the  Asma  Sajjad  for  the  upbringing  of  the 

minors,  though  the  same  is  the  responsibility  of  the  petitioner.  All 

these  aspects  were  duly  considered  by  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court in the impugned order and rightly allowed the said application. 

As  such  no  illegality  has  been  pointed  by  the  petitioner  side  except 

that the similar type of application was dismissed on the ground that 

no document was  appended. As such  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 

Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order 1984 were not applicable and the learned 

Family Judge is fully equipped to settle all the questions to determine 

the  status  of 

father/husband  accordingly  even  without  any 

application.     

6. 

For  the  above  reasons,  instant  petition  is  dismissed  with  the 

direction  to  the  learned  Family  Court  seized  with  the  matter  to 

conclude the trial within the period of two months.  

 (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
 JUDGE 

Asif Mughal/- 

 
         
 
 
 
 
 
