Form No: HCJDIC-IZI

ORDqR SHEET

IN THE ISLA\MAPAP  TII,GH COURT..ISIiAMABAD
{upICIA&  D, EPARI\4ENT

Writ Petition  No.3648 12019

Mst. Asia Sharakat etc.
VS
Family  Judge Islamabad  (East) etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedings

Order with signature of Judge
Date of
and that of parties or counsel
order/
where necessary.
Proceedings
22.t0.2019 Mr. Muhammad  Waqas  Saleem,

Advocate  for the petitioners.

Through the instant petition the petitioners

have assailed order dated 22.07.2019  whereby

respondent No.l, otr the application  of the

petitioners,  fixed the interim  maintenance  of the

minor children as Rs.2000/-  for plaintiffs  No.2 &

3 and Rs.1500/- for plaintiffs No.4 & 5

2.  The facts, in brief, are that the petitioners

instituted a suit for maintenance and recovery of

dowry etc. against  respondent  No.2. Alongwith

the suit an application for interim maintenance

was also filed which was decided  through the

impugned order and the maintenance  of the

minor children was fixed.

3.  Learned counsel for the petitioners  inter

alia contended that under the facts and

circumstances  the maintenance  amount per

2

month is too low and is not sufficient for the

maintenance  of the children.

4.  Arguments  advanced  by the leamed

counsel for the petitioners have been heard  and

the documents  placed on record perused  with his

able assistance.

5.  The interim  maintenance  has been fixed by

the learned Trial Court on the basis of tentative

assessment. The discretion  exercised  does not

seem to be unjust  or improper  under the facts  and

circumstances. It is trite law that the petition

under Article 199 of the Constitution  of the

Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 1973 is not

maintainable  unless the order  passed  suffers from

jurisdictional elror or is patently  illegal. The

order in the instant petition does not suffer  from

such effors.

6.  For the above reasons, the instant petition

is without  merit and is dismissed in limine

However, respondent  No.l/learned  Trial Court is

expected  to conclude  the trial within  a period of

two months from  the date of this order.

*M.Naveed*

FAROOQ)

JUDGE

