 Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

WRIT PETITION No. 156 of 2020 

Ms. Shazia Akbar Ghalzai, etc.  

VS 

Additional District Judge etc.  

        PETITIONERS BY:       Ms. Saira Khalid Rajput, Advocate. 

RESPONDENT  BY: 

Mr. Mehboob-e-Hasnain, Advocate. 

DATE OF HEARING: 

15.01.2021. 

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-    The  petitioner  is  aggrieved  by 

judgment  and  decree  dated  21.06.2019  passed  in  Family  Suit  No. 

116/2018, whereby petition under sections 7 &17 of the Guardians 

and Wards Act, 1890 for appointment of petitioner as guardian was 

dismissed  along  costs  of  Rs.5,000/-  and  the  judgment  and  decree 

dated  27.11.2019  passed  in  Family  Appeal  No.  73/2019  by  the 

learned  Additional  District  Judge,  where  by  the  appeal  was 

dismissed.  

2.   

The  brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  petitioner  is  the 

mother  of  a  minor  namely  Muhammad  Rohan  born  on  26.09.2017 

to  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3,  who  got  married  on 

14.09.2016. The petitioner is an academic and she was to proceed 

to  France  for  higher  studies  after  being  awarded  a  scholarship  for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

such  purpose.  She  proceeded  to  France  to  pursue  her  PhD 

programme in September 2, 2017 when her son was three months 

old,  who  was  living  in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.3.  She  came 

back  to  Pakistan  in  January,  2018  to  meet  with  her  son  and  then 

finally  returned  to  Pakistan  in  May,  2018.  During  this  period 

differences  developed  between  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3 

and  a  criminal  case  was  filed  by  the  petitioner  against  respondent 

no.3  to  seek  custody  of  her  minor  child.  The  criminal  proceedings 

and  custody  proceedings  culminated  in  a  judgment  of  the  august 

Supreme  Court,  which  through  order  dated  16.08.2018  handed 

over  custody  of  the  minor  to  the  petitioner  while  permitting 

respondent No.3 to seek visitation rights in appropriate proceeding 

under  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890  (“Act”).  The  present 

petition is a consequence of suit filed by the petitioner seeking to be 

appointed  guardian  of  the  person  of  the  minor  child  in  place  of 

respondent  No.3  who  is  the  father  of  the  minor  and  is  natural 

guardian.  Meanwhile  on  17.09.2018  the  petitioner  pronounced 

divorce on respondent No.3 claiming that she has such right under 

the  Nikah  Nama  dated  14.09.2016,  which  is  contested  by 

respondent  No.3.  The  issue  of  divorce  was  neither  the  subject 

matter of the proceedings that led to the impugned judgments nor 

forms subject of the instant petition.  

3.   

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  taken  me  through 

the  facts  of  the  case  and  submits  that  the  petitioner  seeks  setting 

aside  of  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  dated  21.06.2019 

and  27.11.2019  passed  by  the  learned  trial  court  and  the  learned 

appellate  court,  respectively,  and  seeks  her  appointment  as 

 
 
3. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

guardian  under  sections  7  and  17  of  the  Act.  Learned  counsel  for 

the petitioner submits that the petitioner is a dedicated mother of a 

suckling baby who has great love and affection for her child and her 

appointment  as  guardian  is  in  the  child’s  welfare;  that  respondent 

No.3 is disqualified from being a guardian as he was involved in the 

abduction of the child which led to registration of FIR No. 166/2018 

and subsequently it was eventually the august Supreme Court that 

handed her custody of the minor; that  in view of such criminal case 

he  is  unfit  to  be  a  guardian;  that  the  petitioner  is  serving  as  a 

lecturer at Quaid-i-Azam University and living in the hostel as she is 

a native of Jamshoro  and has to stay in Islamabad  during the Eid 

holidays due to the visitation schedule determined by the Guardian 

Court  which  is  too  harsh;  that  superior  courts  have  held  that 

mother is entitled to being appointed guardian of minor if that is in 

the  welfare  of  the  child  and  she  is  only  seeking  appointment  as 

guardian for the person of the child and not his property. In support 

of  her  arguments  the  learned  counsel  relies  on  the  judgments 

reported  as  Amjad  Masih  VS  Mst.  Bushra  Bibi  [2010  YLR  1468], 

Muhammad  Noman  Malik  v.  Rukhsan  Noman  [1983  CLC  2846], 

Hussain Bux VS Mir Muhammad [1985 MLD 161 Karachi], Shabana 

Naz  VS  Muhammad  Saleem  [2014  SCMR  343],  Mst.  Munazza  Bibi 

VS  SHO  Police  Station  Chichawatni  [2012  PCr.LJ  1567],  Mst. 

Shahmim  VS  Sarfraz  [2013  MLD  1885],  Mst.  Feroze  Begum  VS 

Lt.Col.  Muhammad  Hussain  [1978  SCMR  299],  Talib  Hussain  VS 

Bashiran Bibi [1985 CLC 592 Lahore], Mirjam Aberras Lehdeaho v. 

SHO,  Police  Station  Chung,  Lahore  [2018  SCMR  427],    Naveed 

Munir VS Additional District and Sessions Judge, Lahore [2011 MLD 

1938],  Bashir  Ahmed  VS  Incharge  (Female)  Darulaman,  District 

 
 
4. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

Mianwali  [2011  SCMR  1329],  [PLD  2009  Karachi  50],  Mst.  Shah 

Bakht  and  4  othres  VS  Rodin  and  4  others  [PLD  2007 Quetta  91], 

Mrs. Seema Chaudhry VS Ahsan Ashraf Sheikh [PLD 2003 SC 877], 

SakhawatAli VS  Shui Khelay [PLD 1981 SC 454] and Naveed Munir 

VS  Additional  District  and  Sessions  Judge,  Lahore  [2014  SCMR 

1446]. 

4.   

Learned counsel for the respondent submits on the factual 

plain  that  allegations  against  respondent  No.3  that  he  kidnapped 

his  child  has  not  been  substantiated  in  trial  proceedings  and  that 

the learned Magistrate passed a judgment of acquittal in this regard 

on  19.09.2020;  that  the  petitioner  left  her  three  months  suckling 

baby  with  respondent  No.3  when  she  left  for  France  for  further 

studies  and  it  was  the  father  who  looked  after  the  child  till  she 

returned  back  several  months 

later  and  consequently 

the 

petitioner’s  argument  that  child’s  welfare  is  of  paramount  concern 

to  her  is  not  backed  by  facts;  that  the  petitioner  is  emotionally 

unstable  and  has  admittedly  attempted  to  hurt  herself;  that  the 

petitioner already has custody of the minor child and is only seeking 

appointment as guardian as she wishes to take the child outside the 

territorial jurisdiction of Pakistan, which fact was brought before the 

august  Supreme  Court  during  the  proceedings  in  which  custody  of 

the minor was handed over to the petitioner with the direction that 

the petitioner shall not remove the minor out of the territorial limits 

of  Pakistan  without  express  permission  of  a  court  of  competent 

jurisdiction.  

5.   

On  the  legal  plain,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3 

submits  that  section  19  of  the  Act  prohibits  the  court  from 

 
 
5. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

appointing  another  individual  as  guardian  if  the  father  is  alive  and 

not  unfit  to  be  the  guardian  in  the  opinion  of  the  court;  that  the 

petitioner  has 

failed 

to  establish  any  grounds 

leading 

to 

disqualification of the father as guardian for purposes of section 19; 

that  respondent  no.3  has  continued  to  maintain  his  child,  has 

looked after the child when  the  petitioner was away  to France and 

has  continued    to  oversee  welfare  of  the  child  by  staying  engaged 

with him; that the respondent No.3 has no criminal record and even 

the FIR registered by the petitioner against him for abduction of his 

own child was based on a false story and the Guardian Court found 

that the petitioner had not come to the court with clean hands; that 

both  the  courts  below  have  not  found  respondent  No.3  to  be  unfit 

as guardian of his minor child; that the concurrent judgments of the 

Guardian  Court  and  the  appellate  court  cannot  be  assailed  in  writ 

jurisdiction.  In  support  of  his  arguments,  he  relies  on  Hari  Chand 

VS  Ghulam  Rasool  [A.I.R  1932  Lahore  385],  Walayat  Shah  and 

another  VS  Muhammad  Hussain  Shah  and  others[A.I.R  1932 

Lahore  386],  Mst.  Zebu  and  another  v.  Mizaj  Gul  [PLD  1952 

Peshawar  77],  Muhammad  Saqib    Butt  VS  Mst.  Khalida  Parveen 

[PLD  1967  Karachi  645],  Ganj  Bibi  VS  Muhammad  Younas  and 

another [2011 CLC 1062 Quetta] and Bushra Asghar v. Dr. Rehmat 

Ali and others [2012 MLD 1755]. 

6.   

I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the 

parties and reviewed the record.  

7.   

The legal questions before this Court are as follows: 

(i).  Whether  the  petitioner  has  a  right  to  be  appointed  as 

guardian  of  the  minor  child  under  section  17  of  the  Act  and 

 
 
6. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

whether  respondent  No.3  is  unfit  to  be  the  guardian  for 

purposes of section 19 of the Act?   

(ii).  Whether  the  judgments  and  decrees  of  the  Guardian 

Court and the appellate Court suffer from any illegality or error 

rendering them liable to be set aside? 

8.   

The  relevant  provisions  of  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act, 

1890 are reproduced below: 

Section 4(2) 
(2) 'Guardian' means a person having the care of the person of 
a minor or his property, or of both his person and property; 

Section 7. 

“Power  of  the  Court  to  make  order  as  to  guardianship.  (1) 

Where the Court is satisfied that it is for the welfare of a minor 

that  order  should  be  made:-  (a)  appointing  a  guardian  of  his 

person or property, or both; or (b) declaring a person to be such 

a  guardian,  the  Court  may  make  an  order  accordingly.  (2)  An 

order under this section shall imply the removal of any guardian 

who  has  not  been  appointed  by  will  or  other  instrument  or 

appointed  or  declared  by  the  Court.  (3)  Where  a  guardian  has 

been  appointed  by  will  or  other  instrument,  or  appointed  or 

declared by the Court, an order under this section appointing or 

declaring another person to be guardian in his stead shall not be 

made until the powers of the guardian appointed or declared as 

aforesaid have ceased under the provisions of this Act.” 

Section 17. 

17.  Matters  to  be  considered  by  the  Court  in  appointing 

guardian. (1) In appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, 

the  Court  shall,  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  section,  be 

guided by what, consistently with the law to which the minor is 

subject,  appears  in  the  circumstances  to  be  for  the  welfare  of 

the minor. (2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the 

minor, the Court shall have regard to the  age, sex and religion 

of  the  minor,  the  character  and  capacity  of  the  proposed 

guardian  and  his  nearness  of  kin  to  the  minor,  the  wishes,  if 

any,  of  a  deceased  parent,  and  any  existing  or  previous 

relations  of  the  proposed  guardian  with  the  minor  or  his 

property.  (3)  If  the  minor  is  old  enough  to  form  an  intelligent 

 
 
 
 
 
7. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

preference, the Court may consider that preference. (4) Omitted 

by  the  Federal  Laws  (Revision  and  Declaration)  Ordinance, 

XXVII  of  1981.  (5)  The  Court  shall  not  appoint  or  declare  any 

person to be a guardian against this will. 

Section 19 

19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases. 

Nothing  in  this  Chapter  shall  authorize  the  Court  to  appoint  or 

declare  a  guardian  of  the  property  of  minor  whose  property  is 

under the superintendence of a Court of Wards or to appoint or 

declare  a  guardian  of  the  persons.  (a)  of  a  minor  who  is  a 

married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion of the 

Court,  unfit  to  be  guardian  of  her  person;  or  (b)  of  a  minor 

whose father is living and is not, in the opinion of the Court unfit 

to  be  guardian  of  the  person  of  the  minor,  or  (c)  of  a  minor 

whose  property  is  under  the  superintendence  of  a  Court  of 

Wards  competent  to  appoint  a  guardian  of  the  person  of  the 

minor. 

Section 41 

41.  Cessation  of  authority  of  guardian.  (1)  The  powers  of  a 

guardian  of  the  person  cease:  (a)  by  his  death,  removal  of 

discharge; (b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence 

of  the  person  of  the  ward;  (c)  by  the  ward  ceasing  to  be  a 

minor;  (d)  in  the  case  of  a  female  ward,  by  her  marriage  to  a 

husband who is not unfit to be guardian of her person or, if the 

guardian  was  appointed  or  declared  by  the  Court,  by  her 

marriage to husband who is not, in the opinion of the Court, so 

unfit; or (e) in the case of a ward whose father was unfit to be 

guardian  of the  person of the  ward  by  the  father  ceasing  to  be 

so or, if the father was deemed by the Court to be so unfit, by 

his ceasing to be so in the opinion of the Court.  

(2) The powers of a guardian of the property cease: - (a) by his 

death,  removal  or  discharge;  (b)  by  the  Court  of  Wards 

assuming superintendence of the property of the ward; or (c) by 

the ward ceasing to be a minor.  

(3)  When  for  any  cause  the  powers  of  a  guardian  cease  the 

Court  may  require  him  or,  if  he  is  dead,  his  representative  to 

deliver  as  it  directs  any  property  in  his  possession  or  control 

belonging  to  the  ward  of  any  accounts  in  his  possession  or 

control relating to any past or present property of the ward.  

 
 
 
 
8. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

(4) When he has delivered the property or accounts as required 

by the Court, the Court may declare him to be discharged from 

his  liabilities  save  as  fraud  which  may  subsequently  be 

discovered. 

9.   

The  crux  of  the  matter  before  this  court  is  the  distinction 

between  custody  and  guardianship  and  the  respective  rights  and 

obligations of a custodian and a guardian under the Act, especially 

where one parent has the custody of the child and the other is the 

guardian.  The  term  ‘custody’  is  not  defined  in  the  Act.  The  term 

‘guardian’ has been defined in section 4(2) of the Act and seems to 

include  the  concept  of  custody,  unless  a  guardian  court  awards 

custody  of  a  child  exclusively  to  a  party/parent  who  is  not  the 

guardian  of  the  minor.  It  was  held  in  Mst.  Atia  Waris  VS  Sultan 

Ahmed  Khan  [PLD  1959  Lahore  205]  that  custody  means  actual 

custody  and  not  constructive  custody.  However,  custody  was 

defined  as  actual  or  constructive  possession  for  purposes  of 

protection  in  Jumna  Khan  VS  Mst.  Gull  Ferosha  [PLD  1972 

Peshawar 1]. And in [PLD 1988 Karachi 252] custody was referred 

to  as  the  right  to  upbringing  of  a  minor  child  by  the  mother  or 

someone  legally  entitled  to  it.  It  was  held  in  Bushra  Asghar  v.  Dr. 

Rehmat Ali and 3 others [2012 MLD 1755] that guardianship entails 

the concept of taking care of the minor even in situations when the 

guardian does not have “domain over the corpus of [the] child”.  

10. 

In  view  of  the  case  law  it  is  apparent  that  the  manner  in 

which  the  concepts  of  custody  and  guardian  are  understood  and 

applied,  there  is  an  overlap  between  the  two.  And  where  the 

guardian  also  retains  custody  of  the  minor  child  there  is  complete 

overlap. The question of respective obligations of the custodian and 

 
 
 
9. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

the  guardian  of  the  minor  arises  where  custody  of  a  minor  is 

awarded  to  someone  other  than  the  guardian  as  is  case  in  the 

present  petition.  In  such  case,  the  custodian  and  guardian  are 

separate  persons  and  while 

the  guardian  would  maintain 

constructive custody over the child for purposes of discharge of his 

obligations as guardian, he/she would not have physical custody of 

the  child.  So  custody  alludes  to  bringing  up  and  nurturing  a  child, 

and taking care of his/her personal and emotional needs on a day-

to-day  basis.  Whereas  guardianship  refers  to  the  obligation  of 

maintaining a child and affecting legal transactions in his/her name 

and  retaining  constructive  custody  over  his/her  person  or  property 

for purposes of discharging obligations as a guardian.  

11. 

Traditionally, in the event of separation of the parents as a 

family  unit  custody  of  suckling  minors  is  handed  to  the  mother 

whereas  the  father  is  endowed  with  the  responsibility  to  act  as 

guardian  for  the  person  and  property  of  the  minor  [see  PLD  2009 

SC 751]. However, this  general rule is  not carved  in  stone and for 

purposes  of  the  Act,  welfare  of  the  child  remains  the  paramount 

consideration  (not  one  of  the  considerations  or  even  the  primary 

consideration).  In  view  of  sections  17,  19  and  41  of  the  Act,  the 

scheme  of  the  Act  is  that  the  father  is  the  natural  guardian  even 

when the mother is bestowed with the child’s custody, and custody 

of a minor is not a precondition or requirement for being a guardian 

of  his/her  person  or  property.  (see  PLD  1967  Karachi  569,  PLD 

1968 Karachi 774 and PLD 1963 Lahore 534). 

12. 

A  father  is  considered  the  natural  guardian  of  a  minor, 

since  even  after  separation  with  the  mother,  and  even  when  the 

 
 
10. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

mother  has  been  granted  custody  of  a  minor  child,  the  father  is 

obligated  to  provide  financial  assistance  to  the  minors.  In  Mst. 

Kaneez Akhtar v. Abdul Qadoos and 2 others, [2005 MLD 828] held 

at para 9 that “[t]here is no cavil about the proposition that liability 

to maintain minor child is not only religious/moral obligation of the 

father  but  it  is  also  his  bounded  legal  duty.”  In  Nazan  Bibi  v. 

Additional  District  Judge,  Jhang  and  2  others,  [2009  YLR  991 

(Lahore)]  held  in  para  10  that  the  father,  “although  a  natural 

guardian…his  right  of  Hizanat  [custody]  is…subordinate  to  the 

fundamental  principle  i.e.  welfare  of  the  minor,  the  sole  criteria, 

which  in  any  case  should  prevail”. In  Habib-ur-Rehman  v.  Hina 

Saeed [2010 MLD 544], the father of the child, who was in France, 

wasn’t awarded custody, as the mother would have been unable to 

see  the  child,  but  the  father  was  still  held  responsible  for 

maintenance. The concept of guardianship thus encapsulates, in the 

ordinary scheme of things, the obligation of the father to maintain a 

minor  child  and  the  rights  that  come  along  are  afforded  to  him  to 

exercise oversight and to stay involved with the affairs of the child 

for purposes of discharging his obligations as guardian. 

13. 

It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Mst.  Feroze 

Begum  VS  Lt-Col.  Muhammad  Hussain  [1983  SCMR  606]  and 

reiterated in Munawar Bibi VS Muhammad Amin [1995 SCMR 1206] 

that  maintenance  of  the  child  was  the  duty  of  the  father  and  the 

mother  could  not  be  deprived  of  custody  due  to  her  inability  to 

maintain  her  child.  It  was  held  in  Masroor  Hussain  VS  Additional 

District  Judge,  Islamabad  [2011  CLC  851  Islamabad]  that  if  the 

father failed to maintain his child, he would lose the right to custody 

 
 
11. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

and guardianship. In this case the father had claimed guardianship 

upon  mother’s  remarriage,  but  had  not  been  maintaining  the  child 

or  taking  interest  in  her  life.  The  court  turned  down  his  claim  and 

granted both custody and guardianship to the mother. In short, in a 

claim  of  custody  by  the  mother,  lack  of  resources  to  maintain  the 

child is not a disqualification as the obligation to maintain the child 

remains vested in the father in his capacity as guardian even if the 

custody  of  the  child  is  handed  over  in  the  mother.  But  lack  of 

resources of the father is a disqualification, in his claim for custody 

and in a claim to retain his status as guardian, because if he cannot 

discharge  his  fundamental  obligation  to  maintain  his  child  in  his 

capacity as the natural guardian, the assumption is that it is not in 

the  child’s  welfare  to  remain  in  his  custody  or  under  his 

guardianship,  and  the  child  ought  to  be  placed  in  someone  else’s 

constructive care who is capable of discharging the obligations of a 

guardian.  

14. 

The  concept  of  welfare  of  child  operates  differently  in  a 

claim  for  custody  VS a  claim  for  guardianship.  In  a  claim  for 

custody  a  whole  host  of  factors  are  to  be  considered  by  the 

guardian court to determine wherein lies the child’s welfare. As the 

question of custody is not part of the lis before this court, there is 

no need to list the considerations germane to determination of the 

welfare  of  a  child  in  a  custody  matter.  But  in  a  claim  for 

guardianship,  the  law itself assumes,  when Sections  7, 17, 19  and 

41  are  read  together,  that  the  welfare  of  the  child  is  best  served 

when  his/her  natural  father  remains  the  guardian,  unless  he  is 

found unfit to be the guardian.   

 
 
12. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

15. 

Section  17(2)  lists  the  considerations  for  determining 

where  the  welfare  of  a  minor  lies  while  appointing  a  guardian  of 

minor  as  follows:  (i)  age  of  the  minor,  (ii)  sex  of  the  minor,  (iii) 

religion  of  the  minor,  (iv)  character  of  the  proposed  guardian,  (v) 

capacity  of  the  proposed  guardian,  (vi)  the  proposed  guardian’s 

nearness  to  the  kin  of  the  minor,  (vii)  any  wishes  of  the  deceased 

parents,  and  (viii)  existing  or  previous  relations  of  the  proposed 

guardian  with  the  minor  or  his  property.  Section  17(2)  thus 

assumes that the question of appointing a guardian would ordinarily 

only  arise  when  the  parents  of  the  minor  are  not  alive,  and  even 

then,  the  wishes  of  the  deceased  parents  are  to  be  taken  into 

account  as  they  are  deemed  to  be  the  best  judges  of  wherein  lies 

the  welfare  of  their  child.  And  amongst  the  considerations  to 

determine welfare, it includes affinity of the proposed guardian with 

the  minor,  his  family  and  relations  as  well  as  familiarity  with  his/ 

her  property.  The  answer  to  why  Section  17(2)  makes  such 

assumption  is  then  answered  by  Section  19(2),  which  forbids  a 

court from appointing a guardian of the person of the minor “whose 

father  is  living  and  is  not  in  the  opinion  of  the  court,  unfit  to  be 

guardian  of  the  person  of  the  minor.”  The  intent  of  the  law  is 

further  augmented  by  section  41(1)(e),  which  provides  that  the 

powers  of  a  guardian  cease  “in  case  of  a  ward  whose  father  was 

unfit to be guardian of the person of the ward, by the father ceasing 

to be so, or if the father was deemed by the court to be so unfit, by 

his ceasing to be so in the opinion of the court.” 

16. 

A  combined  reading  of  Section  7,  17,  19  and  41  leads  to 

the following conclusions: (i) the father of a minor is his/her natural 

 
 
13. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

guardian  and  the  welfare  of  the  child  is  best  served  when  he/she 

remains  under  the  father’s  guardianship;  (ii)  the  question  of  how 

the welfare of the child will be best served in appointing a guardian 

in  the  stead  of  the  father  will  only  arise  when  the  father  is  either 

not  alive  or  has  been  determined  by  the  court  to  be  unfit  as 

guardian;  (iii)  the  court  is  vested  with  no  authority  to  appoint  a 

guardian in place of the father when the father is alive and not unfit 

to  be  the  guardian;  and  (iv)  even  where  the  father  is  found  to  be 

unfit  to  be  the  guardian  and  another  person  is  appointed  in  his 

place,  such  other  guardian’s  authority  ceases  once  circumstances 

leading  to  the  father  being  declared  unfit  change  and  he  is  no 

longer  deemed  unfit  by  the  court.  Thus  no  one  can  be  appointed 

guardian  in  the  father’s  place  unless  the  father  is  found  unfit  to 

serve  as  guardian  of  his  child,  and  the  onus  to  establish  that  the 

father is unfit is on the person bringing such claim. 

17. 

In order to discharge his obligations as guardian, the right 

of  a  father  to  access  to  the  child  and  to  provide  constructive 

oversight  has  been  recognized  by  courts.  It  was  observed  in 

Muhammad  Sadiq  VS  Mrs.  Sadiq  Safoora  [PLD  1963  Lahore  534] 

that  the  mother  is  not  to  keep  the  child  at  a  distance  from  the 

father’s  residence  and  that  if  the  mother  “willfully  prevents  the 

father  from  having  anything  to  do  with  the  minor”,  she  could  lose 

her right to custody. In Chiragh Bibi v. Khadim Hussain [PLD 1967 

Lahore  382]  it  was  held  that  father  has  constructive  custody  over 

the child and if the mother who has physical custody precluded the 

father  from  accessing  the  child,  it  would  be  deemed  as  removing 

the child  from the  constructive custody of the father and a ground 

 
 
14. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

for reconsidering custody given to the mother. The jurisprudence of 

our  courts  is  in  sync  with  sociological  studies  that  suggest  that 

splitting up of parents is a source of severe anguish for a child. It is 

in  the  best  interest  of  the  child  to  grow  up  in  a  manner  that  both 

parents  are  involved  in  his/her  upbringing  and  he/she  has  the 

opportunity  to  develop  a  normal  healthy  relationship  with  both 

parents, whether it is a case of shared custody or where one parent 

has custody over the child and the other has visitation rights. It is 

thus that in cases where custody and guardianship is split, the law 

assumes  that  it  is  in  the  welfare  of  the  child  that  the  father,  as 

natural guardian, retains the ability to oversee the upbringing of the 

child while discharging his obligation to maintain the child and look 

after his/her legal affairs.    

18. 

It  was  held  in  Hamida  Begum  v.  Uben  Ullah  [1989  CLC 

604] that in a clash between the rights of parents and the  welfare 

of  a  minor,  the  latter  must  prevail.  Likewise,  it  was  observed  in 

Bulan  VS  Rohiman  [PLD  1963  Karachi  839]  that  custody  is  a  right 

of a child and not of either of the parents i.e. it is the welfare of the 

minor  that  ought  to  be  considered  and  not  that  of  the  person 

seeking  custody.  The  petitioner’s  argument  that  the  visiting 

schedule  drawn  out  by  the  Guardian  Court  is  onerous  and  she 

would like to travel back to her ancestral home during eid holidays 

when  she  has  to  stay  in  Islamabad  to  enable  respondent  no.  3  to 

meet  their  minor  son  is  thus  devoid  of  force.  There  is  nothing 

preventing  the  petitioner  to  rework  the  visitation  schedule, 

amicably  with  respondent  no.  3  or  with  the  indulgence  of  the 

Guardian  Court,  such  that  the  father  is  not  deprived  of  seeing  his 

 
 
15. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

son  on  eid  holidays  and  the  mother  also  gets  to  travel  to  her 

ancestral home for one or both eid holidays. But that the visitation 

schedule  causes  inconvenience  to  the  petitioner  during  holidays  is 

not a valid basis to seek guardianship over her minor son who is in 

her custody.    

19. 

The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to 

identify any illegality in the impugned orders. The learned Guardian 

Court  while  relying  on  Abdul  Ghaffar  VS  AwwamuNas  [1988  CLC 

670] and Mst. Naseem VS Ali Akbar [PLD 2015 Quetta 30] has held 

that: 

“In the light of above judgments this court reached at the 

conclusion that the guardian petition filed by the petitioner 

cannot be rejected on the mere ground that petitioner has 

not taken any  ground on the basis of  which father can  be 

declared  unfit  to  be  appointed  as  guardian  because  while 

deciding  the  guardian  petition  the  right  of  the  parents 

regarding the interest and control of their child is not to be 

exercised,  in  the  interest  and  the  benefit  of  the  parents; 

but in the interest and for the welfare of the child himself. 

Although  the  father  is  a  natural  guardian  but  his  right  is 

also  subordinate  to  the  welfare  of  the  minor.  The 

overriding  fundamental  and  paramount  consideration  is 

always the welfare of minor, rather this is the sole criteria 

which must prevail.” 

The learned Guardian Court has further held that: 

 
 
16. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

25.  Record  further  shows  that  after  the  filing  of  suit  for 

maintenance allowance which is pending before this Court, 

Rs.5,000/- was fixed as an interim maintenance allowance 

of  minor  which  is  regularly  paid  by  respondent.  Petitioner 

despite having the knowledge of this fact had negated the 

same  when  she  was  asked  about  regular  payment  of 

maintenance by respondent.  

26. 

in view of what has been discussed above this court 

is  of  the  opinion  that  petitioner  failed  to  establish  from 

record  that  respondent  is  a  negligent  father  who  had  not 

shouldered  his  responsibilities 

towards 

the 

financial 

requirements  of  minor  by  producing  any  cogent  evidence, 

therefore,  to  this  extent  court  is  of  the  view  that  on  this 

ground respondent is not liable to be disqualified.  

The learned Guardian Court has concluded that: 

“49.  In  the  light  of  above  circumstances,  this  court  is  of 

the  opinion  that  petitioner  failed  to  establish  through 

evidence  that  respondent  is  unfit  for  being  remained  as 

guardian  of  person  of  minor  and  is  liable  to  disqualify 

under section 19(b) of Guardian and Wards Act, therefore, 

this issue is decided against the petitioner and in favour of 

respondent.  

20. 

The  reasoning  of  the  learned  Appellate  Court  also  suffers 

from no illegality and is reproduced herein below: 

 
 
 
17. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

“16.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  a  guardian  of  a 

person of a minor is appointed u/s 7 of the Guardians and 

Wards Act, 1890 only where the court is satisfied that it is 

for  the  welfare  of  a  minor  that  an  order  should  be  made 

appointing  a  guardian  of  the  person  of  the  minor.  If  the 

court  is  not  satisfied  that  the  appointment  of  guardian  of 

the  person  of  the  minor  is  for  the  welfare  of  the  minor, 

then  there  is  no  need  to  proceed  further  at  all.  The 

respondent  being  father  is  natural  guardian  having  the 

right  to  supervise  the  upbringing  of  his  minor  son.  Under 

the  law,  a  mother  has  no  right  to  remove  a  minor  to  a 

place  which  is  inaccessible  to  the  father  of  the  minor.  As 

per  record,  it  is  not  for  the  welfare  of  the  minor  son  to 

appoint  the  guardian  of  his  person  in  presence  of  his 

natural guardian who is not unfit for his guardianship.”    

17.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above, 

the 

appellant/petitioner  No.1  being  mother  is  not  entitled  for 

her  appointment  as  guardian  of  the  person  of  her  minor 

son  despite  she  is  having  the  custody  of  her  minor  son, 

hence  the  trial  court  rightly  refused  to  appoint  her  as 

guardian  of  the  person  of  the  minor.  It  is  also  worth 

mentioning that, as discussed above, the respondent being 

father  is  a  natural  guardian  having  right  to  supervise  the 

upbringing of his minor son.”  

21. 

It  was  held  by  the  learned  Peshawar  High  Court  in 

Mst.Zebu and another VS Mizaj Gul [PLD 1952 Peshawar 77] that:  

 
 
18. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

“the  view  of  the  legislature  seems  to  be  that  the  father 

being the natural and lawful guardian of a minor does not 

require to be so appointed. The natural guardianship which 

vested  in  him  cannot  be  taken  away  from  him  until  and 

unless  it  is  proved  that  ‘he  is  unfit  to  be’  the  guardian  of 

the person of the minor…” 

22. 

It was held by the learned Sindh High Court in Muhammad 

Sadiq Butt VS Mst. Khalida Parveen [PLD 1967 Karachi 645] that “I 

am inclined to think that in a case where the father is alive and has 

not been found to be a person unfit to be the guardian of his minor 

children  he  must  be  regarded  as  the  natural  guardian  and  an 

application  for  the  appointment  of  the  guardian  of  the  minors  in 

such  a  case  would  be  incompetent.  But  the  fact  that  the  father  is 

the natural guardian does not, in my opinion, disentitle the mother 

or  the  mother’s  mother,  as  the  case  may  be  for  claiming  the 

custody  of  the  minor  children,  which  order  of  custody  is  not 

necessarily  in  disregard  of  the  guardianship  of  the  father  which 

continues until an order of unfitness is passed in respect of him.” 

23. 

In  Ganj  Bibi  v.  Muhammad  Younas  and  others  [2011  CLC 

1062 Quetta], the learned Balochistan High Court held that “though 

the  main  consideration  while  appointing  a  person  as  guardian  of  a 

minor, is the welfare of the minor, which is to be seen in relevance 

to  noted  provision  of  law.  In  present  case,  there  is  nothing  on 

record,  nor  even  asserted  by  the  appellant,  on  basis  of  which  the 

respondent can be considered unfit to be guardian of person of his 

minor  son.”And  further  that  “for  the  purpose,  in  view  of  section 

19(b) Guardians and Wards Act 1890, she has to establish that the 

 
 
19. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

father/respondent  is  unfit  to  remain  as  guardian  of  persons  of  the 

minor. But she has completely failed to disclose any reason, nor she 

has placed on record any material due to which the father has been 

disqualified to remain guardian of his minor son.”   

24. 

The  learned  Lahore  High  Court  in  Bushra  Asghar  v.  Dr. 

Rehmat Ali and other [2012 MLD 1755] held as that “the minors are 

male,  the  father  is  their  natural  guardian.  In  the  presence  of  the 

father, any other person cannot put a claim to be a guardian of the 

minors. Court is not authorized to appoint or declare a guardian of 

the person of a minor whose living father is not, in the opinion of a 

court,  unfit  to  be  a  guardian  of  the  person  of  that  minor…”And 

held,  while  relying  on  Fahimudin  Khokhar  v.  Mst.  Zaibunnisa  [PLD 

1968  Karachi  774]  and  Muhammad  Sadiq  Butt  v.  Mst.  Khalida 

Parveen [PLD 1967 Karachi 645], wherein it has been held that the 

guardianship  and  custody  are  two  different  expressions;  the  first 

means,  having  the  care  of  a  person,  it  prescribes  the  duty  on  the 

guardian  to  take  care  of  the  minor  even  without  having  his  actual 

domain over the corpus of a child. The latter denotes the actual or 

constructive  possession  over  the  minor  for  the  purpose  of  his 

protection.  Both  these  capacities  and  characters  could  be  enjoined 

by the same person or by the two different persons, keeping in view 

the  circumstances  of  each  and  every  case  and  definitely  with  the 

paramount  consideration  of  the  welfare  of  the  child.  No  doubt,  a 

father is the natural guardian of the minors whether they be sons or 

daughters.  For  the  purpose  of  the  welfare  of  the  minor,  the 

custody, however, may be entrusted to the mother.” 

 
 
20. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

25. 

Similarly, it was held in Mst. Marium Tariq v. SHO of Police 

Station  Defence  [PLD  2015  Karachi  382]  that  even  where  the 

custody of the minor was awarded to the mother, the guardianship 

of  father  did  not  extinguish  and  that  he  should  have  access  to  the 

minor  and  he  should  remain  financially  responsible  for  the 

education  and  maintenance  of  the  minor  even  though  the  minor 

may be under the care of their divorced mother.    

26. 

In view of a holistic reading of the provisions of the Act, as 

enumerated  above,  case  law  on  the  issue  of  guardianship  and  the 

reasoning  of  the  impugned  judgments,  the  petitioner  has  failed  to 

identify any illegality that calls for interference by this court. 

27. 

It is also settled law that concurrent findings of the Family 

Court  and  the  Appellate  Court  ought  not  be  interfered  with  in  writ 

jurisdiction. 

28. 

It  was  held  by  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court  in  Mst. 

Sardaran  v.  District  Judge,  Mianwali  and  others  [2016  MLD  801] 

that: 

“constitutional petition cannot be resorted to challenge an 

order  on  the  ground  that  evidence  was  not  properly 

appreciated as findings of the facts recorded by the Court 

of  competent  jurisdiction  cannot  be  disturbed  solely  on 

the  ground  that  another  view  could  be  possible  on  the 

same  evidence.  The  High  Court  in  its  constitutional 

jurisdiction cannot sit as a Court of Appeal.”  

 
 
 
21. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

29. 

In Sitara Aslam v. Family Judge and others [2018 CLC 382 

Lahore] it was held that:  

“it  is  settled  proposition  of  law  that  this  Court  should  not 

interfere  with  the  findings  of  facts  arrived  at  by  the 

primary Courts when it is satisfied that the findings of the 

both  the  learned  Courts  below  are  reasonable  and  were 

not arrived at by disregarding any of the provisions of law 

or  any  accepted  principle  concerning  appreciation  of 

evidence. Leaned counsel for the petitioner could not point 

out  that  the  findings  of  fact  recorded  by  both  the  learned 

Courts  below,  on  the  face  of  it,  are  against  evidence  or 

were patently improper or perverse that to accept it could 

amount to perpetuating a grave miscarriage of justice. The 

constitutional  jurisdiction  is  ordinarily  discretionary  in 

character.” 

30. 

The  High  Court  in  constitutional  jurisdiction  does  not 

ordinarily interfere with concurrent findings of fact given by the trial 

court  and  the  appellate  court.  High  Court  can  intervene  in  custody 

matters,  but  only  on  an  interim  basis  in  face  of  an  exigency, 

pending adjudication of the matter by the guardian court as held by 

the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Mirjam  Aberras  Lehdeaho  v.  SHO, 

Police  Station  Chung,  Lahore  [2018  SCMR  427].  This  principle 

applies  even  more  stringently 

in  matters  of  custody  and 

guardianship because being a matter of fact, welfare of a child has 

to be established on the basis of evidence and not presumptions, as 

held  in  Rahimullah  v.  Hilali  Begum  [1974  SCMR  305].  The  only 

presumption  applicable  in  a  claim  of  guardianship  is  that  supplied 

 
 
22. 

                      W.P No. 156 of 2020 

by  the  Act  itself:  that  the  father  is  a  natural  guardian  and  the 

welfare of the child lies in vesting the responsibility of guardianship 

in  him,  unless  he  is  unfit  for  the  purpose  and  declared  so  by  a 

court.  

31. 

In view of the above, there is no infirmity in the judgments 

and  decrees  impugned  through  the  instant  petition,  which  is 

dismissed with a cost of Rs. 10,000 to be paid to respondent no. 3. 

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

    Announced in the open Court on 02-02-2021. 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting 

Saeed.  

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
