ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Criminal  Original  No.425/2018 

Muhammad Rasheed 
VS
Babar Mahmood Sub Divisional Officer Islamabad etc 

,, 

I 

Order with  signature  of Judge  and that of parties 
or counsel where  necessary. 

s. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  Proceedings 

Date of 
order/ 

(1) 

10.01.2019  Petitioner in  person. 

Through this  criminal original,  the  petitioner  has 

prayed for  initiation  of  contempt of  court  proceedings 

against the  respondents for  non-compliance of  order 

dated  12.09.2018 passed  by  this  Court in  writ  petition 

No.3366/2018. 

2. 

Petitioner  contends  that  he  has  submitted 

representation to the SDO,  WAPDA but the same has  not 7.X 

been  decided  despite clear direction of  this  Court vide 

order dated 12.09.2018. 

3. 

Petitioner  has 

been 

confronted 

regarding 

maintainability of  his  claim  upon which  he  states that 

electricity  meter  No.SP-18069  was  installed  at  his 

premises and  the  same  was in  his  name, however, said 

meter was shifted by his  elder son  to  newly constructed 

house,  where  he  is  living with  his  mother (ex-wife of 

petitioner) and is  enjoying the  electricity facility on  the 

strength of electricity meter which was originally installed 

at the premises of applicant. 

4. 

Entire background narrated by the petitioner before 

this  Court reveals that  it  is  not  a  dispute of  electricity 

connection  rather  issue  revolves  around  family  disputes 

whereas, petitioner  has  entered  into  second marriage and 

his  ex-wife  and  children  are  living  separately  in  newly 

constructed  house. Petitioner  is  alleging that  at  the  initial 

stage,  his  son  got  shifted  the  electricity  meter  in  his 

premises  with  the  consent  of  petitioner  but  later  on 

moved to  the  SDO,  WAPDA  for  re-shifting  of  said  meter. 

Petitioner also filed  writ  petition  No.3366/2018 which  was 

disposed of  by this  Court vide  order  dated  12.09.2018  in 

which  SDO,  WAPDA  Sector F-11, Islamabad  was directed 

to  decide  the  representation  of  petitioner  in  accordance 

with  law. 

5. 

In  view of above, there  is  no contempt  apparent on 

record,  therefore,  instant  petition  is  hereby  dismissed 

and office  is  directed to  transmit  copy of  this  order to  the 

SDO,  WAPDA  sector  F-11,  Islamabad  to  issue a  written 

letter  to  the  applicant  as  to  whether  his electricity  meter 

could be  re-shifted or otherwise. 

(MOHSIN-AKHTAR IOY'ANI) 
JUDGE 

