ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

WRIT PETITION NO. 3412 OF 2021 

AWAIS SHABBIR  
VS    
DR. AYESHA SAEED and others 

Petitioner by 

: 

Syed Ghias-ud-Din, Advocate. 
Mr. Adnan Muhammad Khan, Advocate. 

Respondents by 

:  Mr. Naseem Ahmad Shah, Advocate. 

(for Respondents No.1 to 3) 

Date of hearing   

: 

11.05.2022. 

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ, J.:-     Through  the  instant  petition,  the  Petitioner 

[Awais Shabbir] has assailed the Order dated 23.06.2021 (“Impugned Order-I”) 

whereby the application filed by the Petitioner/Defendant for dismissal of suit was 

dismissed by the learned Judge Family Court, West-Islamabad (“Family Court”). 

The  Petitioner  also  assailed  Order  dated  29.07.2021  (“Impugned  Order-II”) 

whereby  the  learned  Family  Court  ordered  that  both  minors  are  entitled  to  get 

Rs.20,000/- per month each as interim maintenance.  

2. 

Facts, in brief as per the Memo of Petition, are that the Petitioner/Defendant 

and the Respondent No.1/Plaintiff No.1 were  married on  06.10.2012. The parties 

were blessed with two children (Respondents/Plaintiffs No.2 and 3). The relations 

between  the  husband  and  wife  deteriorated  and  Respondents  No.1  to  3/Plaintiffs 

instituted  a  Suit  for Dissolution of  Marriage on the  basis of Khulla,  Recovery  of 

Dower  of  Amount  Rs.50,000/-  and  Maintenance  of  Minors  at  the  rate  of 

Rs.40,000/- per month for each Plaintiff No.2 & 3 with 10% Annual Increase. The 

Petitioner/Defendant filed an application for rejection of plaint on the ground that 

the  learned  Family  Court  lacks  territorial  jurisdiction  which  was  dismissed  vide 

Impugned  Order-I.  Thereafter,  vide  Impugned  Order-II  the  learned  Family  Court 

decreed the suit of Respondents/Plaintiffs and dissolved the marriage on the basis 

of  Khulla  whereas  interim  maintenance  of  Respondents/Plaintiffs  No.2  and  3was 

fixed  at  the  rate  of  Rs.20,000/-  per  month  each  which  the  Petitioner/Defendant 
shall be bound to pay on or before 14th day of each month. Feeling aggrieved, the 

Petitioner/Defendant filed instant Writ Petition. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
W.P.No. 3412/2021 

3. 

Learned counsel for the Petitioner/Defendant, inter alia, contended that the 

Impugned Orders are against the law and facts of the case; that Respondents No.1 

to 3/Plaintiffs are resident of Taxila, Rawalpindi whereas in the plaint filed before 

the learned Family Court, Respondents No.1 to 3/Plaintiffs claim to be residents of 

Islamabad  and  that  cause  of  action  also  accrued  in  Islamabad;  that  the  learned 

Family  Court  ought  to  have  decided  the question of  jurisdiction  as a  preliminary 

matter; 

that 

the  Respondent  No.1/Plaintiff  No.1  herself  and 

through 

Respondents/Plaintiffs  No.2  and  3  filed  the  suit  just  to  extort  money  from  the 

Petitioner; 

that 

the 

learned  Family  Court  failed 

to  appreciate 

that 

the 

Petitioner/Defendant 

is  not 

in 

a  position 

to  pay  maintenance  of 

Respondents/Plaintiffs  No.2  and  3  at  the  above  mentioned  rate;  that  in  any  case 

there is no legal or factual justification for the grant of maintenance allowance; that 

the Petitioner/Plaintiff had been maintaining both the Respondents since before the 

institution of suit, hence the Respondents cannot claim past maintenance; that it is 

an established law that maintenance for the minor children should not become the 

sources of undue and enrichment for the lady; that the learned Family Court failed 

to  notice  that  above  amount  is  an  excessive  amount  as  compared  to  the 

requirements  of  the  minor  children;  that  the  learned  Family  Court  has  failed  to 

appreciate  the  facts  that  valuable  rights  of  the  Petitioner/Defendant  are  involved 

and  he  will  suffer  an  irreparable  loss.  Learned  counsel  prayed,  on  behalf  of  the 

Petitioner,  for  acceptance  of  the instant  Writ  Petition  and  the  Impugned  Orders-I 

and II dated 23.06.2021 and 29.07.2021 passed by the learned Family Court to be 

set aside. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  Respondents  No.1  to  3/Plaintiffs 

supported the Impugned Orders and strongly opposed the contentions raised by the 

learned counsel for the Petitioner/Defendant. He submitted that Respondents No. 1 

and 3/Plaintiffs are presently residing in Islamabad; that the instant petition is not 

maintainable and is liable to be dismissed. 

5. 

Arguments advanced by the learned counsels for the parties have been heard 

and record examined with their able assistance. 

6. 

In so far as  the  Impugned Order-I is concerned the learned counsel for the 

Petitioner essentially argued that the issue of jurisdiction should have been decided 

as  a  preliminary  matter  and  the  learned  Family  Court  erred  in  declining  the 

P a g e  | 3 
W.P.No. 3412/2021 

Petitioner’s  application  for  dismissal  of  suit  due  to  lack  of  territorial  jurisdiction 

vide Impugned Order-I.  

7. 

In  this  regard  relevant  paragraph  of  the  Impugned  Order-I  is  reproduced 

herein below: 

Perusal of plaint shows  that plaintiffs permanently reside in Islamabad whereas 
4. 
their temporary residence in in Taxila as well. Copy of CNIC of plaintiff No. 1 which was 
issued  to  her  even  prior  of  this  suit  shows  her  permanent  address  in  Islamabad.  Her 
learned  counsel  stated  that  she  is  doing  her  job  in  Taxila.  Prima  facie  plaintiffs 
successfully  proved  their  residence  in  Islamabad.  At  this  stage  this  application  is 
declined. However, defendant will be at liberty to prove his case with special reference to 
territorial jurisdiction during evidence.     

8. 

The  relevant  portion  as  reproduced  hereinabove  shows  that  the  learned 

Family  Court  was  satisfied  with  regard  to  the  point  of  jurisdiction  nevertheless 

allowed  the  Petitioner  to  prove  his  case  regarding  territorial  jurisdiction  through 

evidence. The discussion contained in the Impugned Order-I regarding jurisdiction 

shows that the dispute raised by the Petitioner was a factual one.  Therefore, in the 

facts and circumstances of the case, the issue of territorial jurisdiction was a mixed 

question of law and fact which can only be resolved through evidence. Reliance is 

placed  on  Bank  of  Credits  and  Commerce  VS  Asrar  Hassan,  2007  SCMR  852, 

Zohaib  Hussain  Bangesh  VS  Judge  Family  Court,  2011  YLR  1155  and  Messrs 

Taha  Commodity  Export  VS  Khadim  Ali  Shah  Bukhari,  2011  MLD  1898. 

Therefore,  I  do  not  see  any  legal  defect  in  the  Impugned  Order-I  that  warrants 

interference in writ jurisdiction as the Petitioner has the right to prove the issue of 

jurisdiction through recording of evidence.  

9. 

Even otherwise this Writ Petition is hit by laches as the Petitioner has  filed 

the same on 24.09.2021 to challenge the Impugned Order-I which was passed on 

23.06.2021 without any explanation for the delay of three months. In the meantime 

Khulla was granted with the consent of the Petitioner by the learned Family Court 

vide  Impugned  Order-II  and  no  appeal  has  been  filed  against  the  same  and  the 

Petitioner is not stated to be aggrieved by the grant of khula.   

10.  To  the  extent that  the  Petitioner is purportedly  aggrieved  by  the  Impugned 

Order-II  as  the  interim  maintenance  fixed  thereunder  is  allegedly  excessive,  the 

same has been passed in pursuance of Section 17-A of the West Pakistan Family 

Courts Act, 1964, where under the Family Court has the jurisdiction to pass interim 

order  for  maintenance  at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings  in  a  suit  for  maintenance. 

The purpose behind the provision of interim maintenance is to ensure that during 

P a g e  | 4 
W.P.No. 3412/2021 

the  pendency  of  the  legal  proceedings,  the  minors  are  not  faced  with  financial 

challenges. 

11.  Section 14 (3) of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964, bars an appeal 

or  revision  against  an  interim  order  passed  by  a  Family  Court  with  the  obvious 

purpose to avoid delays.  

12.  The  Impugned  Order-II  is  merely  an  interlocutory  order.  The  maintenance 

fixed through such an order is only temporary. The quantum of maintenance may 

be modified after appraising the evidence produced at trial. An aggrieved party will 

have a right to agitate his grievance before the  appellate  forum  when the interim 

order merges into a final order. Even otherwise, quantum of interim maintenance, 

being  a  factual  dispute  cannot  be  made  a  ground  for  invoking  the  Constitutional 

jurisdiction of this Court.  

13. 

I am guided by the consistent view taken by different Honorable Benches of 

the  Islamabad  High  Court,  Islamabad  in  various  matters  including  the  reported 

cases of Dr. Aqueel Waris VSIbrahim Aqueel Waris, 2020 CLC 131; Minhaaj 

Begum  VS  Najam-us-Saqib,  2018  CLC  506;  Mashkoor  Ahmed  Khokhar VS The 

Family  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  2019  CLC  1635;  Muhammad  Touseeq  Danial 

Bhatti VS Ayesha Naeem, 2021 MLD 337; and Aamir Munir Puri VS Mst. Saima 

Naeem, 2021 YLR 2166, wherein it has been held that interlocutory orders by the 

Family  Court  cannot  be  assailed  in  Constitutional  jurisdiction  even  though  they 

may be harsh in some instances.  Keeping in view the above said observations by 

this  Court  in  the  aforementioned  cases  the  instant  petition  is,  therefore,  not 

maintainable to the extent of the Impugned Order-II dated 29.07.2021. 

14.  Thus,  in  the  light  of  above  said  discussion  the  Impugned  Orders  I  and  II 

dated  23.06.2021  and 29.07.2021 passed by the learned  Family  Court do not call 

for interference in writ jurisdiction.  Consequently,  this  Writ  Petition  is  hereby 

dismissed.  

 (SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 
JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
