Form  No:  HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No.1155/2019 

Islamabad Wildlife Management Board 
VS
Metropolitan Corporation Islamabad, etc.  

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  

Date of order/ 
proceedings  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

14-12-2020 

Mr  Owais Awan, Advocates for applicant. 
Syed Muhammad  Tayyab, Dy. Attorney General. 
Sardar  Ejaz Ishaq  Khan,  Advocate for respondents.  
Mr  Daniyal  Hassan,  Advocate for IMWB. 
Malik  Naseem  Abbas  Nasir,  Advocate  for  respondent/  Bio 
Research  Council. 
Mr  MNA  Rehan,  Advocate for respondent.  
Barrister  Omer  Malik,  Advocate for respondent . 
Ms Naheed  S. Durrani,  Secretary, M/o Climate  Change. 
Ms  Rina  Saeed  Khan,  Chairperson,  Isb.  Wildlife  Management 
Board.   
Mr  Zahid  Baig  Mirza,  Member,  IWMB. 
Mr  M.  Sulyman  Khan,  Joint  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Climate 
Change.   
Dr  Mazhar  Hayat, Dy. Secretary, M/o Climate  Change.   
Dr  Amir  Khalil,  Director  Four  Paws International. 
Syed Mujtaba  Hussain,  Member,  IWMB. 
Dr  Mazhar  Hayat, Dy. Secretary, M/o Climate  Change.   
Syed Ali  Raza  Zaidi,  Dy.  Director  Law, M/o Climate  Change.   

C.M. No. 3976/2020. 

Athar  Minallah,  C.J.-  Barrister    Sardar  Ijaz 

Ishaq, learned counsel  for Ms Naheed S. Durrani, 

Secretary,  Ministry 

of 

Climate 

Change, 

Government  of  Pakistan  and  Barrister  Danyal 

Hassan,  learned  counsel  for  the  Chairperson  of 

Islamabad  Wildlife 

Management 

Board 

(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Board”)  have 

appeared. They  have informed that the Board, in 

its  meeting  held  on11th  December,  2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page :2 
C.M. No. 3976/2020  in W.P. No. 1155/2019 

deliberated  regarding  the  relocation  of  the  two 

Himalayan  brown  bears 

to  an  appropriate 

sanctuary.  The  Board,  after  obtaining  opinions 

from  the  experts,  has  decided  to  relocate 

forthwith the two brown bears, namely Suzie and 

Bubloo, to a sanctuary established in the Kingdom 

of  Jordan.  A  copy  of  the  minutes  of  the  Board’s 

meeting has also been submitted and it shall be 

read as an integral part of this order.  

2. 

It  is  heartening  for this Court to note that 

the  Board  has  correctly  appreciated 

the 

jurisprudence  laid  down  in  its  judgment,  dated 

21-05-2020, passed in W.P. No.1155/2019, titled 

“Islamabad  Wildlife  Management  Board  through 

its  Chairman  v.  Metropolitan  Corporation 

Islamabad  through  its  Mayor  and 4 others”. The 

natural  habitat  of  Suzie  and  Bubloo,  the  two 

incarcerated  brown  bears,  was  the  high  altitude 

plateau of Deosai National Park in the Himalayas. 

It was indeed inhumane to have deprived them of 

living  in  their  natural  habitat  merely  for  the 

entertainment  of  the  human  species.  They have 

remained  caged  in  the  Marghazar  zoo  for  more 

than  a  decade.  A  zoo,  no  matter  how  well 

equipped,  is  no  less  than  a  concentration  camp 

for living beings. Both the bears were sent by the 

 
 
 
 
 
Page :3 
C.M. No. 3976/2020  in W.P. No. 1155/2019 

Creator to live free in their natural habitats. They 

were  born  free  and  taking  them  out  of  their 

natural habitat and caging them was in violation 

of the natural rights bestowed upon them by the 

Creator.  They  were  imprisoned  without  having 

committed  a  crime.  By  depriving  them  of  their 

natural habitat, the human species has interfered 

with the balance created in nature by the Creator. 

They  were  subjected  to  unimaginable  pain  and 

suffering  and  there  was  no  justification  for  this 

cruel  treatment  other  than  to  entertain  the 

human  species.  They  have  suffered  enough  and 

they  lack  the  ability  to  let  the  human  species 

know  what  they  must  have  gone  through.  Their 

abnormal  behavior  while 

imprisoned  was 

sufficient to speak volumes for the unimaginable 

pain and suffering. 

3. 

“Kaavan”,  the  elephant,  has  already  been 

relocated to a sanctuary in Cambodia. The reports 

received from Cambodia is a tribute to the people 

of Pakistan and its Government who accepted the 

jurisprudence of this Court and implemented it in 

letter  and spirit. The relocation of “Kaavan”, the 

elephant,  and  the  two  Himalayan  brown  bears, 

Suzie and Bubloo, to appropriate sanctuaries has 

set  a  precedent  for  others  to  follow.  They  will 

 
 
 
 
 
Page :4 
C.M. No. 3976/2020  in W.P. No. 1155/2019 

always represent the people of Pakistan and their 

resolve  to  treat  living  species  with  respect  and 

dignity.  It  is  an  acknowledgement  that  animal 

species  have  rights  and  that  it  is  a  duty  of 

humans  to  protect  them.  The  survival  of  the 

human species on this planet is dependent on the 

existence  and  protection  of  the  animal  species 

and  their  natural  habitats.  Kaavan,  Suzie  and 

Bubloo will always be  ambassadors of the people 

of Pakistan,  a reminder that the human race can 

go  extinct  if  the  animal  species  and their rights 

are  not protected. They will serve as symbols of 

the empathy and respect that the animal species 

deserve  from  humans  and  a  reminder  that 

protecting  their  rights  and  their  welfare  is  of 

paramount  importance.  They  will  remain  the 

messengers of the people of Pakistan for the rest  

of  humanity  that  it  is  time  to  end  imprisoning 

sentient animal species in cages in a zoo and to 

restore the balance of nature by letting them live 

with dignity in their respective natural habitats so 

that  they  may  enjoy  their  natural rights. This is 

the scheme of  nature created by the Creator and 

disturbing it is not humane.  

4. 

Both  Suzie  and  Bubloo,  the  brown  bears, 

could  have  been  taken  care  of  in  Pakistan  but 

 
 
 
 
 
Page :5 
C.M. No. 3976/2020  in W.P. No. 1155/2019 

time  was  required  for  creating  an  enabling 

environment and a facility that would serve as a 

sanctuary. This Court records its appreciation for 

the  decision  of  the  Board  not  to  subject  these 

sentient living beings to further pain and suffering 

even  for  a  day  and  to  relocate  them  to  an 

appropriate  sanctuary  in  the  Kingdom  of  Jordan 

till a facility could be established that would meet 

their  behavioral,  physiological  and  social  needs. 

This  is  a  step  towards  changing  mindsets  and 

would  definitely  contribute  towards  fighting  the 

evils that today threaten the peaceful existence of 

the  human  species  on  this  plant because it is a 

recognition of a fundamental principle; life is the 

most  precious  creation  of  the  Creator  and  its 

protection is a duty of every human. There will be 

no crime, violence, or bloodshed if this principle is  

acknowledged as the purpose of human existence 

on  this  planet.  Every  form  of  life  is  an  end  in 

itself.  

5. 

This  Court  would  also  like  to  avail  this 

opportunity  by  recognizing  the  valuable  and 

laudable services rendered by  Dr Amir Khalil and 

his organization Four Paws in assisting the Board 

and  the  Government  of  Pakistan  and  to  enable 

spreading  the  message  in  the  rest  of  the  world 

 
 
 
 
 
Page :6 
C.M. No. 3976/2020  in W.P. No. 1155/2019 

that  the  welfare  of  sentient  animal  species  and 

protecting  their  natural  rights  is  of  paramount 

importance.  This  Court  wishes  the  two  brown 

bears,  Suzie  and  Bubloo, a safe journey to their 

temporary  abode  with  the  hope  that,  being 

magnanimous  by  nature,  they  would  forgive  the 

human race for subjecting them to unimaginable 

pain and suffering.  

6. 

This application stands disposed of in terms 

of the minutes of the meeting of the Board held 

on 11th December, 2020. 

Luqman Khan/* 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
