ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal Appeal No.125/2018 
Chanzeb Akhtar v. The State & another 

Jail Appeal No.130/2018 
Chanzeb Akhtar v. The State 

and 

Murder Reference No.8/2018 
The State v. Chanzeb Akhtar 

Appellant by: 

Raja Muhammad Farooq, Advocate.  

Respondents by: 

Mr. Zahid Asif Chaudhary, Advocate for 
Respondent No.2/Complainant  
Barrister Qurat-ul-Ain, State Counsel.  

Date of Hearing: 

15.04.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  this  common  judgment,  we 

intend to decide the captioned criminal appeal, jail appeal and murder reference 

as the same have arisen out of criminal case FIR No.51, dated 06.02.2015, under 

Section 302 PPC, P.S. Koral, Islamabad.  

2. 

Through  the  captioned  criminal  appeal  and 

jail  appeal,  Chanzeb 

Akhtar/appellant  has  called  in  question  judgment  of  the  learned  District  and 

Sessions  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  Islamabad,  dated  17.07.2018,  whereby  the 

appellant  has  been  convicted  in  the  aforesaid  case  FIR  and  sentenced  to  death 

under  Section  302(b)  PPC  along  with  payment  of  compensation  to  the  tune  of 

Rs.200,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of  deceased  and  fine  of  Rs.100,000/-  ,  in  default 

whereof,  the  appellant  shall  further  undergo  simple  imprisonment  for  six  (06) 

months.  

3. 

Similarly,  the  State  through  the  captioned  murder  reference  preferred 

under Section 374 Cr.P.C. sought confirmation or otherwise of the death sentence 

awarded to Chanzeb Akhtar/appellant. 

4. 

Brief facts referred in the captioned appeals are that  on 06.02.2015, in the 

midnight,  PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood/complainant  submitted  a  complaint 

(Exh.PL)  to  the  S.H.O.,  P.S.  Koral,  Islamabad  alleging  therein  that  he  had  been 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 2 

informed  by  CW-1  Pervez  Akhtar,  brother  of  Chanzeb  Akhtar/appellant,  that 

appellant had murdered his wife (Munaza Sultana) i.e. sister of complainant with 

.30 bore pistol and fled away. The complaint Exh.PL was converted into the case 

FIR No.51/2015 (Exh.PU) and formal investigation was started. The next day i.e. 

07.02.2015, the appellant surrendered himself before the police and got recovered 

the  weapon  of  offence  i.e.  .30  bore  pistol,  however  when  charge  under  Section 

302  PPC  was  framed  against  the  appellant,  he  pleaded  not  guilty.  The 

prosecution  in  order  to  prove  the  case  has  produced  16  prosecution  witnesses 

coupled with 02 court witnesses, whereafter the learned trial Court has recorded 

the  statement  of  appellant  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  and  vide  the  impugned 

judgment dated 17.07.2018, sentenced the appellant to death under Section 302(b) 

PPC  along  with  payment  of  compensation  of  Rs.200,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of 

deceased and fine of Rs.100,000/- , in default whereof, the appellant shall further 

undergo simple imprisonment for six (06) months. Hence, the captioned criminal 

appeal, jail appeal and murder reference.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  appellant  contended  that  the  impugned  judgment 

dated 17.07.2018 is patently illegal being not supported by scope of evidence and 

is  not  sustainable  in  the  eyes  of  law; that  the  case  in  hand  is  a  motive-less  case 

from  the  very  inception  of  its  registration  up  till  its  conclusion  as  nothing  in 

terms  of  motive  had  ever  been  surfaced  on  record  during  the  course  of  entire 

investigation;  that  the  learned  trial  Court  and  prosecution  have  mainly  relied 

upon  the  testimony  of  CW-1  Mirza  Pervez  Akhtar,  whose  evidence  remained 

totally  different  from  the  prosecution  version  as  his  evidence  did  not  surface 

either  in  the  investigation  or  at  trial  through  report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C., 

rather  only  reliance  was  placed  on  an  affidavit  filed  by  the  said  court  witness, 

which  could  not  substitute  the  due  process  of  investigation  and  law;  that  the 

learned  trial  Court  has  not  given  due  weightage  to  the  statement  of  appellant 

recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  and  resorted  to  passing  the  impugned 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 3 

judgment in hasty manner, which is liable to be set-aside and the appellant may 

be acquitted of the charge.  

6. 

Conversely,  learned  State  Counsel  as  well  as  learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.2/complainant in support of the impugned judgment stated that 

prosecution  has  successfully  proved  the  case  by  producing  truthful  witnesses; 

that  the  evidence  produced  by  private  PWs,  Investigating  Officer,  witnesses  of 

recovery  coupled  with  the  medical  evidence  and  circumstantial  evidence  prove 

the  case  of  prosecution  against  the  appellant;  that  all  the  prosecution  witnesses 

remained consistent and the defence has failed to shake their stance on material 

points,  while  the  learned  trial  Court  has  rightly  appreciated  the  evidence 

available on record and passed the impugned judgment in accordance with law.  

7. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal of record reveals that PW-11 Mirza Zafar Mehmood/complainant 

submitted a  complaint  (Exh.PL) to the S.H.O. P.S. Koral  having  allegations that 

his  younger  sister  Munaza  Sultana  (deceased)  was  married  to  his  first  cousin 

namely Chanzeb Akhtar (appellant) and on 06.02.2015, at about 12.15 a.m. in the 

midnight, when he was sleeping in his house, he was informed by CW-1 Pervez 

Akhtar,  brother  of  appellant,  regarding  the  death  of  deceased  at  the  hands  of 

appellant  by  way  of  firing  with  .30  bore  pistol,  whereafter  the  appellant  fled 

away from the scene. The complainant along with CW-1 Pervez Akhtar went to 

the house of appellant to  see his sister, where he saw the dead body lying on a 

cot.  The  complaint  (Exh.PL)  was  converted  into  case  FIR  No.51/2015  (Exh.PU) 

and  was  lodged  at  about  02:15  a.m.  in  the  midnight,  whereafter  PW-16 

Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O.  immediately  started  investigating  the  crime  and  visited 

the  place  of  occurrence  along  with  the  police  party  comprising  of  PW-7  Imran 

Shafique/constable,  Arshid/constable  and  PW-1  Mst.  Khadija-Tul-Kubra/LHC, 

where they found the dead body of deceased lying on a cot in a residential room 

of appellant’s house. The said lady Head Constable inspected the dead body and 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 4 

prepared  the  inquest  report  Exh.PJ,  which  was  attested  by  PW-11  Zafar 

Mehmood Mirza and PW-12 Mirza Babar Iqbal. Application for the postmortem 

of deceased (Exh.PV) was drafted, however the Investigating Officer stated that 

the appellant’s brothers were not allowing to escort the dead body of deceased to 

hospital on the ground  of having the dispute between the relatives and there is 

no need of postmortem examination of deceased, due to which the dead body of 

deceased  was  escorted  to  hospital  with  delay  i.e.  at  09:00  a.m.  in  the  morning, 

whereafter the postmortem of deceased was conducted. 

9. 

PW-9  Dr.  Kaneez  Fatima,  Medical  Officer,  Polyclinic  Hospital  conducted 

the  postmortem  examination  of  deceased  and  prepared  the  report  (Exh.PH), 

which is reproduced as under.    

“External Appearance: 
A  dead  body  of  women  wearing  Gulabi  color  shalwar  qameez  with 
correspondence  holes  present  on  it,  Jursy  gray  color,  white  buniyan 
two in number, pajama white color, kareem color brazier soacked with 
blood.  

Injuries 
1.  Fire-arm  entry  wound  on  the  right  upper  arm  below  the  right 
shoulder.  Wound  is  on  the  lateral  aspect  about  1cmx1cm  with 
blackening (pallet recover from the wound No.1) 

2.  Fire-arm  entry  wound  on  the  same  side  on  the  injury  No.1,  6cm 

below the wound No.1 with blackening around the wound.  

3.  Fire-arm  exit  wound  on  the  medial  aspect  of  the  right  arm  about 

01cmx01cm with everted edges.  

4.  Fire-arm  entry  wound  in  the  right  deltoid  area  of  the  right  arm 
with  blackening  with  1  c.m.  x  1  c.m.  with  inverted  edges.  Pallet 
recovered from the wound No.4.  

5.  Fire-arm  entry  wound  on  the  right  upper  shoulder  area  with 

blackening 01 c.m. x 01 c.m. with inverted edges.  

6.  Fire-arm entry wound on the right back of the chest, lateral aspect 
of the right scapula just above the axilla with blackening 01 c.m. x 
01 c.m. with inverted edges.  

7.  Fire-arm  exit  wound  on  the  left  fron  side  of  the  chest  above  the 
brest  near  to  nipple  lateral  aspect  01  c.m.  x  01  c.m.  with  everted 
edges.  

8.  Fire-arm exit wound on the same side of the wound No.7, 03 c.m. 
away from the wound No.6 with everted edges 01 c.m. x to 01 c.m. 
Pallet recovered from wound No.8.  

9.  Fire-arm  entry  wound  on  the  right  fron  chest  just  below  the 

posterior axillary line 01 c.m. x 01 c.m. with inverted edges.  

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 5 

Cranium and Spinal Cord 
Scalp,  skull  and  vertebra,  membranes,  brain,  spinal  cord  were  found 
healthy.  

Thorax 
Walls,  ribs  and  cartilages  ruptured,  walls  ruptured,  ribs  healthy. 
Pleurae  ruptured.  Right 
lung  both  ruptured. 
lung  and 
Paricardium and heart ruptured.  
Larrynx and tracheae and blood vessels were found healthy.  

left 

Abdomen 
Walls,  peritoneum,  mouth,  pharynx  and  oesophagus,  diaphragm, 
stomach and its contents, pancreas, small intestines and their contents 
semi  digested  particles,  large  intestines  and  their  contents,  liver, 
spleen, kidneys, bladders, organs and generation external and internal 
were found healthy.  

My opinion 
In my opinion deceased sustain multiple fire-arm over the upper part 
of  the  body,  but  the  injury  No.6  resulted  ruptured  both  lungs  and 
heart,  most  vital  organ  of  the  body  leading  to  loss  of  function  and 
death. All these injuries are antemortem in nature and are sufficient to 
cause to death in ordinary course of time.  

Probable time b/w injury and death 

Between injury and death three to four minute, and between 
death to postmortem ten (10) to twelve hours. 

10. 

PW-16 Muhammad Iqbal/I.O. prepared the rough site plan, got recovered 

the fire empties from the place of occurrence (P7/1-2), bloodstained Chadar and 

recorded the statements of CW-1 Mirza Parvez Akhtar, Javed Akhtar (both sons 

of  Muhammad  Ashraf),  Mirza  Muhammad  Ibrahim  son  of  Muhammad  Afzal, 

Mirza Abdul Qadeer son of Pervaiz Akhtar in the police diary, who affirmed the 

factum  of  murder  of  deceased  by  the  hands  of  appellant.  The  Investigating 

Officer  had  also  taken  the  last  worn  clothes  of  deceased  comprising  of  Shalwar 

Qameez (P9&10), Banyan (P11), Pajama (P12), Brazier (P13), Jersey (P14), while the 

jersey (P14) contains the corresponding holes of fire-arm shots with burning. On 

07.02.2015,  the  Investigating  Officer  arrested  the  appellant,  who  himself 

surrendered  in  the  police  station  and  during  the  course  of  investigation,  the 

appellant  disclosed  about  the  weapon  of  offence  i.e.  .30  bore  pistol  that  it  has 

been concealed in under-constructed garage in Haveli near his house, which was 

recovered on his pointation, whereby .30 bore pistol (P15) along with magazine 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 6 

(P16)  were  taken  into  possession,  regarding  which  a  separate  case  i.e.  FIR 

No.54/2015, under Section 13/20/65 AO (Exh.PA), was registered and unscaled 

site  plan  (Exh.PZ)  was  prepared.  The  Investigating  Officer  also  received  an 

affidavit  dated  10.02.2015  (Exh.CW-1/1-3)  from  appellant’s  brother  namely 

CW-1  Pervez  Akhtar.  The  Investigating  Officer  dispatched  two  recovered  fire-

arm  empties  of  .30  bore  pistol,  three  (03)  lead  bullets  recovered  from  the  dead 

body of deceased and .30 bore pistol (P15) to the Forensic Science Laboratory on 

20.02.2015, 27.02.2015 and 10.03.2015, respectively.  

11. 

It  has  been  observed  from  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  seen  by 

PW-12  Babar  Iqbal  i.e.  brother  of  deceased,  fleeing  away  from  the  scene  of 

occurrence after commission of offence as he was living in a house adjacent to the 

appellant’s house. The alleged incident was also notified by the appellant’s real 

brother  namely  CW-1  Parvez  Akhtar  through  an  affidavit,  though  he  was  not 

made  a  witness  by  the  Investigating  Officer  in  the  list  of  witnesses,  but  he  has 

been summoned by the Court as CW-1. 

12. 

The  thorough  inspection  of  entire  record  led  this  Court  to  the  following 

facts.  

(i) 

The time of occurrence is referred as 12:15 a.m. in the morning 

on 06.02.2015, followed by registration of FIR (Exh.PU) at 02:15 

a.m.  on  the  complaint  (Exh.PL)  filed  by  PW-11  Mirza  Zafar 

Mehmood, real brother of deceased.  

(ii) 

The  deceased  was  allegedly  murdered  by  her  husband 

(appellant) as referred in the complaint Exh.PL.  

(iii) 

The  inquest  report  (Exh.PJ)  prepared  by  PW-16  Muhammad 

Iqbal/I.O., refers the place of occurrence as the residential room 

of appellant’s house.  

(iv) 

Column  No.7  of  the  inquest  report  (Exh.PJ)  also  refers  the 

bloodstained  clothes  of  deceased 

including 

jersey  with 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 7 

corresponding  holes  having  burning  marks  thereon  occurred 

through firing.  

(v) 

Column  No.10  of  the  inquest  report  (Exh.PJ)  refers  07  fire-arm 

injuries of .30 bore pistol.  

(vi) 

PW-9  Dr.  Kaneez  Fatima,  Medical  Officer,  Polyclinic  Hospital 

pursuant  to  postmortem  examination  (Exh.PH)  of  deceased 

referred  09  injuries,  having  06  fire-arm  entry  wounds,  on  the 

dead body of deceased. 

(vii) 

Three  (03)  lead  bullets  were  recovered  from  dead  body  of 

deceased, which were handed over to police.  

(viii) 

PW-14  Dr.  Tanveer  Afsar  Malik,  Medical  Officer,  Polyclinic 

Hospital  issued  the  death  certificate  of  deceased  Exh.PK,  with 

date  of  death  as  06.02.2015,  at  about  10:25  a.m.,  and  sent  three 

(03) pellets/Sikka taken out from the dead body of deceased on 

19.02.2015 to Forensic Science Laboratory, vide letter Exh.PT, for 

detection of weapon of offence.   

(ix) 

The  Forensic  Science  Laboratory  vide  report  dated  08.04.2015 

(Exh.PAA)  confirms  that  .30  bore  pistol  recovered  at  the 

pointation of appellant and the three (03) lead bullets recovered 

from the dead body of deceased are matched as the said empties 

recovered  from  the  place  of  occurrence  believed  to  have  been 

fired from the weapon of offence. 

(x) 

PW-1 Khadija-Tul-Kubra/Lady HC examined the dead body of 

deceased  on  06.02.2015  along  with  the  Investigating  Officer 

while preparing the inquest report.  

(xi) 

PW-6  Malik  Amir  Shahzad/Draftsman  on  the  pointation  of 

complainant  and  eyewitnesses  prepared  the  scaled  site  plan  of 

the place of occurrence (Exh.PE).  

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 8 

(xii) 

PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood/complainant,  who  is  the  elder 

brother  of  deceased,  while  appearing  before  the  Court  stated 

that  her  sister  (deceased)  was  married  to  his  paternal  cousin 

Chanzeb  Akhtar  (appellant),  and  on  06.02.2015,  at  about  12:15 

a.m. in the midnight, when he was sleeping in his home, CW-1 

Parvez  Akhtar,  brother  of  appellant,  came  to  his  house  and 

informed him about the murder of his younger sister (deceased) 

at the hands of appellant by way of firing.  

(xiii) 

PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood/complainant  has  also  explained 

the reasons of delay in conducting postmortem of deceased and 

held  responsible  the  family  members  of  appellant  as  they  did 

not  allow  the  dead  body  to  be  escorted  for  the  purpose  of 

postmortem  or  to  initiate  the  legal  proceedings,  due  to  which 

dead body was escorted to hospital with delay at about 09 a.m. 

in the morning.  

(xiv) 

PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood/complainant  also  became 

witness  of  two  empties  Exh.P7/1-2  of  .30  bore  pistol  from  the 

cot together with bloodstained Chadar (P8) and received the last 

worn clothes of deceased in hospital.  

(xv) 

PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood/complainant  has  not  suggested 

any  motive  for  commission  of  murder/offence  committed  by 

the appellant.  

(xvi) 

He also stated that the rooftop of  house  of PW-12 Mirza Babar 

Iqbal, brother of deceased, is near to the house of appellant.  

(xvii) 

PW-12 Mirza Babar Iqbal acknowledged that three (03) brothers 

and  three  (03)  of  both  the  parties  sisters  are  married  to  each 

other, while the deceased was married to appellant 20/22 years 

prior to the occurrence and were issueless.  

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 9 

(xviii) 

PW-12  Mirza  Babar  Iqbal  stated  that  houses  are  adjacent  and 

roofs of both the houses are connected  

(xix) 

PW-12 Mirza Babar Iqbal on hearing the alarm of fire from the 

house of appellant went upstairs on the roof of  house of CW-1 

Parvez Akhtar, who is also his cousin/brother-in-law, and saw 

the appellant going out of his room holding a pistol in his hand 

towards  outer  gate  of  the  Haveli,  while  at  the  relevant  time, 

electric bulbs in the courtyard were switched on.  

(xx) 

The  appellant  surrendered  himself  before  the  police  in  police 

station on the next day of the occurrence.  

(xxi) 

On  09.02.2015,  the  appellant  led  the  police  party  to  a  garage 

situated  in  Haveli  near  his  house  and  in  presence  of  PW-16 

Muhammad Iqbal/I.O. and PW-13 Ehsan ul Haq/Constable got 

recovered.30  bore  pistol  (P15)  beneath  the  seats  of  car,  vide 

recovery memo Exh.PS.  

(xxii) 

No one was present inside the Haveli at the time of recovery and 

the garage was an open place. 

(xxiii) 

The Haveli has Atta Chakki and an unconstructed garage with a 

gate. 

(xxiv) 

The  affidavit  (Exh.P1/1-3)  submitted  by  CW-1  Parvez  Akhtar 

was  taken  into  possession  through  recovery  memo  Exh.PB, 

attested  witness  PW-5  Ayyaz  Akram,  on  which  objection  was 

raised,  whereafter  the  matter  was  assailed  by  the  appellant 

through Criminal Revision No.83/17, whereby this Court, vide 

judgment  dated  20.07.2017,  directed  the  learned  trial  Court  to 

decide the fate of affidavit in accordance with law.  

(xxv) 

The  affidavit  (CW-1/1-3)  of  CW-1  Mirza  Pervez  Akhtar 

discloses  that  he  nominated  his  brother  (appellant)  for  the 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 10 

murder  of  deceased  after  four  days  of  occurrence  and  handed 

over  the  said  affidavit  to  the  Investigating  Officer  of  this  case, 

who made the affidavit as part of the record. 

(xxvi) 

On  the  application  of  complainant,  the  learned  trial  Court  has 

summoned  appellant’s  real  brother  namely  Mirza  Parvez 

Akhtar as CW-1 to confront the affidavit (CW-1/1-3) submitted 

by him.  

(xxvii) 

The learned trial Court has also  summoned Sami Ullah/Stamp 

Vendor  as  CW-2  and  confirms  the  copy  of  ID  card  referred  as 

Exh.CW-2, register of stamp vendor, entry of affidavit on stamp 

vendor (Exh.CW-2/1) and issuance of stamp paper on its verso 

as  Exh.CW-2/2  along  with  leaflets  of  stamp  paper  affidavit  as 

Exh.CW-2/3-5. 

(xxviii) 

Shan  Muhammad/ASI,  Moharrar  Malkhana  P.S.  Khanna, 

appeared  as  PW-2,  who  handed  over  the  parcels  of  empties  of 

.30  bore  pistol  to  PW-10  Abdul  Haleem/constable  for  onward 

transmission to FSL. 

(xxix) 

On 18.02.2015, PW-2 Shan Muhammad/ASI  handed over three 

(03) 

led  bullets  of 

.30  bore  pistol 

to  Muhammad 

Haleem/constable, followed by handing over of .30 bore pistol 

on  27.02.2015  to  PW-15  Shafaqat  Ullah/constable  for  onward 

transmission  to  FSL.  However  during  the  course  of  cross-

examination,  PW-2  Shan  Muhammad/ASI  acknowledged  that 

the pistol was handed over to him on the day of occurrence.  

13. 

The  above 

referred  evidence  clearly 

spells  out 

that  Munaza 

Sultan/deceased was living with her husband Chanzeb Akhtar/appellant on the 

fateful day i.e. 06.02.2015 and she was murdered with .30 bore pistol by causing 

06 firearm injuries on vital parts of body at about 12:15 a.m. in the midnight. The 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 11 

incident  was  unseen,  however  PW-12  Babar  Iqbal  i.e.  brother  of  deceased,  who 

was  living  next  door  had  seen  the  appellant  holding  a  pistol  in  his  hand  and 

leaving  his  house  after  the  alleged  firing.  His  statement  to  that  effect  has  been 

recorded in the following manner:  

“I heard the alarm of fire from the house of accused Chanzeb, whereupon 
I went up stairs on the roof of Pervez Akhtar who is also my cousin and 
brother in law at the time when the lights of their courtyard and room of 
accused  were  on  through  electric  bulbs.  I  witnessed  that  accused 
Chanzeb  was  coming  out  of  his  room  holding  pistol  in  his  hand  and 
went out of the haveli through the outer gate. At that time the brother of 
accused Chanzeb Akhtar namely Pervez Akhtar was also present in the 
courtyard.”   

14. 

Similarly,  as  per  complaint  submitted  by  PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood 

i.e.  elder  brother  of  deceased,  appellant’s  brother  i.e.  CW-1  Parvez  Akhtar 

informed  him  that  the  appellant  after  shooting  dead  his  younger  sister 

(deceased)  has  fled  away  from  the  spot.  Both  the  said  witnesses  proceeded  to 

house of deceased where dead body of deceased was lying in a  cot, whereafter 

they  proceeded  to  P.S.  Koral  for  submission  of  complaint  (Exh.PA),  which  was 

converted  into  FIR  (Exh.PU),  and  as  such,  the  prosecution  story  regarding  the 

murder of deceased has been justified by PW-11 Mirza Zafar Mehmood, PW-12 

Mirza Babar Iqbal and CW-1 Mirza Parvez Akhtar.  

15.  On  receiving 

information  about  the 

incident,  PW-16  Muhammad 

Iqbal/S.I.  along  with  other  police  officials,  including  PW-1  Khadija-Tul-Kubra 

lady HC proceeded to the place of occurrence, whereafter inquest report Exh.PJ 

of deceased was prepared, which refers details of injuries in Column No.10 with 

observation  that  corresponding  holes,  including  the  burning  marks,  have  been 

seen in the clothes of deceased.  

REASONS OF DELAY IN SENDING THE DEAD BODY TO HOSPITAL 

16. 

PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O.  when  tried  to  shift  the  dead  body  to 

hospital for postmortem examination, the family members of appellant interfered 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 12 

and did not allow the police to proceed with their lawful duties. This aspect has 

been highlighted by PW-11 Mirza Zafar Mehmood in the following manner:  

“The  police  tried  to  send  the  dead  body  to  hospital  for  postmortem  but 
the  family  of  accused  did  not  allow  on  the  pretext  that  they  would  not 
like  to  disgrace  the  dead  body  of  deceased  and  asked  me  not  to  initiate 
legal proceedings. I requested the police to postpone the escort of body to 
hospital till the matter is resolved between the family. Due to which the 
dead body of deceased was escorted to hospital at about 09:00 am on the 
same day.” 

PW-11 Mirza Zafar Mehmood on the question of appellant during the course of 

cross-examination has also explained the circumstances of delay in the following 

manner:  

“I  have  stated  before  the  police  that  the  brother  of  the  accused  had 
resisted against taking the dead body to hospital for postmortem, on the 
pretext of its disgrace.” 

At  another  occasion,  PW-11  Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood  on  the  question  of  defence 

side  in  cross  examination  has  further  explained  the  delayed  factor  in  the 

following manner.  

“The  dead  body  was  dispatched  to  the  hospital  at  about  09:00  am.  We 
have consulted ourselves regarding the postmortem examination on the 
dead  body  of  deceased,  whereas  two  brothers  of  the  accused  were 
reluctant  for  sending  the  dead  body  for  the  postmortem  examination.  I 
have not move any application or stated this fact before the police about 
the resistance and reluctance for taking the dead body for autopsy.” 

17. 

Similarly,  PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O.  in  his  examination  in  chief  has 

elaborated on the delayed factor in the following manner.  

“The  brothers  of  the  accused  were  not  allowing  to  escort  the  body  of 
deceased to hospital, on the ground that dispute is between the relatives, 
therefore,  there  was  no  need  for  postmortem  of  deceased.  Due  to  said 
reason,  the  dead  body  of  deceased  could  not  be  escorted  to  hospital 
timely,  however,  at  about  09:00  am,  they  allowed  to  escort  the  body  of 
deceased for postmortem.” 

18. 

It  is  evident  at  this  moment  that  appellant’s  real  brothers  had  restricted 

the police officials to shift the dead body to hospital, rather they intended to hush 

up the matter on false pretext of disgrace. Hence, the ground of delay in shifting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 13 

the dead body to hospital as raised by the appellant  has lost its worth and it is 

not safe to rely upon the same. Although, the police had not initiated any action 

against the family members of appellant in this regard despite the fact that they 

were  well  within  their  powers  to  initiate  proceedings  against  the  people 

interfering with the matter at the place of occurrence.  

PRINCIPLE OF RES GESTAE  

19. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2/complainant  has  argued  his  case 

while  highlighting  the  principle  of  res  gestae  i.e.  the  chain  of  circumstantial 

evidence  in  which  CW-1  Mirza  Parvez  Akhtar  had  seen  the  appellant  fleeing 

away from the place of occurrence after commission of offence. Similarly, PW-12 

Mirza  Babar  Iqbal  had  also  seen  the  appellant  armed  with  pistol  after 

commission of murder of deceased. Such testimonies fully attract the role of res 

gestae on the strength of Article 19 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, which is 

as under: 

The facts which though not in issue are so connected with a fact 
19. 
in  issue  as  to  form  part  of  the  same  transaction,  are  relevant,  whether 
they occurred at the same time or place or at different time and places.  
Illustration:  
A is  accused  of  the murder  of  B by beating  him. Whatever was said  or 
done  by  A  or  B  or  the  by-standers  at  the  beating,  or,  shortly  before  or 
after it as to form part of the transaction, is a relevant fact.  

20. 

 Similarly, Article 20 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 also relates to 

similar proposition as it reads that: 

 20. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue:- 
Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of 
relevant  facts,  or  facts  in  issue,  or  which  constitute  the  state  of  things 
under which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their 
occurrence or transaction, are relevant.  

21.  While  dealing  with  the  above  provisions  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 

1984, the fact in issue as narrated by PW-12 Mirza Babar Iqbal and CW-1 Mirza 

Pervaiz  Akhtar  that  the  appellant  after  resorting  to  firing  upon  his  wife 

 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 14 

(deceased) in his bedroom at around 12:15 a.m. in the midnight fled away from 

the  scene  while  armed  with  .30  bore  pistol  has  clearly  been  proved  and  is 

admissible  evidence  against  the  appellant.  The  said  principle  has  also  been 

discussed in cases reported as 2018 P.Cr.LJ 841 Islamabad (The State VS Maheen 

Zafar),  2015  YLR  73  Peshawar  (Feroz  Khan  VS  The  State)  and  1993  SCMR  654 

(Sultan  VS  The  State),  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  relevant  facts  before  or 

immediately  after  the  occurrence  were  to  be  applied  to  connect  the  same  with 

original  transaction  and  those  circumstances  could  not  be  ignored,  rather  it 

creates  an  effect  which  was  immediately  notified  by  the  witnesses  to  the 

Investigating  Officer,  in  this  case  to  PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/S.I.  hence,  this 

portion of evidence stands proved and applied in this case.  

MEDICAL EVIDENCE  

22. 

The autopsy of deceased was conducted by PW-9 Dr. Kaneez Fatima, who 

described 09 injuries on the dead body of deceased, including 06 entry wounds 

on the upper part of the body of deceased, but the surprising feature highlighted 

in  the  medical  evidence  is  regarding  blackening  of  entry  wounds  i.e.  Injuries 

No.1,  2,  4,  5  &  6  while  the  recovery  of  pellets  from  Injuries  No.1, 4  &  8  further 

highlights  the  conduct  of  appellant  that  he  had  used  the  weapon  of  offence  at 

closed  range  and  as  such,  the  blackening  at  entry  wounds  further  justifies  that 

fires were made from a close range. 

23. 

This Court has taken into account the different citations while considering 

the  question  of  distance  of  a  firearm,  whereby  the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court 

while replying upon  the book “Medical  Jurisprudence and Toxicology by Jaising 

P.  Modi”  has  observed  in  case  reported  as  2018  MLD  410  [Lah]  (Muhammad 

Rizwan VS The State, etc.) that:  

“A suicidal firearm wound is usually a contact wound situated on 
the side of the temple, depending on which hand was used to shoot 
himself, in the centre of the forehead, the roof of the mouth, in the 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 15 

chest or epigastrium in front or the left side and sometimes under 
the chin. The firearm is usually fired at close range.” 

24. 

Similarly,  the  apex  Court  has  also  explained  the  concept  of  burning  and 

blackening  in  PLD  2002  SC  786  (Muhammad  Tufail  VS  The  State)  in  the 

following manner: 

“Fire  arm  wound  Absence  of  burning  and  blackening  around  the 
wounds Effect Where there was no burning and blackening present 
around  the  wound  the  same  itself  suggested  that  shot  was  fired 
from  longer  distance  than  nearer  distance  but  such  fact  was  also 
dependent  upon  the  kind  and  quality  of  gun  powder  used  in  the 
cartridges and the length of barrel and its diameter at muzzle end.” 

25.  We have also taken into account the view of the Hon’ble Peshawar High 

Court reported in 2018 YLR 282 [Peshawar] (Haji Qasim Kkhan VS Kabir Khan, 

etc.) wherein it has been held that: 

In view of the Modi Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology 
“11. 
favorite  sites  of  suicidal  fire-arm  are:-A  suicidal  firearm  wound  is 
usually a contact wound situated on the side of the temple, depending 
on which hand was used to shoot himself, in the center of the forehead, 
the  roof  of  the  mouth,  in  the  chest  or  epigatrium  in  front  or  left  side 
and  sometimes  under  the  chin.  The  firearm  is  usually  fired  at  close 
range. A small weapon like a revolver or a pistol is held in the hand, 
while a rifle  or  a shot gun is  supported on the ground or against the 
wall.  Sometimes,  the  firing  is  done  by  pulling  a  string  tied  to  the 
trigger  by  the  big  toe.  The  skin  around  the  entry  wound  shows 
characteristics blackening.” 

26. 

Likewise,  the  Hon’ble  Sindh  High  Court  in  recent  judgment  reported  as 

2018  PCr.LJ  Note  52  (Nooro  alias  Noor  Muhammad  Sehar  VS  The  State)  has 

observed that: 

“Blackening on entrance wound---Effect---Principle---Blackening on 
entrance wound would show that fire shot was made from near range 
under three feet.” 

27. 

Similarly, the Hon’ble Lahore High Court had also taken a view regarding 

the  concept  of  blackening  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Riaz  reported  as 

(PLJ 1996 Cr.C (Lahore) 1789), wherein it has been held that:  

“Blackening with pistol  is  present when it is  fired from a distance of 
one foot and not from 4 or 5 feet.” 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 16 

28.  Whereas,  the  Hon’ble  Sindh  High  Court  on  the  concept  of  distance  has 

taken  the  view  in  the  case  of  Mir  Muhammad  reported  as  (1972  PCr.LJ  1108 

Karachi), wherein it has been observed that:  

“The  distance  from  which  gun  was  fired  can  be  estimated  by 
blackening,  burning,  or  the  diameter  of  the  wound  caused  by  gun 
shot.” 

29.  While  considering  the  above  effects  highlighted  in  autopsy  report 

(Exh.PH/1-4) by PW-9 Dr. Kaneez Fatima and Dr. Tanvir Afsar Malik/MLO, this 

Court  confidently  holds  that  the  appellant  had  a  clear  cut  intention  to  commit 

murder  in  a  desperate  manner  having  serious  rage  in  back  of  his  mind,  which 

has  otherwise  been  observed  due  to  repetition  of  firearm  injuries  from  a  close 

range  and  causing  immediate  death  of  deceased  in  her  bedroom  on  a  cot. 

Similarly,  PW-16  Muhammad  Iqba/I.O.  while  preparing  the  inquest  report 

Exh.PJ  with  the  help  of  PW-1  Khadija-Tul-Kubra/LHC  also  confirmed  the 

corresponding holes with feature of blackening in the following manner. 

 ےک خاسوع سوا ںیہ خاسوع ےع گٌیشئاف شپ یعشج سوا ںیه یًذیشوپ تاجاچشپ ٍدولآ ىوخ"

"۔ںیہ ےئوہ ےلج تاًاشً

The above referred aspect left nothing to disbelieve the intention of the appellant, 

who  intended  to  commit  murder  of  his  wife  by  using  a  fire-arm  from  a  close 

range. 

RECOVERY OF WEAPON OF OFFENCE  

30. 

PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/S.I.  stated  that  the  appellant  surrendered 

himself  on  07.02.2015  in  Police  Station  in  connection  with  murder  of  his  wife 

(deceased) and on 09.02.2015, the appellant got recovered .30 bore pistol used in 

the  alleged  occurrence  from  a  garage  situated  in  Haveli.  PW-16  Muhammad 

Iqbal/I.O. has explained the recovery in the following manner. 

“He concealed the weapon of offence .30 bore pistol in under constructed 
garage, in haveli, which is near to his house and he could recovered the 
same  by  leading  police  party.  Upon  said  disclosure,  I  along  with  said 
police  officials  and  accused  left  the  Police  Station  through  private 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 17 

vehicle. The accused led the police party to his haveli where a machine of 
flour (atey ki chakki) was installed by him. The said haveli is situated in 
village Phind Malkaan, Islamabad. When we reached to said vehicle the 
accused got stopped the vehicle, we deboarded from the vehicle under the 
lead  of  accused  who  took  us  inside  of  said  haveli  and  from  under 
constructed garage, underneath the old seat of vehicle lying there, 
he  got  recovered  .30  bore  pistol  (P15)  along  with  magazine  P16. 
I checked the magazine of said pistol which was found empty.”  

31. 

The above referred facts disclose the special knowledge of concealment of 

weapon of offence (P15) by the appellant, which was not known to anyone else, 

even the site plan of place of recovery (Exh.PZ), prepared by PW-6 Malik Amir 

Shahzad/Draftsman, discloses that the entire compound has a main gate and no 

one  was  present  in  the  said  compound  as  the  same  was  being  exclusively 

managed by the appellant.  

32. 

The  other  recovery  witness  namely  PW-13  Ehsan-ul-Haq/HC  also 

narrated similar facts as brought on record by PW-16 Muhammad Iqbal/S.I. and 

nothing  favourable  was  brought  on  record  by  the  appellant  in  the  cross 

examination.  Although,  it  has  not  been  denied  that  any  notable  person  has  not 

been  joined  in  recovery  proceedings  by  the  Investigating  Officer  and  even  the 

garage  from  where  the  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence  was  effected,  is  an  open 

place, although the place was open but the same was within the compound and 

the placement of weapon was in exclusive knowledge of the appellant, hence the 

recovery of weapon of offence could not be disbelieved.  

33.  We  have  also  considered  the  objection  raised  by  the  appellant  regarding 

the  statement  of  PW-2  Shan  Muhammad/Moharrar  Malkhana,  who  is  not  a 

recovery  witness,  but  during  the  course  of  cross-examination,  when  he  was 

asked  different  questions  regarding  the  sealed  parcel  of  empties  of  .30  bore 

pistol, the answer has been written as, “sealed parcel of pistol was handed over 

to  me  on  the  day  of  occurrence.”  This  aspect  has  been  considered  minutely  by 

this Court with reference to examination-in-chief and it has been observed that a 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 18 

typographical  error  has  been  occurred  as  “sealed  parcel  of  pistol”  has  been 

written  instead  of  “sealed  parcel  of  empties  of  .30  bore  pistol”,  therefore,  this 

aspect  could  not  be  resolved  in  favour of  the  appellant  on  account  of  it to  be  a 

typo.  

FORENSIC SCIENCE LABORATORY REPORT 

34.  We have gone through the Forensic Science Laboratory Report (Exh.PAA), 

dated  08.04.2015,  whereby  two  crime  cartridges  of  .30  bore  pistol  collected  by 

PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O.  from  the  place  of  occurrence  through  Exh.PN 

were found matched with the pistol  (P15), which was dispatched to the FSL on 

27.02.2015,  even  otherwise,  the  parcel  contained  three  (03)  Sikka  Goli  (pellets) 

recovered  from  the  dead  body  of  deceased  also  “belong  to  one  group  and  had 

been fired from the pistol recovered on the pointation of appellant”. This aspect 

clearly  establishes  that  .30  bore  pistol  (P15)  was  used  by  the  appellant  in  the 

alleged  crime  and  same  has  been  found  matched,  even  three  (03)  of  the 

slugs/pellets recovered from the dead body of deceased  were found to be fired 

from  said  pistol  and  as  such,  there  is  no  discrepancy  in  the  entire  evidence  of 

FSL.  However,  the  appellant  has  highlighted  one  aspect  that  the  weapon  of 

offence  was  dispatched  to the  FSL  with  delay  on  27.02.2015  and  the  weapon  of 

offence  remained  in  Police  Station.  This  stance  is  just  to  be  considered  as 

procedural  in  nature  and  no  benefit  could  be  extended  to  the  appellant, 

especially  when  three  (03)  slugs/Sikka  Goli  recovered  from  the  dead  body  of 

deceased were found matched to be fired from same pistol got recovered by the 

appellant,  therefore,  the  delay  in  sending  the  weapon  of  offence  has  no  legal 

effect in favour of appellant in this case.  

CONDUCT OF APPELLANT  

35. 

The  conduct  of  appellant  is  not  above  board  as  he  had  not  brought  on 

record  any  valid  reason  for  non-submission  of  complaint  regarding  murder  of 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 19 

his  wife  (deceased)  to  the  Police  Station,  rather  he  fled  away  from  the  scene. 

Similarly, the motive has not been established in this case nor brought on record 

by any of the party; therefore, the appellant is the best man to justify his position 

as  his  wife  was  murdered  in  his  room  at  odd  hours  of  the  night.  In  such 

circumstances, the absence of motive or lack of motive or the cases where motive 

has  been  shrouded  in  mystery  is  immaterial  as  it  will  not  affect  the  case  of 

prosecution.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2008  SCMR  1106  (Muhammad  Latif  alias 

Teefa VS The State).  Even, the  lack of motive is immaterial to withhold normal 

penalty  of  death  in  murder  case,  when  trustworthy  evidence  had  squarely 

brought home the guilt against the accused beyond any doubt. Reliance is placed 

upon PLD 2007 SC 453 (Nazakat VS Hazrat Jamal, etc.). Similarly, this principle 

has  also  been  discussed  and  appreciated  in  cases  reported  as  2006  SCMR  1796 

(Nasir Shah VS The State) and 2008 SCMR 997 (Musa VS The State).  

IDENTIFICATION OF APPELLANT/ACCUSED  

36.  Another 

important  aspect  argued  by 

the  appellant  side 

is 

the 

identification  of  appellant  by  PW-12  Babar  Iqbal,  who  had  allegedly  seen  the 

appellant  holding  pistol  in  his  hand  after  the  alleged  murder  of  deceased  from 

his  roof,  which  is  next  to  the  place  of  occurrence.  We  have  gone  through  the 

scaled  site  plan  of  place  of  occurrence  (Exh.PE/1-2),  which  discloses  the 

availability  of  light  at  Points  No.3  &  4,  while  these  two  points  have  also  been 

referred  in  the  unscaled  site  plan  prepared  by  PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O., 

hence the prosecution has justified the presence of light in courtyard at the time 

of occurrence, when appellant was fleeing away from the scene after commission 

of offence, even otherwise, PW-12 Babar Iqbal, who is the cousin of appellant as 

well as (brother-in-law/لااس) and the next door neighbor, had seen the appellant 

from  his  roof  after  hearing  the  fire  shots.  There  is  no  denial  that  appellant  and 

PW-12  Babar  Iqbal  are  close  relatives  and  the  identification  of  a  close  relative, 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 20 

even  in  low  light,  is  not  a  big  deal.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2019  SCMR  610 

(Muhammad Akram alias Akrai VS The State). 

EFFECT OF STATEMENT OF CW-1 MIRZA PERVEZ AKHTAR 

37. 

CW-1  Mirza  Pervez  Akhtar  was  called  by  the  Court  as  his  affidavit  was 

appended  with  the  final  report  submitted  by  PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O., 

which was taken into possession vide recovery memo Exh.PB, dated 11.02.2015, 

in the Police Station. Although, said court witness was not notified as a witness 

in  the  calendar  of  witnesses  and  this  aspect  was  confronted  to  PW-16 

Muhammad Iqbal/I.O. by the Court, to which the said PW had answered in the 

following manner:  

“I did not state any reason for taking affidavit. It is incorrect to suggest 
that  the  affidavit  had  also  been  taken  subsequently  without  the 
involvement  of  Mirza  Pervaiz  Akhtar.  I  did  not  array  Pervaiz  Akhtar 
and Javed Akhtar as witness in report U/S 173 Cr.P.C. I have not stated 
any potential reason for not arraying the said two persons as a witness 
in the calendar of witnesses.  
(Court Question)  
(Why  the  above  said  witnesses  were  not 
arrayed  as  PW  in  the  calendar  of  witnesses?  Ans.  I  was 
apprehending that being brothers of the accused they might resile 
from evidence lateron). 
The affidavit was given to me  by PW Pervaiz Akhtar in police station, 
therefore,  I  placed  the  same  in  file.  It  is  incorrect  to  suggest  that  any 
affidavit was given by the said witness which was fraudulently and with 
fait-comply managed by me as I.O. I did not record the statement of any 
stamp vendor. I did not take recourse in my investigation to record the 
family  history  of  the  parties.  I  do  not  remember  as  to  whether  in  any 
other criminal case I had excluded the close relatives and brothers from 
the array of witnesses just because of close relationship.” 

38. 

 The  above  referred  admission  is  the  turning  point  of  this  case  as  the 

statement of CW-1 Mirza Pervaiz Akhtar in shape of affidavit Exh.CW-1/1-3 was 

also  assailed  before  this  Court  in  Crl.  Revision  No.83/2017  by  the  appellant, 

which  was  decided  by  this  Court  vide  order  dated  20.07.2017,  whereby  the 

learned Trial Court was directed to decide the status of affidavit Exh.CW-1/1-3 

before  pronouncement  of  the  final  judgment,  however  the  learned  Trial  Court 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 21 

while  deciding  the  matter  received  another  application  from  the  complainant 

side  under  Section  540  Cr.P.C.  and  declared  that  CW-1  Mirza  Pervaiz  Akhtar 

recorded  his  statement  in  the  course  of  investigation  in  daily  diary  of  the 

Investigating  Officer  and  the  said  CW  was  summoned  as  court  witness  along 

with stamp vendor, who had issued the stamp papers. The said aspect is noted in 

order  sheets  of  26.01.2018,  30.01.2018,  10.02.2018  &  17.02.2018,  and  as  such,  no 

objection was raised by the appellant side in this regard, therefore, the affidavit 

has been exhibited on record and plays an important role in the entire case. For 

ready reference, the affidavit Exh.CW-1/1-3 is reproduced as under:  

 ص

شیص 

5105

ةیص يچ۔

 و لیظحت

 ہخسوه ےہ

یئاھت اٹوھچ اشیه

یہ ھتاع ےک ےشوک ےک

:ہک  
ںوہ اتید
ںیہ شیزپ شئاہس

ںیہ لاوعتعا شیص ےشوک ود طاپ ےک ةیص

 صاخ ہًاخکاڈ ںاکله ڈٌپ يکاع فششا محمد اصشه ذلوشتخا ضیوشپ اصشه

 یوغه ہکٌه
شیشحت یفلح ىایت لیر ہجسذٌه سوا ںوہ یشئاہس اک داتآ ملاعا علض
ا 
سوا دوخ ںیه
ںیه یلیوح یہ کیا شتخا ةیص يچ
 طاپ ےشیه
۔ 
يچ 
 ہکثج ںیہ لاوعتعا
 ےشوک وً
 اشیه
 یسوشف
6 
 سوا
5 
 یئاھت اٹوھچ
 یویت یشیه سوا دوخ ںیه تاس یًایهسد یک
ں 
ةیص ي
چ ہکوج ےشوک یشئاہس ےٌپا
 ےک ةی
يچ ےھت ےئوہ ےئوع
يحط شپ سوط یسوف ںیه شک يع صاوآ یک گًشئاف ںیه ےشوک
 اٹوھچ اشیه ہک اھکید وت ایآ
 ںیه
 یشئاہس ےک طا سوا
 یئاھت
 یک طا وت ایگ فشط یک ےشوک یشئاہس ےک طا شپ سوط یسوف اھت لاھک ٍصاوسد اک ےشوک
 ںیه  شک  ھکید
یویت
 اک
سوا ےہ یئاھت داص اچچ اشیه ہک وج دووحه شفظ اصشه یجاح شپ سوط یسوف
ہک ید
شک علاطا یک لتق ہعوقو طا ےہ یئاھت یقیقح
شعً
 یک طا سوا ےہ ایدشک لتق ےکشک گًشئاف ےً شتخا ةی
يچ یئاھت ےشیه وک يہت یک پآ
 ص
 دووحه شفظ
 ایگ گاھت دوخ شتخا ةیص
يچ 
 دوجوه شپ یئاپساچ
 ایآ"۔
 ےًاھت ےًشک علاطا ھتاع ےک دووحه شفظ یجاح دوخ ںیه ںیه ذعت سوا ایآ ھتاع
 ےشیه

ھت  یڑپ  شپ  یئاپساچ  ںیه  تلاح  ٍدشه  یت  یت

علاطا وک طا سوا ایگ شھگ ےک طا

ہات ےع ٹیگ ےک یلیوح شتخا ةیص

اھت اہس گاھت فشط یک ش

 یجاح شک اپ علاطا ۔ےہ

شعً  یکعا  ۔ی

ہًاطلع  ٍضٌه

ہًاطلع ٍضٌه

 سوا

يچ 

ےہ

ےً

۔ 

39. 

CW-1  Mirza  Pervaz  Akhtar  while  appearing  before  the  Court  had  been 

confronted  with  his  affidavit  Exh.CW-1/1-3,  whereby  he  acknowledged  his 

signature  and  thumb  impression  thereon,  however  he  denied  the  contents 

mentioned  therein  and  submitted  the  reason  that  he  and  his  brother  PW-11 

Mirza  Zafar  Mehmood  were  engaged  in  a  business,  while  he  used  to  purchase 

stamp papers in connection with the same and handed over blank stamp papers 

along  with  his  ID  for  using  the  same.  However,  during  the  course  of  cross-

examination,  he  acknowledged  the  presence  of  his  signature  on  CNIC,  rather 

thumb  impression.  He  further  acknowledged  that  neither  the  Investigating 

Officer/police  officials  have  no  enmity  with  him,  nor  has  PW-11  Mirza  Zafar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 22 

Mehmood (brother). However, he stated in loud words that I have not challenged 

the  said  affidavit  and  its  contents  before  any  Court.  Stamp  vendor  or  typist  has  no 

enmity with me. He has also no objection for verification of his signature by way 

of  comparison  and  he  also  stated  that  I  did  not  move  any  application  before  any 

authority or before this court up till now regarding the contents of affidavit and signature 

over it about falseness thereof. 

40. 

The  submission  of  affidavit  Exh.CW-1/1-3  has  also  been  taken  into 

account with the testimony of CW-2 Sami Ullah, who stated in Court that Stamp 

Paper No.3892, dated 10.02.2015, was issued by him to CW-1 Pervaiz Akhtar son 

of  Mirza  Muhammad  Ashraf,  resident  of  Phind  Malkknaa,  Islamabad,  having 

CNIC  No.61101-8535463-9,  and  has  also  given  the  endorsement  at  the  back  of 

stamp  paper,  who  himself  purchased  the  said  stamp  paper  after  putting  his 

signature on register in his presence. He also verified that CW-1 Pervaiz Akhtar 

had  purchased  three  (03)  stamp  papers,  each  of  Rs.20/-,  for  the  purpose  of 

affidavit  and  the  counter  files  of  those  stamp  papers  have  been  referred  as 

Exh.CW-2/3-5. On Court’s question, CW-2 Sami Ullah further verified that, “it is 

correct  that  I  typed  stamp  paper  No.AC405664  in  Urdu  what  was  stated  by 

deponent Pervez Akhtar and I read over contents to him who admitted the same 

as correct and signed the same.  

41. 

The  above  referred  statement  of  CWs,  if  considered  in  the  light  of 

statements  of  PW-11  Zafar  Mehmood/complainant  and  PW-16  Muhammad 

Iqbal/I.O., there is nothing  left  in favour of appellant as his own  brother  CW-1 

Mirza  Pervez  Akhtar  by  way  of  submission  of  his  affidavit  Exh.CW-1/1-3  had 

vowed that he had seen the appellant fleeing away from the scene of occurrence 

after  commission  of  offence,  whereafter  he 

informed  PW-11  Zafar 

Mehmood/complainant regarding the alleged incident  and this aspect was also 

noted  by  PW-16  Muhammad  Iqbal/I.O.  that  the  complainant  came  to  Police 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 23 

Station  in  late  hours  of  night  with  appellant’s  brother  i.e.  CW-1  Mirza  Pervez 

Akhtar.  This  circumstantial  chain  links  all  the  facts  relating  to  the  crime  and 

prosecution has successfully proved this chain of evidence, although CW-1 Mirza 

Pervez  Akhtar  tried to  escape  from  his  acknowledgment  being  a  court  witness, 

which itself is a negation of Quranic injunctions as laid down in Verse 283 of the 

Surah Al-Baqarah, which reads as follow: 

 ھچک وج سوا ےھ لااو لد ساگہٌگ ٍو ےلاپھچ ےعا وج

سوا  ٔواپھچ ہً
یہاوگ سوا"
۔ےہ اتًاج بوخ  ٰیلاعت اللہ ےعا وہ ےتشک نت

 وک 

" 

Similarly, Verse No.135 of Surah An-Nisa reads that: 

  سوا  ےلاو  ےًاج  نج  ےع  یطوثضه  شپ  فاظًا  و  لذع  !

 یدوٌشوخ
  ولاو  ىاویا  ےا
"
 ای  وہ  فلاخ  ےٌپا  ےساہوت  دوخ  ٍو  وگ  ٔواج  يت  ےلاو  ےٌید  یہاوگ  یچع  ےیلیک  لاوه
 وہ شیقف سوا وت وہ شیها شگا ضخش ٍو ےک ںوضیضع ںوساد ہتشس ےک پات ںاه ےٌپا
 شک ڑپ ےھچیپ ےک ظفً  ِشہاوخ نت ےیل طا ےہ قلعت ٍدایص وک اللہ ھتاع ےک ںوًود وت
ک  ول  ىاج  وت  اٌید  ڑوھچ  ہً  فاظًا
 یسوپ  ےع  طا  ٰیلاعت  اللہ  ےگ  وشک  نت  ھچک  وج  ہ
" 
۔ےہ شثخات حشط

42. 

The  Allah  Almighty  has  directed  every  individual  not  to  suppress  any 

testimony and he, who conceals the testimony/evidence, is a sinful of heart. The 

directions given in the above mentioned  Quranic  injunctions further impose an 

obligation upon the individual to give “یہاوگ یچس” whether it is against one’s own 

family members, parents or kinsmen, this aspect left nothing to hide or conceal, 

therefore, if CW-1 Mirza Pervez Akhtar intends to hide the evidence recorded by 

him in shape of affidavit, the same has to be considered in the light of statement 

of three witnesses of the prosecution, where the dead body of deceased was not 

allowed to be transmitted to hospital, which shows their willful abetment in the 

crime  or considered to be  harboring the offender i.e. the appellant and as such, 

all three brothers are liable in such type of conduct.  

43. 

The  entire  chain  of  events  imposes  a  duty  upon  appellant  to  explain  his 

position,  especially  when  a  vulnerable  dependent  i.e.  his  wife  Munaza  Sultan 

was  done  to  death  inside  the  house  as  well  as  in  bedroom  of  appellant.  The 

appellant is under heavy onus to explain as to why his wife (deceased) met with 

an unnatural death, especially when  the weapon of offence i.e.  pistol  (P15)  was 

 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 24 

recovered  on  his  pointation.  However,  no  logical  explanation  was  rendered  by 

the appellant to discredit the medical and forensic evidence or the testimonies of 

PW-11 Zafar Mehmood/complainant and PW-12 Babar Iqbal/last seen witness. 

44. 

In this context, we have also gone through the judgments reported as 2005 

SCMR 1524 (Arshad Mehmood VS The State), 2015 SCMR 710 (Saeed Ahmad VS 

The State), 2011 SCMR 941 (Abdul Majeed VS The State), PLD 2017 SC 681 (Asad 

Khan VS  The  State),  1991  P.Cr.LJ  113  (Afzal  Hussain  Shah VS  The  State),  2018 

P.Cr.LJ 242 (Syed Tahir Shah VS The State), 2003 SCMR 855 (Muhammad Akram 

VS The State) and 2016 SCMR 1628 (Nazir Ahmad VS The State), wherein it has 

been held that the burden of proof never shifts upon the accused, however it is 

the responsibility of accused in such circumstances where a wife or a vulnerable 

dependent had met an unnatural death within confines of the house of accused, 

such helpless and weak person requires protection and care and it would not be 

sufficient  for  the  accused  to  stay  silent  in  circumstances  which  tend  to 

incriminate him and if he elects to do, he lightens the burden of the prosecution. 

The case of Saeed Ahmad supra has further highlighted the duties of the accused in 

the following manner:  

“Article  122  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order  too  stipulates  that  if  a 
particular  fact  is  especially  within  the  knowledge  of  any  person  the 
burden  of  proving  that  fact  is  upon  him.  In  the  present  case  the 
prosecution  had  established  its  case  against  the  appellant;  two  eye-
witnesses  had deposed against him and the medical evidence confirmed 
strangulation  of  the  deceased.  The  appellant  did  not  attend  to  the  last 
rites of his wife who had died whilst residing with him, he also did not 
inform the police nor took his wife to a hospital and disappeared for two 
months,  such  circumstances  corroborate  the  prosecution  case  in  the 
absence  of  the  appellant  offering  a  reasonable  explanation  for  his 
unnatural conduct.” 

45. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  ratio,  the  appellant  has  failed  to  explain  his 

conduct in this case, even his brothers and family members  had tried to protect 

him and concealed the evidence, rather tried to destroy the prosecution evidence 

to favour him. Similarly, his own brother CW-1 Mirza Pervaiz Akhtar concealed 

the  testimony  to  protect  the  offender  in  this  case,  such  conduct  is  highly 

 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 25 

condemnable  and  could  not  been  taken  lightly.  All  these  factors,  if  placed  in 

juxtaposition  with  the  testimonies  of  PW-11  Zafar  Mehmood  and  PW-12  Babar 

Iqbal i.e. the witnesses of last seen/res gestae coupled with recovery of weapon 

of  offence,  which  has  been  confirmed  through  FSL  report  Exh.PAA  along  with 

the details of injuries given by PW-9 Dr. Kaneez Fatima/MLO, there is no other 

conclusion except that the appellant had committed the offence of murder of his 

wife  in  a  gruesome,  shocking  and  dreadful  manner  by  repeating  the  firearm 

shots at a close range, which otherwise expressed his intention of committing a 

certain murder and nothing else, even the appellant had not denied his presence 

in unequivocal terms at the time and place of occurrence nor the same could be 

infirmed  from  his  statement  recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.,  therefore,  the 

circumstantial  chain  of  evidence  is  proved  without  any  missing  link  and  the 

combined effect establishes the guilt of appellant beyond any shadow of doubt.  

46. 

Besides the above referred position, no motive has been brought on record 

by the prosecution nor even suggested in this case, neither any reason or a clue 

has  been  reflected  from  record  as  to  why  a lady  (deceased)  was  murdered  in  a 

ruthless manner in her own bedroom. Such silence of motive, however, has been 

considered immaterial as a mitigating circumstance as held by the apex Court in 

the  cases  of  Nasir  Shah  and  Musa  supra,  but  this  aspect  could  not  been  taken 

lightly  as  the  appellant  has  been  charged  under  Section  302(b)  PPC  for  causing 

murder of his wife in  their  own bedroom  and it is not  imaginable to a prudent 

mind that a murder in such a brutal manner could be done without a reason or 

motive, therefore, it could safely be held that motive has been concealed by either 

party  due  to  family  honor  as  insinuation  can  be  taken  from  the  statements  of 

prosecution  witnesses  that  family  members  of  appellant  restricted  the  police 

party for about six  (06) hours in  shifting  the dead body of deceased to hospital 

for the purpose of postmortem examination. 

 
 
Crl. Appeal No.125/2018, Jail Appeal No.130/2018 and M.R. No.08/2018 

Page | 26 

47. 

In  view  of  above  discussion,  the  captioned  Criminal  Appeal  No.08/2018 

(Chanzeb Akhtar VS The State, etc.) and Jail Appeal No.130/2018 (Chanzeb Akhtar VS 

The State) are hereby DISMISSED. However, the death sentence awarded to the 

appellant by the learned Trial Court, vide impugned judgment dated 17.07.2018, 

has been  CONVERTED into  LIFE IMPRISONMENT for  the reasons mentioned 

in 

preceding 

paragraph. 

Accordingly, 

the 

captioned  murder 

reference  is  answered  in  NEGATIVE  and  death  sentence  awarded  to  the 

appellant is NOT CONFIRMED.   

48. 

Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  it  is  necessary  to  hold  that  the 

appellant’s  brother  i.e.  CW-1  Mirza  Pervez  Akhtar  has  withheld  the  testimony 

and  even  as  per  the  sayings  of  Holy  Quran,  he  has  been  considered  as  a 

dishonest man as he had concealed the crime of a murder within his own house. 

Similarly, the conduct of appellant’s other brothers in causing delay in shifting of 

dead  body  to  a  hospital  makes  them  part  of  this  worst  crime  in  the  family, 

although this Court, at this stage, is not in a position to prosecute them for their 

conduct  and  dishonesty,  but  it  is  necessary  to  record  their  conduct  in  this 

judgment for rest of their lives.   

               (AAMER FAROOQ)                         (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

           JUDGE 

           JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 23.04.2020. 

           JUDGE 

           JUDGE 

***APPROVED FOR REPORTING*** 

Khalid Z. 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
