ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAIIIABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLATIIABAD
JUDICIAL DEPARTTUIENT
W.P.  No.3781 12019
Muhammad Ali Jibran Qamar
VS
The Learned Judge Family Court and others

S. No. oforder
/ proceedinqs

Date of order/
Proceedinqs
30.10.2019 Chaudhary Amjad Ala, Advocate for  the

Order  with signature of Judge  and that of parties or counsel
where necessary.

petitioner.

Through the instant writ petition, the
petitioner,  Muhammad  Ali Jibran Qamar, impugns
the interlocutory order dated 02.10.2019 passed

by the learned Judge Family Court,  dismissing  his
application  for a decision on whether  the suit in
question was incompetently filed by the father of

respondent  No.2.
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner  drew the
attention of the Court to the power of attorney
dated 29.03.2019 given by respondent  No.2  in
favour of  her father (Mr. Masood  Akhtar)
authorizing the latter lo inter alia tile a legal case
etc.; that the said power of attorney does not
mention the type of the legal case in which
respondent  No.2 had authorized her father to file;

that respondent  No.2 did not give any authority to
her father to file a suit for dissolution of marriage
on the basis of khula, recovery of maintenance
etc.; that the learned  Family Court erred by not
requiring respondent No.2 to appear  in-person;
and that the impugned order  is violative  of Section

10 of the West Pakistan  Famlly Courts Act, 1964.
Learned  counsel  for the petitioner prayed  for the
writ petition to be allowed in terms of the relief
sought therein.
3. 
I have heard  the contentions  of the learned
counsel for the petitioner and have perused the
record with his able assistance.

2

W.P.  No.3781/2019

4.  Since the impugned order dated 02.10.2019
is an interlocutory order, I am not inclined to go
into the merits of the case lest it may prejudice
the petitioner's  case during the trial.

As Section 14(3) of the West Pakistan
Family Courts  Act, 1964 expressly bars a right of
appeal or revision  against an interim order
passed  by a Family Court, the same cannot be
circumvented by challenging such an interim
order in the Constitutional  jurisdiction  of the High
Court. A party  aggrieved  by such an interim order
has to wait until a Family Court passes a final
order and then to challenge  it in an appeal. This is
because  an interim order merges into the final
verdict.  The purpose behind  barring  an appeal or
a revision against an interim order of the Family
Court is to avoid delays in disposal  of the cases
by the Family Court. Since the suit instituted by
respondent No.2 is for dissolution of marriage on
the basis of khula, recovery of maintenance
allowance and dowry articles, the final decree
that may be passed by the learned  Judge, Family
Court would be appealable  under Section  14 of
the West Pakistan Family  Court Act, 1964.
Reference in this regard  may be made to the
following case law:-
(i) 

!n the case of Syed Saghir Ahmad Naqvi  VS
Province of Sindh (1996 SCMR 1165), it has
been held as follows:-

"The statute excluding  a right of appeal
from the interim  order cannot be passed
by bringing  under attack such interim
orders in Constitutional  jurisdiction.  The
party affected has to wait till it matures
into a final order and then to attack it in
the proper exclusive  forum  created  for
the purpose of examining  such orders."
(ii)  ln the case Mumtaz Hussain  a/as Butta VS
Chief Administrator of Auqaf.  Punjab (1976

SCMR 450), it has been hetd as follows:-

1

W.P.  No.3781/2019

"As the said Ordinance has taken away
the right of petitioner  to interim relief,
learned counsel submitted that this was a
ground which entitled the petitioner to
prosecute  a  writ petition despite the
pendency of the proceedings  on the
District Court. The argument is
misconceived because the  writ
jurisdiction  of the superior  Courts cannot
be invoked in aid of injustice and in order
to defeat the express provisions of the
statutory law."

(aii) ln the case of Mst. Maham Shabbir VS
Salman Haider (2014 CLC 330),  the Hon'ble

lslamabad High Court held as follows:-

u9. ... High Court in exercise  of its writ
jurisdiction  is not sitting as a Court of
appeal, or  court of  revision.  lts
jurisdiction  to interfere on the point of
fact is limited. lnterlocutory order if does
not suffer  from any illegality,  malafide  or
is not in excess  of jurisdiction or lack of
exercise  of jurisdiction  or not based on
misreading, misconstruing  or discarding
of the evidence and material on record
cannot be challenged  in constitutional
jurisdiction. Nevertheless, the facts of
each case are to  be  considered
separately and no uniform principle  can
be determined  for exercising the writ
jurisdiction."

lt  is  my view that the exceptiona!
5. 
circumstances which could justify invoking the
jurisdiction of the High Court under  Article 199 of
the Constitution  would be when the order or
action assailed  was palpably without jurisdiction,
malafide, voad or coram non-Judlce. The order
impugned in this petition is clearly interlocutory  in
nature and does not dispose of the entire  case
before  the Family  Court. The impugned order is
neither  without jurisdiction nor malafide, void or
coram non-judice  so as to warrant interference in
the constitutional jurisdiction  of this Court under
Article  199 of the Constitution.
6.  The order dated 02.10.20'19, being purely
interlocutory in nature could not be subjected to
challenge  by filing a Constitutional petition before

4

W.P. No.378'l/2019

this Court as it would amount to defeating the
legislative intent behind Section  14(3) of the West

Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964. Therefore, I am
not inclined to interfere in the said interlocutory
order passed  by the learned Judge,  Family Court.
7.  Since I do not find the pre-requisites for
interference in the Constitutional  jurisdiction of
this Court with the impugned order dated
O2.1O.2019 to be satisfied in the case at hand, the
instant writ petition is  dismissed as  not
maintainable. The petitioner will be at liberty  to
chaflenge the said order dated O2.1O.2O19 in an
appeal against the final order passed by the
learned Judge, Family Court, if the occasion
arises for doing so. There shall be no order  as to

costs.

Sultan*

(MIANGUL HASSAN  AURANGZEB)
JUDGE

