JUDGMENT SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD,
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P. No.4025/2021

Mst. Rozina & 02 others

VS

Muhammad Zubair Paracha & 03 others

Petitioners by:

Mr. Ali Nawaz Kharral and Malik Qamar Abbas,
Advocates.

Respondent No.1 by:

Rao Abdul Rahim and Ch. Shahid Mehmood,
Advocates.

Date of Hearing:

16.12.2021.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J: Through this  writ  petition,

the

petitioners have called in question order of the learned Additional District Judge

(West),  Islamabad,  dated  08.10.2021, whereby  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioners

against order of the learned Executing Court (West), Islamabad, dated 12.07.2021,

has been dismissed.

2.

Succinctly, Mst. Rozina (petitioner No.1) and Muhammad Zubair Paracha

(respondent No.1) were married and from the said wedlock two children namely

Rehan  Paracha (10  years)  and  Irfa  (07  years) were  born,  as  such,  after  divorce,

both  minors  started  living  with  their  mother  (petitioner  No.1) in  Mansehra,

whereafter the father (respondent No.1) allegedly snatched the minors from the

mother  and  obtained  guardian  certificate  from  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge,

Rawalpindi  vide  order  dated  21.10.2017.  Both  the  parents  remained  locked  in

diverse  litigation, including  criminal  and  civil, in  order  to  get  the  custody of

minors,  as  such,  the  learned  Executing  Court  vide  order  dated  12.07.2021

removed  the  mother  as  guardian  of  the  minors  (petitioners  No.2  &  3),  against

which  the  mother  preferred  an  appeal,  which  was  dismissed  vide  impugned

order dated 08.10.2021. Hence, instant writ petition.

W.P. No.4025/2021

Page | 2

3.

Learned counsel for petitioner contends that the learned Executing Court

acted  beyond  his  jurisdiction  in  directing  petitioner  No.1  to  hand  over  the

custody  of  minors to  the father,  who  is  otherwise  the  judgment-debtor  despite

the fact he neither filed any guardianship petition for custody of the minors nor

prayed for handing over the custody of minors in his favour; that both the Courts

below have failed to note that respondent No.1 has not paid any sum of money

as maintenance, therefore, such conduct disentitles him for the custody of minors

as  welfare  of  the  minors  is  of  paramount  consideration;  that both  the  Courts

below have not appreciated each and every fact of the case in its true perspective,

rather passed the impugned orders in haste.

4.

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  opposing  the  instant

writ  petition  stressed  that petitioner  No.1  has  been  playing  hide  and  seek  with

the  Hon’ble  Courts  causing  tremendous loss  to  the State’s  machinery;  that

petitioner  No.1  is  blowing  hot  and  cold  in  the  same  breath as  she  has  been

changing her stance before the Courts and causing frustration to Hon’ble Courts

and respondent No.1 for locking them in unwarranted litigation; that petitioner

No.1 has been given sufficient number of opportunities to improve her conduct

before  the  Court,  but  her  conduct  clearly  manifested  defiance  of  the  Court’s

order  constraining  the  learned  Executing  Court  to  pass  the  impugned  order,

which is well within the four corners of law.

5.

6.

Arguments heard, record perused.

Perusal  of record  reveals  that petitioner  No.1  Rozina  alongwith  her  two

minors have assailed the orders of learned Guardian Court, dated 12.07.2021 and

judgment dated 08.10.2021, passed by learned Additional District Judge (West),

Islamabad, whereby order of the Guardian Judge has been maintained in which

petitioner’s  status  as  of  being  guardian  has  been  removed  in  terms  of  Section

39(e) of the Guardian & Wards Act, 1890, who was also directed to handover the

custody of minors to father Muhammad Zubair Paracha. The minute scanning of

W.P. No.4025/2021

Page | 3

record reflects that the initial impugned order was passed by learned Guardian

Judge when petitioner/mother has refused to implement the visitation schedule

settled  in  the  final  judgment  of  Guardian  Court  vide  judgment  &  decree  dated

27.07.2018 and up-held by the first Appellate Court, whereby it was declared that

custody of two minors shall remain with the mother and she would comply with

the visitation schedule.

7.

I have confronted the petitioner who is present before the court as to why

she  has  not  complied  with  the  orders  of  court,  whereby  she  states  that  she  has

apprehension  that  respondent  might  remove  the  minors  as  he  has  done  in  the

previous proceedings as a result of the same petitioner/mother was without the

minor  for  two  long  years  when  Hon’ble  Bench-I  of  this  Court  in  W.P

No.1859/2019,  got  executed  the  orders  and  minors  were  recovered  from  the

possession  of  respondent.  I  have  gone  through  that  record,  whereby  it  is

admitted position that minors remained in illegal custody of father after passing

of the judgment & decree infavour of petitioner/mother but this aspect does not

entitle  the  petitioner  to  refuse  the  order  of  Guardian  Court  as  it  is  not  the

mandate of law rather it is the Guardian Court, who has to get implemented the

orders  in  letter  &  sprit  and  petitioner  should  have to trust upon the  Guardian

Court at the first instance.

8.

Now going to the requirements of Section 39(e) of the Guardian & Wards

Act, 1890,  it  is  admitted  position  of  law  that  Guardian  Court  on  the  basis  of

application  filed  by  any person interested, or  on  its  own  motion,  remove  a

guardian appointed or declared by the Court, on certain conditionality including

but not limited to “for contumacious disregard of any provision of this Act or of

any order  of  the Court”. Both  the  parties  have  been  confronted  regarding  any

specific order of Guardian Court whereby petitioner/mother has separately been

declared  as  Guardian  through  judgment  of the  court, both  the  parties  have

conceded  that  no  specific  order  has  been  passed  in  this  regard  rather

W.P. No.4025/2021

Page | 4

petitioner/mother has initially filed the application for custody of minors, which

was allowed vide judgment & decree dated 27.07.2018 in the following manner:-

In  view  of  my  findings  hereinabove,  the  instant  guardian  and  custody

petition is  hereby  accepted.  The  respondent  is  directed  to  hand  over  the

permanent custody of minors namely Rehan Paracha and Ifra Paracha to

the  petitioner/mother  within  the  period  of  fifteen  days.  Applying  this

principal following visitation schedule is fixed:-

a. The  respondent/father  shall  have  the  right  to  meet  the  minors  on

every Saturday & Sunday and the minors will be handed over to

the respondent for the period of two days from Saturday morning

till Sunday evening. It will be the responsibility of the respondent

to pick the minors from the house of the petitioner on the Saturday

morning 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and drop them back at the house

of the petitioner in the Sunday evening.

b.

In  addition  to  weekly  visitation  schedule,  respondent/father  has

also  been  allowed visitation  rights  on  specific  events  to  the  effect

that respondent/father shall have the right to meet with the minors

on  second  day  of  Eid-ul-Fitar  and  Eid-ul-Azha,  from  morning  to

evening  at  the  house  of  respondent/father,  subject  to  furnishing

surety bond of Rs.5,00,000/- for safe return of minors.

c. Moreover,  during  visitation,  the  respondent/father  shall  not

remove  the  minor  beyond  territorial 

limits  of  Islamabad.

Petitioner/mother  shall  be  bound  to  intimate  the  court  regarding

any change in her address; otherwise it shall be deemed as an act

contrary to the welfare of the minor.

9.

The  above  referred  operative  part  of  judgment  clearly  establishes  that

petitioner/mother  was  not  appointed  as  Guardian for  custody  of  minors, who

are now in custody of petitioner/mother, therefore, there is no question left for

the executing court to exercise its powers U/S 39(e) of the Guardian and Wards

Act,  1890,  even  otherwise,  the  petitioner  is  natural  guardian  and  such  status

could not be recalled in any circumstances. Learned courts below have wrongly

appreciated  the  legal  position  due  to  defiance  of  courts’  orders  by  the

petitioner/mother  though  there are other  remedies  available to  the  executing

W.P. No.4025/2021

Page | 5

court for  implementation  of  its  orders in  terms  of  Section  43  Chapter  IV of  the

Guardian and Wards Act, 1890, which deals with “orders for regulating conduct

of proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those orders”, whereby specific

powers have been extended to the Guardian Judge to exercise its authority in the

same manner as an injunction granted under Orders XXXIX Rules 1 & 2 as well

as Sub-rule (3) of Rule 2 of the Civil Procedure Code. Similarly, Section 45 also

provides  the  penalty for  defiance  of  Guardian  court’s  order, if a  person  having

custody of minor fail to produce him or cause him to be produced, could be sent

to civil prison  until  he  undertakes  to  produce  the  minors  or  cause  him  to  be

produced or compelled to his return or to delivering the statement or some other

functions,  therefore,  the  court  is  fully  equipped  to  issue  warrants  of  arrest  to

detain  such  person  who  has  committed  disobedience  by  sending  him  to  civil

prison. By virtue of above discussion, this court is convinced that the impugned

orders of both the courts below are not sustainable in the eyes of law and same

are set-aside, instant petition is allowed.

10.

At this stage, petitioner/mother undertakes to comply with the judgment

& decree dated 27.07.2018 including the visitation order in letter & sprit, which

has  attained  finality  upto  this  court.  However,  in  case  the  petitioner/mother

refuses to comply with the terms of visitation order or respondent/father as the

case  may  be,  the Guardian  Court/Execution  Court  can  resort  to  initiation  of

action against the delinquent party for disobedience of the court’s order in terms

of Sections 43, 44 & 45 of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890.

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)
JUDGE

Announced in open court on ___________________

Zahid.

JUDGE

