HCID/C-121
ORDER SHEET

ISI.AMABAD  HIGH  COURT
ISLAMABAD

Crl. Misc.  No. 682-8 of 2020.

Tanveer  Hussain

VERSUS

The  State  and another

S.No.  of orderl
Proceedinq

Date of
hearinq

Order  with signature  of Judge,  and that of parties  or
counsel,  where necessary.

15-05-2020. Mr Muhammad  Shahzad  Qureshi  Advocate,  for the

petitioner.
Raja Nisar ul Haq Abbasi Advocate,  for complainant.
Mr M. Ishaq Khan, SI, with record.

The petitioner Tanveer  Hussain  son of Muhammad Rafique

has sought post arrest  bail in case FIR No. 82, dated 18.06.2019,

registered  under sections  324,  337.F-VI  and 34 of Pakistan Penal  Code,

1860 (hereinafter referred to as 'PPC') at Police  Station Nilore,

Islamabad.

2. 

Brief facts as narrated in the FIR are that on t7.06.2019,  the

petitioner  alongwith  other two co-accused, armed with 3O-bore pistols,

fired upon him while  he was on his way to the house of his relatives. It

was alleged  that there  was an existing  dispute which had led to

commission  of the offence. Hence  the instant FIR.

-2-

Crl. Misc. No. 682-8  of 2O2O.

3. 

The learned  counsel for the petitioner  has contended  that;

the latter  is innocent and has been falsely implicated  in the instant case  as

a wider net due to family  enmity; no empty  has been recovered  from  the

spot in respect of the pistol allegedly used by the petitioner; co-accused

Qadeer has already  been granted bail; ocular account and medical

evidence  is not in line with  each  other; the story  of the FIR is concocted;

the petitioner  has no concern  whatsoever with the alleged  offences; there

is no chance of abscondance  or tampering  with the prosecution evidence;

involvement of the petitioner is highly doubtful;  report under  section  173
of cr.P.c. has been submitted before the learned trial couft;

investigations qua the petitioner  have been  completed and he is no more

required for the purposes of further investigations;  the case of the

petitioner falls within the ambit of further inquiry.

4. 

The  learned  counsel for the complainant appeared  arongwith

M. Ishaq Khan, sI, with record. They have opposed the grant of bail. It

has been  alleged that; it is a promptly  lodged FIR; specific role has been

attributed  to the petitioner;  the petitioner  is involved in the commission  of

the offences;  the petitioner remained fugitive from law for four months;

the offences fall within the ambit of prohibitory  clause of section  497 of

Cr.P.C.  recovery  of pistol has been affected from the petitioner;  the report

under  section 773 of Cr.P.C. has been submitted  before  the learned trial

Court.

5. 

The learned  counsels for the parties have been heard  and

record  perused  with their able assistance.

-3-

Cr!. Misc. No. 682-8  of 2020.

6. 

Admittedly,  there is a background of a dispute.  Whether  or

not section 324 of PPC is attracted in this case  needs fufther probe

because  this factor  can only be established  during the trial. No empty was

recovered  from the crime scene.  The injury on the hand  is attributed  to

two persons  i.e. the petitioner and another accused. It, prima-facie,

appears  to be the sole injury on the hand.  The role of the petitioner  and

his involvement  in the lnstant  case definitely  needs further  probe. It is

settled law that deeper  appreciation  of evidence is not undertaken  while

deciding  grant of bail. The co-accused has been enlarged on bail. The

recovery  alleged to have been made on the basis of information  given  by

the petitioner also requires  further  probe.  The investigations qua the

petitioner  have been  completed  and, therefore,  his further  incarceration

would not serue any useful purpose.  In the facts  and circumstances  of the

case this Coutt is satisfied on the basis of tentative  assessment that a

case for releasing  the petitioner on bail is made out.

7. 

It has been aptly observed by the august Supreme Court  in

the case of "Manzoor  and 04 others  VS The State"reported  as [PLD  1972

S.C. 811 as follows:

"The ultimate conviction and incarceration  of a guilty

person can repair the wrong  caused by a mistaken  relbf of

interim bail granted to him, but no satisfactory reparation

can be offered to an innocent man for his unjustified

incarceratrbn  at any stage of the case albeit his acquittal  in

the long run'i

-4-

Crl. Misc. No. 682-8 ol2O2O.

In the light of the facts and circumstances of the present

case, refusal  of bail will tantamount  to punishing  the petitioner.

B

In the circumstances as mentioned above, this petition is

allowed and the petitioner is admitted  to bail, subject  to furnishing bail

bonds in the sum of Rs.5,00,000/-  (Rupees  five hundred  thousand  only)

with one surety in the like amount  to the satisfaction of the learned trial

Couft.

Needless to mention that the observations  recorded  in the
instant petition are based on tentative assessment, which
will obviously not prejudice  the proceedings before  the
learned trial Couft.

(ATHA

CHEF,I

Tanveer  Ahmed

