HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 

     Civil Revision No.169 of 2015 

       Mohammad Tariq  
  VS
    Mrs. Marrium Sial and another  

Petitioner by 

: 

Mr. 
Jawad, Advocate. 

Mohammad 

Nazir

Respondent by          : 

M/s  Attiq  ur  Rehman  Kiani 
and 
Imran  Ali  Kayani, 
Advocates  for  respondent 
No.1. 
Ms. Mehraj Tareen, Adv. for 
CDA. 

Date of Hearing  

: 

10-10-2022 

Babar  Sattar,  J:-  The  petitioner  is  aggrieved  by  judgment 

and  decree  passed  in  appeal  by  the  learned  Additional  District 

Court  dated  11.04.2015  by  which  the  petitioner’s  suit  for  specific 

performance  was  dismissed  and  the  judgment  and  decree  passed 

by  the  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge  dated  20.04.2011  ordering  the 

specific  performance  of  agreement  dated  13.01.2003  was  set 

aside. 

2. 

The petitioner entered into a sale agreement (“Agreement”) 

with respondent No.1 (“Seller”) dated 13.01.2003 for purchase of 

Plot  No.213,  Sector 

I-16/4, 

Islamabad 

for  a 

total  sale 

consideration  of  Rs.450,000/-  (Rupees  four  hundred  and  fifty 

thousand).  He  claimed  to  have  paid  Rs.100,000/-  in  cash  as 

earnest  money  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the  Agreement.  The 

balance  consideration  was  payable  within  a  period  of  four  weeks. 

On 21.01.2003 the mother of the Seller called the petitioner to the 

MNA  hostel  where  she  was  staying  and  asked  him  to  bring  along 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 2 

the original Agreement so that she could have her nephew take a 

look at it. The petitioner arrived at Family Suit No.05, MNA Hostel, 

Islamabad  on  13.01.2003  and  handed  the  original  Agreement  to 

the  Seller’s  mother.  The  Seller  and  her  mother  retained  the 

Agreement  and  refused  to  hand  it  back.  The  petitioner  went 

straight  to  the  police  station  and  filed  a  complaint  dated 

21.01.2003. He subsequently issued a legal notice to the Seller as 

well.  Upon  failure  of  the  Seller  to  abide  by  her  obligations  under 

the Agreement he filed a civil suit. The learned Civil Court framed 

the following issues by order dated 20.12.2003: 

ISSUES: 

i.  Whether  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  decree  for 
specific performance of the sale agreement dated 
13.01.2003  and  permanent  injunction  as  prayed 
for? OPP 

ii.  Whether the suit is not maintainable? OPD 

iii.  Whether the suit is barred by law? OPD 

iv.  Whether  the  plaintiff  has  not  come  to  the  court 

with clean hands? OPD 

v.  Whether  the  suit  is  frivolous  and  vexatious  and 
defendants  are  entitled  to  special  costs  under 
Section 35-A CPC? OPD 

vi. 

Relief.  

3. 

The  petitioner  and  Seller  adduced  evidence  in  support  of 

their claims. Respondent No.2 (i.e. CDA) did not adduce evidence 

and  its  right  to  adduce  evidence  was  closed  on  25.02.2011.  The 

petitioner  attached  with  his  plaint  a  copy  of  the  Agreement  the 

specific  performance  of  which  was  sought.  It  was  stated  in  the 

plaint  that  the  original  Agreement  had  been  illegally  retained  by 

the  Seller,  in  relation  to  which  a  police  compliant  had  been 

 
 
 
 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 3 

registered,  which  was  adduced  as  Exh.P2.  A  copy  of  the 

Agreement  was  included  in  the  Court  record  as  Mark-A.  The 

petitioner  also  adduced  a  receipt  on  the  letter  head  of  PW-2 

stating  that  the  petitioner  would  pay  Rs.50,000/-  at  the  time  of 

issuance  of  stamp  paper  and  such  acknowledgement  receipt  was 

signed  by  the  Seller  and  also  by  Mr.  Tanvir  Ahmad  Hashmi  who 

appeared  as  PW-3.  PW-2  as  well  as  PW-3  deposed  that  the 

petitioner had paid  the Seller Rs.100,000/- in cash at  the  time of 

execution  of  the  Agreement.  The  Seller  appeared  as  DW-1  and 

simply  denied  the  execution  of  the  Agreement.  During  cross-

examination  she  was  confronted  with  a  copy  of  the  Agreement 

(Mark-A) and asked if the signature affixed on it as a witness was 

that of her mother Mrs. Iqbal Sial. She denied such suggestion and 

claimed  that  she  ever  met  with  the  petitioner  at  the  MNA  hostel. 

She  however  acknowledged  having  received  a  legal  notice  from 

the  counsel  for  the  petitioner  placed  on  record  as  Mark-B.  She 

adduced  no  evidence  to  counter  the  petitioner’s  claim.  In  view  of 

such evidence the learned Civil Court found that the petitioner had 

succeeded  in  proving  the  execution  of  the  Agreement  and  the 

transaction  contemplated  therein.  It  noted  that  the  testimony  by 

the three plaintiff’s witnesses had not been rebutted by the Seller. 

In  view  of  the  acknowledgment  receipt  (Exh.P1)  the  Court  found 

that  the  petitioner  had  proved  payment  of  Rs.50,000/-  by  the 

petitioner  to  the  Seller  as  earnest  money.  As  the  petitioner  had 

already  deposited  Rs.3,50,000/-  with  the  learned  Civil  Court,  it 

found  that  the  petitioner  was  liable  to  pay  a  further  amount  of 

Rs.50,000/-  and  decreed  the  suit.  The  petitioner  deposited  the 

said amount Rs.50,000/- with the Court.  

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 4 

4. 

The Seller impugned the judgment and decree of the learned 

Civil  Court.  The  learned  Additional  District  Court  concluded  that 

even though the Seller had not cross-examined the PWs produced 

by  the  petitioner,  the  petitioner  remained  under  an  obligation  to 

prove  the  Agreement  in  accordance  with  law.  It  noted  that  the 

Agreement  was  a  marked  document  and  not  an  exhibit  and  that 

the  petitioner  had  produced  a  photocopy  of  such  document 

without  permission  of  the  Court  under  provision  of  the  Qanun-e-

Shahadat  Order,  1984,  (“QSO”).  It  was  further  held  that  the 

Agreement had not been proved in accordance with requirements 

of  Article  79  of  the  QSO  as  the  petitioner  had  only  produced  one 

witness  to  such  Agreement.  The  learned  Additional  District  Court 

thus  concluded  that  the  petitioner  had  failed  to  prove  the 

execution  of  the  Agreement  and  the  transaction  contemplated 

therein.  On  the  question  of  whether  the  acknowledgment  receipt 

(Exh.P1)  supported  the  case  of  the  petitioner,  the  learned 

Appellate  Court  found  that  the  signature  of  the  Seller  on  the 

acknowledgment  receipt  when  compared  to  that  on  the  written 

statement  and  vakalatnama  appeared  similar.  But  that  the 

pleadings  in  the  suit  were  silent  in  relation  to  the  content  of  the 

acknowledgment  receipt  (Exh.P1).  It  held  that  an  explicit 

reference  ought  to  have  been  made  to  the  acknowledgement 

receipt  (Exh.P1)  in  the  plaint  if  it  was  a  document  signed  before 

the execution of the Agreement. It thus found that the transaction 

contemplated  in  the  acknowledgment  receipt  had  also  not  been 

proved and set aside the judgment and decree of the learned Civil 

Court. 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 5 

5. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  the 

learned Civil Court had correctly appreciated the evidence adduced 

before  it.  The  petitioner  together  with  two  other  witnesses  to  the 

execution  of  the  Agreement  had  testified  as  such  and  had 

confirmed the handing over of Rs.100,000/- as earnest money by 

the  petitioner  to  the  Seller.  That  such  testimony  had  not  been 

rebutted by the Seller. And that one such witness (i.e. PW-2) was 

also  a  marginal  witness  to  the  Agreement.  The  second  marginal 

witness was the mother of the Seller, who never appeared before 

the  Court  even  in  order  to  support  the  story  of  the  Seller.  The 

Appellate Court failed to take into account that the petitioner had 

proved both the execution of the Agreement as well as payment of 

earnest money on a balance of probabilities. The learned Appellate 

Court  also  failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  original 

Agreement  could  not  be  produced  and  exhibited  as  it  had  been 

snatched  away  by  the  Seller  and  her  mother,  which  fact  was 

specifically  pleaded  in  the  plaint  and  also  supported  by  the 

complaint filed by the petitioner with police authorities on the date 

of  such  incident  i.e.  21.01.2003.  He  submitted  that  requirements 

of  QSO  had  been  complied  with  and  Article  76  of  QSO 

contemplated  that  secondary  evidence  could  be  given  in  relation 

to a document which is not available with a claimant. The learned 

Appellate Court itself observed in the impugned judgment that the 

signature  of  the  Seller  on  the  acknowledgement  receipt  (Exh.P1) 

and  on  the  vakalatnama  and  pleadings  filed  by  her  were  similar. 

The Seller also acknowledged receipt of legal notice (Exh.P2) sent 

by the petitioner. The complaint filed by the petitioner against the 

Seller  on  the  date  on  which  the  Agreement  was  snatched  by 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 6 

mother  of  the  Seller  was  on  record.  And  the  testimony  of  three 

plaintiff’s  witnesses  supported  the  content  of  the  plaint  and  the 

petitioner’s  claim  that  the  Agreement  had  been  executed  and 

advance  consideration  in  the  amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  had  been 

paid  to  the  Seller  and  the  Agreement  had  subsequently  been 

snatched  away  by  the  Seller  and  her  mother.  There  was  thus 

sufficient  evidence  to  establish  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that 

the  petitioner  had  proved  his  case.  In  support  of  his  submissions 

he relied on Arbab Tasleem VS The State (PLD 2010 SC 642), 

Mst.  Zareena  and  5  others  VS  Syeda  Fatima  Bi  (PLD  1995 

Karachi  388),  Khalid  Hussain  and  others  VS  Nazir  Ahmad 

and others (2021 SCMR 1986), Dawood Foundation through 

Chairman  and  another  VS  Ghulam  Hasan  and  another 

(2016  CLC  Note  25),  Mst.  Farida  Bano  VS  Karachi  Electric 

Supply  Corporation  through  Managing  Director  (2008  MLD 

62),  Allah  Dad  VS  S.M.  Khan  (1989  CLC  2287)  and 

Mohammad  Mohsin  Malik  VS  Mst.  Qamar  Jehan  and  2 

others (2009 YLR 289). 

6. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  submitted  that  it  was 

the  petitioner’s  obligation  to  prove  his  claim  in  accordance  with 

provisions  of  QSO,  which  he  had  failed  to  do.  Under  Article  79 of 

the  QSO  it  was  necessary  to  produce  two  attesting  witnesses  to 

prove a document, which the petitioner had failed to do as he had 

produced  only  one  witness.  The  petitioner  had  also  not  produced 

the stamp vender who issued the stamp paper for purposes of the 

Agreement  or 

the  scribe  who  prepared 

the  necessary 

documentation.  He  submitted  that  the  police  report  (Exh.P2) 

regarding the snatching of the Agreement proved nothing. A copy 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 7 

of the Agreement had been included in the case record as Mark-A 

but  there  was  no  provision  in  the  Civil  Procedure  Code  (CPC)  for 

treating  a  marked  document  as  part  of  evidence.  The  Appellate 

Court had correctly appreciated the fact that the acknowledgment 

receipt (Exh.P1) was not part of the pleadings and the plaint. The 

Seller  was  not  confronted  with  the  copy  of  the  Agreement  during 

cross-examination.  The  requirements  for  producing  secondary 

evidence  in  support  of  the  Agreement  under  Article  76  and  77  of 

QSO  had  not  been  complied  with.  And  as  the  Seller  (DW-1)  had 

denied  the  execution  of  the  Agreement  or  having  given  her 

consent  to  the  transaction  contemplated  in  the  Agreement,  the 

onus  to  prove  the  same  was  on  the  petitioner,  which  he  failed  to 

discharge  and  the  learned  Appellate  Court  correctly  set  aside  the 

judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  and 

dismissed  the  petitioner’s  suit.  In  support  of  his  submissions  he 

relied  on  Syed  Shabbir  Hussain  Shah  VS  Asghar  Hussain 

Shah  and  others  (2007  SCMR  1884),  Ghulam  Ali  Shah  and 

others  VS  Mohammad  Khalid  and  others  (2017  SCMR 

1849),  Farid  Bakhsh  VS  Jind  Wadda  and  others  (2015 

SCMR  1044),  Mst.  Nagina  Begum  VS  Mst.  Tahzim  Akhtar 

and  others  (2009  SCMR  623),  Shah  Mohammad  through 

L.Rs.  and  4  others  VS  Nawab  Din  (2006  MLD  823),  Imam 

Din and 4 others VS Meraj Din and others (2003 MLD 329), 

Ghulam  Nazak  VS  ZTBL  through  Manager  and  another 

(2007 CLD 667), Mohammad Rafique and 7 others VS Noor 

Ahmad  (2007  MLD  1554),  Farzand  Ali  and  another  VS 

Khuda  Bakhsh  and  others  (PLD  2015  SC  187),  Province  of 

Punjab 

through  Secretary, 

Irrigation 

and  Power 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 8 

Department, P.W.D., Secretariat Old Anarkali, Lahore and 3 

others  VS  Ch.  Mehraj  Din  &  Co.  through  Proprietor  (2003 

CLC  504),  Ghulam  Nabi  VS  Mohammad  Yusuf  and  2  others 

1993  CLC  314),  State  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of 

Pakistan  and  another  VS  Javaid  Iqbal  (2011  SCMR  1013), 

Mst.  Rasheeda  Begum  and  others  VS  Mohammad  Yousaf 

and others (2002 SCMR 1089), Mst. Sakina Bibi and another 

VS  Mohammad  Anwar  alias  Mujahid  and  others  (PLD  2007 

Lahore  254),  Rafaqat  Ali  and  others  VS  Mst.  Jamshed  Bibi 

and  others  (2007  SCMR  1076)  and  Ashiq  Hussain  and  5 

others  VS  Anjuman  Islamia,  Kamalia  Regd.  through 

Mohammad Amin and others (2007 CLC 71).  

7. 

Let  us  first  consider  the  pleadings  and  evidence  of  the 

petitioner.  Para  03  of  the  plaint  stated  that  out  of  the  total  sale 

consideration Rs.450,000/-, Rs.100,000/- was paid in  cash at the 

time of execution of the Agreement and the balance consideration 

was  to  be  paid  at  the  time  of  transfer  within  four  weeks  of  the 

execution  of  the  Agreement.  Para  05  provides  details  of  how  the 

mother  of  the  Seller  summoned  the  petitioner  and  procured  the 

original Agreement that was fraudulently seized and not returned. 

Para  07  states  that  the  incident  was  immediately  reported  to  the 

police on 21.01.2003 and recorded in the Roznamcha of the police 

station.  Para  09  states  that  a  legal  notice  dated  24.01.2003  was 

served on the Seller.  

8. 

In  support  of  the  claim  in  the  plaint  the  petitioner  (PW-1) 

reiterated his claim and produced a copy of the Agreement which 

was  marked  as  Mark-A  by  the  learned  Civil  Court.  The  petitioner 

testified  that  he  had  paid  Rs.100,000/-  as  earnest  money, 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 9 

Rs.50,000/-  of  which  was  paid  through  Ejaz  Hussain  Shah 

(property  dealer),  and  stated  that  the  receipt  was  acknowledged 

by the Seller in the form of Exh.P1. He also produced a copy of the 

legal notice referred to in the plaint which was marked as Mark-B. 

PW-2 supported the claim of the petitioner and confirmed that an 

amount of Rs.100,000/- was paid by the petitioner to the Seller at 

the  time  of  execution  of  the  Agreement  and  a  receipt  in  the 

amount  of  Rs.50,000/-  was  a  signed  acknowledgment  receipt 

(Exh.P1)  issued  by  him.  He  acknowledged  the  execution  of  the 

Agreement in his presence and payment of initial consideration in 

the  amount  of  Rs.100,000/-.  PW-3  testified  that  he  was  the  real 

estate  agent  who  connected  the  petitioner  to  the  Seller  through 

PW-2,  who  was  the  real  estate  agent  for  the  Seller.  He  testified 

that he witnessed the payment of Rs.100,000/- as earnest money 

by  the  petitioner  to  the  Seller.  The  Seller  called  PW-2  on 

21.01.2003  requesting  that  the  petitioner  bring  the  original 

Agreement so it can be shown to a relative of the Seller and that 

he  communicated  that  message  to  the  petitioner.  He  then  went 

along  with  the  petitioner  to  the  MNA  hostel  where  the  Seller  was 

residing.  And  after  being  handed  the  original  Agreement,  the 

mother of the Seller refused to hand it back to the petitioner, after 

which he accompanied the petitioner to the police station for filing 

of a complaint in this regard on 21.01.2003. Cross-examination of 

DW-1  reflects  that  she  was  confronted  with  the  copy  of  the 

Agreement  (Mark-A)  and  was  asked  whether  the  signature  in  the 

signature  block  for  a  witness  (immediately  above  her  own 

signature) was that of her mother, which she denied. She was also 

asked  about  the  legal  notice  served  by  the  petitioner  (marked  as 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 10 

Mark-B  by  the  learned  Civil  Court),  which  she  acknowledged  as 

having received.  

9.  What  emerges  from  the  evidence  adduced  is  that  the 

petitioner  included  a  copy  of  the  Agreement  in  the  documents 

appended  to  the  plaint,  in  view  of  which  the  learned  Civil  Court 

issued  an  injunctive  order  while  making  a  note  in  its  order  dated 

20.12.2003 that the copy of the Agreement was presented before 

the Court. It was the petitioner’s claim that the original Agreement 

has been snatched away by the Seller, which claim was mentioned 

in  the  plaint  and  supported  by  a  police  complaint  filed  by  the 

petitioner  dated  21.03.2003  and  produced  as  Exh.P2.  The 

petitioner  himself  produced  a  copy  of  the  Agreement  during  his 

own  testimony.  The  Seller  was  also  confronted  with  the  copy  of 

the  Agreement  when  she  appeared  in  the  witness  box  as  DW-1 

and  she  was  asked  if  she  recognized  the  signature  of  her  mother 

on the Agreement in the signature block as a witness.  

10. 

In view of the above, it is obvious that the petitioner as an 

executant  of  the  Agreement  presented  a  copy  of  the  same  while 

stating  that  the  Seller  had  illegally  seized  the  original  and  the 

Seller  as  DW-1  was  confronted  with  a  copy  of  the  Agreement 

during  cross-examination.  The  second  fact  that  emerges  is  that 

PW-2 was the real estate agent in touch with the Seller and PW-3 

was  the  petitioner’s  real  estate  agent  at  the  time  of  the 

transaction that formed the subject matter of the Agreement. PW-

2  issued  a  receipt,  as  is  customary  on  part  of  the  agent  of  the 

seller, which documented the proposed transaction and noted that 

Rs.50,000/- was to be paid at the time of issuance of stamp paper 

for the Agreement. This receipt was issued on 10.01.2003 and was 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 11 

signed  by  the  Seller  as  well  as  the  petitioner’s  real  estate  agent 

(i.e. PW-3). The Agreement was then executed on 13.01.2003 and 

was signed by the petitioner and the Seller, and by PW-2 and the 

mother  of  the  Seller  as  marginal  witnesses.  Perusal  of  the 

signature  of  Seller  on  the  copy  of  the  Agreement  (Mark-A), 

acknowledgement  receipt  (Exh.P1),  and  written  statement  and 

vakalatnama filed on behalf of the Seller reflects that the signature 

of the Seller on all these documents are identical as also noted by 

the  learned  Appellate  Court  in  the  impugned  judgment.  The 

testimonies  of  PW-1,  PW-2  and  PW-3  were  not  contested  by  the 

Seller  and  remained  un-rebutted.  Consequently  what  we  have  is 

the testimony of the petitioner as the purchaser and executant of 

the  Agreement,  one  marginal  witness  of  the  Agreement  (PW-2), 

who is also witness to payment of Rs.100,000/- as earnest money 

to  the  Seller  (including  Rs.50,000/-  through  him  in  lieu  of  which 

he  issued  the  acknowledgment  receipt  (Exh.P1)),  and  PW-3  who 

was  the  real  estate  agent  for  the  petitioner  and  a  witness  to  the 

execution  of  the  Agreement  (even  though  he  was  not  a  marginal 

witness),  signatory  to  the  acknowledgment  receipt  (Exh.P1),  

witness  to  payment  of  earnest  money  in  the  amount  of 

Rs.100,000/-  by  the  petitioner  to  the  Seller,  and  witness  to  the 

sequence  of  events  through  which  the  original  Agreement  was 

wrestled away by the Seller and her mother from the petitioner, as 

well as a witness to the filing of police complaint by the petitioner 

against the Seller in relation to illegal seizing of the Agreement. 

11. 

In view of the above evidence this Court is of the view that 

the learned Civil Court had correctly appreciated the evidence and 

concluded  that  the  petitioner  had  succeeded  in  establishing,  on  a 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 12 

balance  of  probabilities,  the  execution  and  content  of  the 

Agreement,  the  payment  of  consideration  in  the  amount  of 

Rs.100,000/- as earnest money as well as the illegal procurement 

of  the  original  Agreement  by  the  Seller  from  the  petitioner.  The 

learned  Appellate  Court  without  appreciating  all  aspects  of  the 

evidence adduced and the standard of proof required in support of 

a  civil  claim  (i.e.  balance  of  probabilities),  took  a  very  technical 

view of provisions of the QSO to conclude that the Agreement had 

not  been  proved  by  the  petitioner.  The  only  fact  that  the  learned 

Civil Court appears not to have appreciated correctly was evidence 

supporting the petitioner’s contention that he paid earnest money 

in lieu of sale consideration in the amount of Rs.100,000/- and not 

Rs.50,000/-. The pleadings in the plaint and the testimony of PW-

1  was  that  he  had  paid  the  amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  as  earnest 

money.  PW-3  also  testified  to  the  same  effect.  PW-2  further 

testified that the total amount paid at the time of execution of the 

Agreement  was  Rs.100,000/-  and  that  acknowledgment  receipt 

(Exh.P1) in the amount of Rs.50,000/- had been issued by him at 

the  time  of  the  transaction  forming  the  subject  matter  of  the 

Agreement  had  been  agreed  in  principle.  In  view  of  the  evidence 

in  the form of  deposition by PW-1, PW-2 and  PW-3,  the payment 

in  the  amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  stood  proved.  While  Rs.50,000/- 

out  of  a  total  payment  of  Rs.100,000/-  was  acknowledged  in  the 

acknowledgment receipt (Exh.P1), the same had been explained in 

the testimony of PW-2. Consequently, the learned Civil Court erred 

when  it  concluded  that  only  an  amount  of  Rs.50,000/-  had  been 

paid by the petitioner to the Seller as earnest money as that was 

the  amount  in  relation  to  which  the  acknowledgment  receipt 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 13 

Exh.P1  was  issued  by  PW-2.  In  reaching  such  conclusion  the 

learned  Civil  Court  did  not  appreciate  the  sequence  of  the 

transaction and the practice of handing over a certain sum to the 

real  estate  agent  by  a  purchaser  when  he/she  seeks  to  make  a 

serious  offer  for  purchase  of  immoveable  property  together  with 

agreement  to  make  further  payment  at  various  stages  of  the 

transaction.  The 

learned  Civil  Court,  while  accepting 

the 

testimonies  of  PW-2  and  PW-3  and  holding  that  acknowledgment 

receipt  (Exh.P1)  stood  proved,  erred  in  directing  the  petitioner  to 

deposit  a  further  sum  of  Rs.50,000/-  as  a  condition  for  ordering 

the specific performance of the agreement. 

12.  Let  us  take  into  account  the  relevant  provisions  of  QSO. 

Article 2(4) of the QSO states the following: 

“A  fact  is  said  to  be  proved  when,  after  considering 
the  matters  before  it,  the  Court  either  believes  it  to 
exist,  or  considers  its  existence  so  probable  that  a 
prudent  man  ought,  under  the  circumstances  of  the 
particular  case,  to  act  upon  the  supposition  that  it 
exists”  

This  provision  encapsulates  the  standard  of  proof  in  civil  matters 

i.e.  on  a  balance  of  probabilities.  In  view  of  the  sum  total  of  the 

evidence adduced, a Court is to determine the claim on a balance 

of probabilities. In other words, a Court is to take into account the 

pleadings  of  parties,  the  testimonies  of  witnesses,  and  the 

documentary  evidence  before  it  to  determine  whether  a  prudent 

man would conclude, on the balance of probability, that the claim 

is supported by facts. Article 59 of QSO entitles the Court to seek 

opinion  of  experts  and  contemplates  therein  seeking  of  expert 

opinion  in  relation  to  handwriting  and  thumb  impression  etc.  The 

learned  Civil  Court  as  well  as  the  learned  Appellate  Court  could 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 14 

have  sought  an  expert  opinion  in  relation  to  the  signature  of  the 

Seller  as  affixed  on  the  copy  of  the  Agreement  (Mark-A), 

acknowledgement receipt (Exh.P1) and the pleadings of the Seller 

and her vakalatnama as filed before the Court. This was not done. 

However,  the  Court  can  also  compare  signatures  itself  to 

determine if they belong to the person they have been ascribed to 

under  Article  84  of  QSO.  This  was  done  by  the  learned  Appellate 

Court  which  then  noted  in  the  impugned  judgment  that  the 

signature  of  the  Seller  as  affixed  on  the  acknowledgment  receipt 

was the same as that on the vakalatnama and the pleadings filed 

before the Court. In this view of the matter the learned Appellate 

Court  disbelieved  the  testimony  of  the  Seller  as  DW-1  where  she 

denied signing the acknowledgment receipt (Exh.P1). 

13.  Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  made  two  basic  legal 

arguments.  One,  in  order  for  an  agreement  for  the  sale  of 

immoveable property to be enforceable, such agreement must be 

executed by at least two attesting witnesses for it to  be provable 

in  view  of  Article  17(2)(a)  of  the  QSO.  And  two,  that  without  the 

production of two male witnesses an agreement cannot be proved 

in  view  of  Article  79  of  the  QSO.  The  other  legal  submissions  by 

the  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  were  that  secondary 

evidence  can  only  be  produced  with  the  permission  of  Court 

subject to satisfaction of the requirements under Article 77 of the 

QSO,  and  a  document  which  is  not  exhibited  and  only  marked 

cannot  be  read  in  evidence.  Let  us  address  the  aforementioned 

arguments. 

14.  Even  though  the  Court  is  a  neutral  arbiter  of  the  law  and 

facts,  in  a  dispute  between  contesting  parties  it  is  not  a 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 15 

disinterested  bystander.  The  Court  is  under  an  obligation  to  play 

an active role to determine the truth of the matter brought before 

it while passing judgment on the validity of the claim before it. To 

dispense  justice  in  accordance  with  law  is  ultimately  the 

responsibility of a Court. And while the Court cannot fill any lacuna 

in  the  claim  of  the  party  or  relax  the  obligation  of  a  party  to 

discharge  its  burden  of  proof,  the  Court  is  under  an  obligation  to 

ascertain the truth of claims made before it by contesting parties. 

It  is  for  such  purpose  that  under  the  CPC  as  well  as  the  QSO 

ample  authority  has  been  vested  in  the  Court  to  require  the 

contesting  parties  to  clarify  their  positions,  to  summon  essential 

witnesses  as  Court  witnesses  and  to  seek  expert  opinion  where 

required.  A  Court  sitting  in  judgment  over  rival  claims  ought  to 

exercise such power proactively in order to determine the truth in 

the  controversy  before  it  and  dispense  justice  in  accordance  with 

law.  

15.  A Court is required  to decide a civil claim on the balance of 

probabilities. It is the Court that is the ultimate judge of sufficient 

evidence to determine whether or not a claim has been proved on 

a  balance  of  probabilities.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  Court  is 

under an obligation to take a holistic view of the pleadings and the 

evidence adduced before it. This scheme does not change even in 

relation to a suit for specific performance in which grant of relief is 

discretionary. The discretion vested in the Court is to be exercised 

in  accordance  with  requirement  of  fairness.  The  discretionary 

nature  of  the  relief  of  specific  performance  does  not  change  the 

fact  that  in  order  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  transaction 

contemplated  by  the  agreement  (the  performance  of  which  is 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 16 

sought)  has  been  proved,  the  Court  must  apply  the  balance  of 

probability  standard  in  view  of  the  sum  total  of  the  evidence 

adduced before it. The contention that an agreement which is not 

witnessed  by  two  male  witnesses  (in  view  of  the  requirement  of 

Article  17(2)(a)  of  the  QSO)  can  never  be  proved  and 

consequently performance of the transaction contemplated therein 

cannot  be  specifically  enforced,  cannot  be  countenanced.  Even 

where an agreement is not witnessed by two male witnesses, the 

Court  will  take  into  account  secondary  or  corroborating  evidence 

to determine whether or not there was an agreement between the 

parties  to  perform  the  obligations  stated  in  such  agreement.  And 

consequently  after  taking  into  account  primary  evidence  and 

secondary/corroborating  evidence 

the  Court  will  determine 

whether on a balance of probabilities the claimant has established 

the validity of his/her claim. In this context the lack of proof of an 

agreement  in  terms  of  Article  79  of  the  QSO  where  either  two 

attesting  witnesses  are  unavailable  or  cannot  be  produced  to 

testify is not fatal to the claim of a party seeking the performance 

of  obligations  under  such  agreement.  The  requirements  of  CPC 

and  QSO  have  been  designed  to  facilitate  the  adjudicator  in 

deciphering  the  truth  of  a  claim  while  rendering  judgment  that 

meets  a  minimum  safety  requirement,  but  not  as  legal  traps  to 

frustrate  legitimate  claims  on  the  basis  of  a  straight-jacket 

application of procedural and technical requirements.  

16. 

It  is  settled  law  that  only  such  documents  can  be  read  into 

evidence  which  have  been  duly  exhibited  before  the  Court.  The 

Civil  Procedure  Code,  1908,  requires  that  a  claimant  append  with 

the plaint the documents on the basis of which he/she supports a 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 17 

claim. The claimant also lists the documents that he/she relies on 

in  the  list  of  reliance  filed  along  with  the  suit.  The  purposes  of 

these  requirements  is  to  bring  to  the  attention  to  the  respondent 

all  relevant  documents  on  which  a  claim  is  based  to  allow  the 

respondent  to  admit  or  deny  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the 

claimant.  The  defendant  in  a  suit  is  under  a  similar  obligation  to 

bring  along  all  the  relevant  documents  in  relation  to  the  claim 

upon  being  summoned  by  the  Court.  The  purpose  of  these 

provisions  is  to  provide  for  discovery  during  the  stage  when 

pleadings are being completed to ensure that all parties are aware 

of  all  the  documents  that  are  being  relied  upon  by  the  parties  in 

support  of  their  claim  and/or  counter-claim  and  to  try  the  suit 

without  any  party  springing  a  last  minute  surprise  on  the  other 

party. 

17. 

In  order  to  determine  the  veracity  and  authenticity  of  a 

document, law requires the author or repository of a document to 

produce  it  before  the  Court  at  the  earliest  stage  in  the  trial 

proceedings.  It  is  for  such  purpose  that  record  keepers  are 

summoned  to  produce  documents  before  the  Court  which  are  to 

be  read  in  evidence.  However,  in  the  event  that  a  document  is 

appended  to  the  plaint  and  listed  in  the  list  of  reliance  and 

produced  by  a  witness  in  his  testimony  and  or  confronted  to  a 

witness  during  cross-examination,  and  the  Court  while  including 

such  document  as  part  of  case  record  identifies  it  with  a  ”mark” 

and  not  as  an  ”exhibit”,  neither  of  the  contesting  parties  is 

responsible  for  such  identification  by  the  Court.  The  fact  that  the 

document  is  not  identified  by  the  Court  as  an  exhibit  but  is 

identified as a mark despite having been duly produced by a party 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 18 

at an appropriate stage during trial proceeding, in accordance with 

requirements of CPC, does not exclude the same from the material 

which is to be read in evidence by the Court. The law laid down by 

the august Supreme Court stating that a marked document  is not 

to  be  read  in  evidence  cannot  be  applied  out  of  context.  It  is 

settled law that no party can be held liable for the acts of a Court. 

It  is  for  the  Court  to  ensure  that  the  parties  have  a  fair 

opportunity to object to documents that are to be exhibited before 

the  Court  and  read  into  evidence.  And  after  affording  such 

opportunity,  the  documents  presented  before  a  Court,  to  the 

extent  that  they  satisfy  the  requirements  in  CPC,  are  to  be 

identified  as  exhibits.  Consequently,  it  is  for  the  Court  to  ensure 

that  no  document  is  included  in  the  case  record  as  a  marked 

document, if it does not fulfill the requirements of being exhibited. 

Such  responsibility  cannot  be  shifted  to  litigating  parties.  And 

while either party is within its right to raise an objection before an 

Appellate  Court  that  a  certain  document  did  not  meet  the 

requirement  of  law  and  could  not  be  exhibited,  the  action  of  a 

Court in identifying a document as a mark when it qualifies to be 

identified  as  an  exhibit  in  and  of  itself  does  not  require  the 

exclusion of such document from being read as part of evidence. 

18.  Allowing  the  exhibition  of  a  document  as  part  of  material 

which  can  then  be  appreciated  by  a  Court  as  evidence  adduced 

before  it  has  no  co-relation  with  whether  or  not  such  document 

has  been  proved.  The  executant  of  a  contract  for  example  (or  in 

some  circumstances  even  a repository  who  is  a  beneficiary  under 

such document and has founded his/her claim on such document) 

can  exhibit  such  document  before  a  Court  and  it  would  be 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 19 

identified as an exhibit. Whether or not such document constitutes 

a  contract  having  been  executed  by  the  counter-party  is  then  a 

question  of  fact  to  be  determined  by  the  Court.  Whether  or  not 

such  contract  is  proved  to  have  been  executed  and  its  content 

supports the claim of the party is another question to be answered 

by the Court, which question is independent of its admissibility. In 

other  words,  the  exhibition  of  a  document  must  not  be  confused 

with  the  proof  of  such  document.  The  proof  of  a  document  is  a 

question of evidence and the manner in which a document is to be 

placed on record as an exhibit and the timing of such placement is 

a matter of procedure prescribed by CPC. The procedure is guided 

by the need to ensure discovery and prevent surprises during the 

adjudication  of  civil  claims  and  not  to  limit  the  production  and 

exhibition of documents by a party in support of its claim.  

19.  Article 74 of the QSO defines secondary evidence. Article 76 

provide  exceptions  to  the  requirement  of  Article  75  to  prove 

documents  by  primary  evidence.  Included  within  the  exceptions 

under Article 76 are inter-alia the following: 

(a)  when  the  original  is  shown  or  appears  to  be  in  the 
possession  or  power  of  the  person  against  whom  the 
document  is  sought  to  be  proved,  or  of  any  person  out  of 
reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court, or of 
any person legally bound to produce it, and when after the 
notice  mentioned  in  Article  77  such  person  does  not 
produce it; 

(b)  when  the  existence,  condition  or  contents  of  the 
original have been proved to be admitted in writing by the 
person  against  whom  it  is  proved  or  by  his  representative 
in interest;  

Article  77  requires  that  the  parties  seeking  to  produce  secondary 

evidence  must  give  notice  to  the  other  counter-party  who  has 

possession of the document. The proviso to such Article 77 states 

 
  
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 20 

that  a  notice  under  the  Article  is  not  required  is  inter-alia  the 

following cases: 

(2)  when,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  adverse  party 
must know that he will be required to produce it;  

(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has 
obtained possession of the original by fraud or force; 

20.  The  scheme  of  Article  74  to  77  is  based  on  common  sense 

and provides that documents ought to be proved through primary 

evidence.  If  that  is  not  possible,  parties  are  allowed  to  adduce 

secondary  evidence  in  circumstances  contemplated  by  Article  76, 

in  which  case  a  party  adducing  secondary  evidence  is  to  notify  a 

counter-party that it is seeking to rely on secondary evidence. But 

such  notice  requirement  is  itself  subject  to  certain  exceptions, 

including,  for  example,  where  the  original  is  either  with  the 

counter-party  or  the  counter-party  is  aware  that  it  would  be 

required to produce such original document due to the nature of a 

claim. Once again the object of these rules is to enable the Court 

to  determine  the  veracity  of  documents  on  the  basis  of  primary 

evidence  while  also  ensuring  that  no  party  is  able  to  spring  a 

surprise  on  the  counter-party  and  that  the  cards,  on  the  basis  of 

which  claims  are  to  be  asserted  or  defended,  are  placed  on  the 

table 

for  everyone’s  knowledge  at  the  beginning  of  the 

adjudicatory process.   

21.  Let  us  now  revisit  the  facts  of  case.  It  is  the  claim  of  the 

petitioner that the original Agreement was obtained and seized by 

the Seller fraudulently. Such claim formed part of  the petitioner’s 

pleadings  in  the  plaint  and  consequently  his  right  to  adduce 

secondary  evidence  fell  within  the  exception  contemplated  in 

Article  76(a)  of  QSO  and  the  obligation  to  issue  a  notice  under 

 
  
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 21 

Article  77  was  exempt  under  clause  (3)  of  the  proviso  to  Article 

77. In support of such facts the petitioner produced testimonies of 

PW-2  and  PW-3  along  with  his  own  testimony  and  also  produced 

the  police  report  of  the  incident  (Exh.P2),  according  to  which  the 

original Agreement had surreptitiously been snatched by the Seller 

from  the  petitioner.  The  petitioner  also  served  a  legal  notice  on 

the Seller, which was produced  before the court and identified as 

Mark-B, which the Seller acknowledged as having received during 

cross-examination as DW-1. This settled the issue of production of 

copy of the Agreement. That the copy was marked as Mark-A was 

due  to  no  fault  of  the  petitioner.  The  orders  of  the  learned  Civil 

Court  reflect  that  a  copy  of  the  Agreement  was  appended  to  the 

plaint on the basis of which an ad interim injunction was granted. 

The  Agreement  was  also  listed  in  the  list  of  reliance  putting  the 

respondent  on  notice  that  it  formed  the  basis  of  the  petitioner’s 

claim.  It  was  adduced  in  evidence  by  the  petitioner  during  his 

testimony  as  PW-1  and  the  Seller  was  also  confronted  with  it 

during  cross-examination  as  DW-1.  The  petitioner  has  therefore, 

duly produced a copy of the Agreement that he was an executant 

of,  at  the  relevant  time  as  required  by  CPC,  and  such  document 

ought  to  have  been  identified  as  an  exhibit  by  the  learned  Civil 

Court. That it was  wrongly identified as Mark-A can therefore not 

be a basis for its exclusion from the evidence to be considered by 

the Court.  

22.  To  prove  the  Agreement  the  petitioner  himself  entered  the 

witness  box  and  also  produced  PW-2  and  PW-3  who  deposed  as 

witnesses.  PW-2  was  a  marginal  witness  to  the  Agreement  and 

PW-3 deposed that he witnessed the execution of the Agreement. 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 22 

The second marginal witness to the Agreement was the mother of 

the  Seller  who  did  not  appear  in  Court  as  a  witness  even  to 

support  the  claim  of  her  own  daughter.  The  trial  Court  could 

therefore  not  reasonably  require  the  petitioner  to  produce  the 

mother  of  the  Seller  (who  was  alleged  to  have  fraudulently 

wrestled  away  the  original  Agreement  from  the  petitioner)  as  a 

witness  in  compliance  with  the  requirement  of  Article  79  of  QSO. 

The petitioner did, however, produce an acknowledgement receipt 

(Exh.P1)  as 

corroborating  evidence  of 

the 

transaction 

contemplated by the Agreement. The acknowledgment receipt was 

issued by PW-2 who testified to such effect. It was also signed by 

PW-3  as  a  witness  apart  from  being  signed  by  the  Seller.  The 

petitioner  as  PW-1,  and  PW-2  and  PW-3  all  testified  that  the 

petitioner  paid  earnest  money  in  the  amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  to 

respondent  No.1  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the  Agreement.  No 

evidence was adduced by the Seller to contradict such testimony. 

PW-2 in his testimony also explained how he had issued a receipt 

in  the  amount  of  Rs.50,000/-  while  testifying  that  the  petitioner 

did  pay  the  Seller  a  total  of  Rs.100,000/-  (including  the 

Rs.50,000/- in lieu of which he had issued a receipt at the time of 

execution of the Agreement). The assertion regarding the payment 

of  sale  consideration  in  the  amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  as  earnest 

money  was  therefore  supported  by  the  testimony  of  PW-2  and 

PW-3 and by Exh.P1, which was verified by its author PW-2 and by 

its witness PW-3. 

23.  The  learned  Civil  Court  in  view  of  the  evidence  adduced 

concluded that the execution and content of the Agreement stood 

proved  by  the  petitioner.  The  learned  Additional  District  Court 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 23 

disagreed  with  such  conclusion  on  the  basis  that  the  Agreement 

had not been proved in accordance with the requirement of Article 

79 of QSO. It did however observe that the signature of PW-1 on 

the acknowledgment receipt (Exh.P1) was the same as that on the 

vakalatnama  and  pleadings  signed  by  the  Seller.  The  learned 

Additional District Court did not make a comparison of signatures 

on the copy of the Agreement under the belief that the same could 

not  be  read  in  evidence.  As  this  Court  has  held  above  that  the 

copy  of  the  Agreement  ought  to  have  been  marked  as  an  exhibit 

in view of provisions of Article 76 and 77 of QSO, a comparison of 

the signature of the Seller on the copy of the Agreement with that 

of her signature on the acknowledgment receipt (Exh.P1) and her 

signature  on  the  vakalatnama  and  pleadings  filed  before  the 

learned Civil Court reflects that they are identical. 

24. 

In  view  of  the  above  discussion  this  Court  comes  to  the 

conclusion that the learned Additional District Court misinterpreted 

and  misapplied  provisions  of  Article  76,  77  and  79  of  the  QSO  to 

conclude that the petitioner was not entitled to adduce secondary 

evidence before the learned Civil Court. And further that the copy 

of  the  Agreement  adduced  as  secondary  evidence  had  not  been 

proved. The petitioner had no option but to produce a copy of the 

Agreement  as  secondary  evidence  as  his  claim  against  the  Seller 

was  founded  on  the  basis  that  the  Seller  with  the  connivance  of 

her  mother  had  fraudulently  wrestled  away  the  original  executed 

Agreement during the incident on 21.01.2003, which was promptly 

reported  to  police  authorities  and  the  report  was  exhibited  as 

Exh.P2.  In  view  of  the  above,  this  Court  agrees  with  the  learned 

Civil  Court  that  the  petitioner  proved  the  Agreement  dated 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 24 

13.01.2003  and  is  entitled  to  have  the  Agreement  specifically 

performed.  The  only  point  of  divergence  with  the  opinion  of  the 

learned  Civil  Court  is  that  the  petitioner  also  successfully  proved 

before the learned Civil Court that he had paid consideration in the 

amount  of  Rs.100,000/-  as  earnest  money  at  the  time  of 

execution  of  the  Agreement  and  was  only  liable  to  pay  balance 

sale consideration in the amount of Rs.350,000/-, which he did at 

the 

time  of 

filing  of 

the  suit 

for  specific  performance. 

Consequently,  the  additional  requirement  of  paying  an  extra  sum 

of  Rs.50,000/-  as  imposed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  through  its 

judgment  dated  20.04.2011  was  based  on  misappreciation  of 

evidence,  especially  as  the  learned  Civil  Court  had  already  found 

that  the  testimony  of  PW-2  and  PW-3  was  un-rebutted  and  was 

liable  to  be  accepted  for  being  trustworthy.  Both  PW-2  and  PW-3 

had deposed that the petitioner paid earnest money in the amount 

of  Rs.100,000/-  to  the  Seller  at  the  time  of  execution  of  the 

Agreement.  

25.  The  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  learned  Additional 

District  Court  is  liable  to  be  reversed.  The  judgment  and  decree 

passed by the learned Civil Court is restored with the modification 

that  the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  retrieve  the  additional  amount  of 

Rs.50,000/- deposited with the learned Civil Court in terms of the 

judgment and decree dated 20.04.2011. This petition is  allowed. 

The judgment and decree passed by the learned Appellate Court is 

set  aside.  The  petitioner  is  entitled  to  cost  of  litigation  in  the 

amount  of  Rs.50,000/-  payable  by  respondent  No.1  to  the 

petitioner  within  a  period  of  30  days.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondent  No.1  will  file  a  certificate  with  Deputy  Registrar 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 25 

(Judicial)  of  this  Court  stating  that  the  order  granting  costs  has 

been complied with by or before the expiry of 30-day period. 

26.  Before  we  part  with  this  judgment  it  may  be  beneficial  to 

reiterate  some  observation  regarding  the  role  of  the  trial  court 

adjudicating civil claims:- 

(i) 

The  role  of  the  trial  court  is  not  that  of  a 

disinterested  bystander  witnessing  a  trial.  As  the 

adjudicator of claims between contesting parties its 

role  is  that  of  a  seeker  of  true  facts  underlying  a 

controversy. To perform such role, the CPC endows 

the  court  with  extensive  powers,  which  are  not  to 

be  reduced  to  black  letter  law  but  are  to  be  used 

for  proactive  administration  and  management  of 

the trial process. 

(ii) 

It was held by the august Supreme Court in Imtiaz 

Ahmad VS  Ghulam Ali (PLD 1963 SC 382) that 

the  role  of  procedure  is  to  function  as  a  stepping 

stone  in  the  dispensation  of  justice  and  not  as  a 

stumbling block. The Court must employ procedure 

to  facilitate  determination  of  facts  and  the  truth 

and not as a means to frustrate such enterprise. 

(iii) 

The  scheme  for  conducting  a  trial  under  CPC 

(especially  Order  IX-A)  places  the  court  in  a 

controlling role in the middle. The provisions of CPC 

imagine  an  adjudicatory  process  where 

the 

contesting  parties  place  their  cards  on  the  table 

face-up,  and  pursue  their  claims  in  view  of  the 

available  evidence  in  relation  to  the  claims  and 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 26 

defences  that  all  sides  are  aware  of.  For  such 

purpose, CPC provides for production of documents 

and identification of witnesses in support of factual 

claims  at  the  earliest  stage  in  the  trial,  a  case 

management and scheduling conference facilitating 

discovery  of  relevant  material  germane  to  the 

controversy,  provisions  for  discovery,  inspection 

and  admissions, 

followed  by  provisions 

for 

alternative  dispute 

resolution  and 

summary 

judgment.  Without  complete  discovery  at  the 

earliest stage before commencement of trial, there 

would  be  limited  potential  for  alternative  dispute 

resolution  succeeding  or  the  court  possessing  the 

ability to pass summary judgment. 

(iv)  

Case  management  and  scheduling  conference  is  a 

mandatory  step  in  the  trial  process  that  cannot  be 

ignored.  After  completion  of  service  and  once 

pleadings have been filed, the court must schedule 

this conference to draw out a plan for the trial and 

the  way  forward  in  consultation  with  the  counsels 

for the parties. 

(v) 

The claimant is obliged under Order VII Rule 14 of 

CPC to produce in the court at the time of filing the 

plaint the documents on the basis of which he files 

his  suit  along  with  a  list  of  documents  (whether  in 

his  possession  or  not)  that  he  wishes  to  use  in 

support of his claim. 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 27 

(vi) 

The defendant is under a similar obligation in view 

of  Order  V  Rule  7,  which  requires  him  to  produce 

all documents  in his power and possession that he 

intends to rely on in support of his case when he is 

first summoned by the court. 

(vii) 

Order  VII  Rule 18  prescribes  consequences  for  the 

plaintiff  for  not  presenting  before  the  court  at  the 

time  of  filing  of  the  plaint  (or  listing  documents  in 

the reliance list) as such omitted documents cannot 

be received the evidence during the hearing of the 

suit,  except  with  the  leave  of  the  court,  excluding 

any  document  required  to  cross-examination  or 

confront the defendant’s witnesses. 

(viii) 

Order  IX-A  Rule  2  vests  in  the  court  overarching 

authority to manage the trial process and chart out 

a  future  roadmap  with  time-lines,  and  includes 

necessary  power  for  “control  of  discovery  through 

discovery management”. 

(ix) 

Order  XIII  provides  a  detailed  mechanism  for 

production  of  documents,  their  admission  into 

evidence and return of documents that are found to 

be  irrelevant  or  inadmissible.  Order  XIII  conceives 

of a hearing where all the court does is consider all 

documentary evidence sought to be adduced by the 

parties, mark them as exhibits together with details 

prescribed  by  Order  XIII  Rule  4,  and  reject  and 

return documents under Order XIII Rule 6 found to 

be  inadmissible.  The  court  must  remember  that 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 28 

this  is  a  stage  prior  to  settlement  of  issues  and 

recording  of  evidence  in  support  of  the  issues 

framed. The court must not confuse admissibility of 

a document into the record for consideration during 

trial with the proof of such document or the weight 

and  relevance  to  be  attached  to  it  in  support  of  a 

claim.  The  proof  of  a  document  and  the  weight  to 

be  accorded  to  it  is  to  be  determined  by  the  court 

after  recording  of  evidence  while  pronouncing 

judgment. 

(x) 

Orders XV and XV-A dealing with disposal of suit at 

the  first  hearing  and  summary  judgment  follow 

Order  XIII,  as  by  then  all  documentary  evidence 

must  be  before  the  court  and  in  view  of  such 

documentary  record  there  might  be  no  need  for 

recording of evidence if, on the basis of admitted or 

uncontested  documents,  the  controversy  can  be 

resolved.  If  not,  the  trial  then  moves  to  the  stage 

of summoning of witnesses under Order XVI. 

(xi) 

The  scheme  for  conducting  a  trial  in  practice  in 

disregard  of  the  one  mentioned  in  the  CPC  as 

enumerated  above,  in  which  the  requirements  of 

Order  V,  Order  VII,  Order  IX-A  and  Order  XIII  for 

production  of  documents  at  the  earliest  stage  and 

marking them as exhibits is ignored, and further no 

case  management  and  scheduling  conference  is 

convened  and  no  date  is  fixed  exclusively  for 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 29 

admitting  and  returning  documents,  is  not  in 

accordance with provisions of CPC.1  

(xii)  

CPC  prescribes  clearly  marked  stages  in  a  trial.    If 

such stages are ignored the possibility of resolution 

of (i) disputes based on admissions, or (ii) through 

alternate  means  of  dispute  resolution  (including 

compromise)  or  (iii)  through  summary  judgment 

(without a trial of facts) dwindles. Unless the claims 

and  material  in  support  of  such  claims  is  laid  bare 

for the benefit of all parties, no party is incentivized 

to  enter  into  a  compromise,  the  court  is  unable  to 

determine  in  an  educated  manner  the  issues  in 

controversy between the parties, and has no ability 

to decide the matter at the first hearing or through 

summary  judgment.  This  renders  provision  of 

Order  IX,  Order  IX-A,  Order  XV  and  Order  XV-A 

redundant,  results  in  all  suits  brought  to  the  court 

being  subjected  to  trial,  and  populates  court 

dockets  with  matters  that  might  be  resolved 

without  trial  and  without  inordinate  delay  in  cases 

finding a resolution.  

(xiii) 

 The  practice  of  allowing  witnesses  to  adduce 

documentary evidence during their examination-in-

chief  as 

the  primary  mode  of  producing 

documentary evidence is in breach of provisions of 

Order  V,  Order  VII  and  Order  XIII  as  explained 

above and cannot be countenanced. It is only upon 

showing  “good  cause”  for  non-production  of  a 

 
C.R. No.169/2015                                                                                       P a g e  | 30 

document  at  the  first  instance  (as  required  by 

Order  V  and  Order  VII)  that  the  court  may  allow 

production  of  such  document  at  a  later  stage  in 

accordance  with  Order  XIII  Rule  2.  If  courts  hold 

scheduling  conferences  under  Order  IX-A  as 

required  and  forces  discovery  before  fixing  a  date 

for  admission  and  rejection  of  documents  under 

Order XIII, none of the parties would be prejudiced 

and  suits  would  proceed  in  accordance  with  the 

schemes prescribed by CPC.  

(xiv) 

Courts  of  law  have  no  authority  to  contrive  a 

procedure 

for  conduct  of 

trials 

that 

is 

in 

contradiction with that prescribed by CPC. There is 

urgent  need  to  bring  the  practice  of  the  courts  in 

compliance and consonance with the law. 

27.    Let a copy of this judgment be shared with the MIT and the 

learned District Judges in Islamabad to enable them to take steps 

to ensure that trials are conducted in accordance with the scheme 

prescribed by CPC, as enumerated above.            

(BABAR SATTAR) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on 21.10.2022. 

       JUDGE 

Approved for reporting .  

*M.A. Raza* 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
