ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

      W.P.No.2431 of 2021 
Muhammad Akhtar Abbasi 

VS          

Learned Judge Family Court (East) Islamabad and others 

S. No. of order 
/ proceedings 

Date of order / 
Proceedings 
07.07.2021  Mr.  Asad  Hussain  Ghalib,  Advocate  for  the 

Order  with  signature  of  Judge  and  that  of  parties  or  counsel 
where necessary. 

petitioner. 

Through 

the 

instant  writ  petition, 

the 

petitioner, Muhammad Akhtar Abbasi, impugns (i) 

order  dated  21.11.2020  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad  whereby  interim 

maintenance  of  Rs.10,000/-  per  month  was  fixed 

for each of his minor children, and (ii) order dated 

02.06.2021  whereby  the  petitioner’s  application 

for  the  reduction  of  the  interim  maintenance  was 

dismissed and he was directed to pay the interim 

maintenance  between  December  2020  and  June 

2021 on the next date of hearing, failing which the 

suit  for  maintenance  filed  by  his  former  wife  and 

minor  children  would  be  decreed  under  Section 

17-A of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964 

(“the 1964 Act”). 

2. 

Both  the  orders  assailed  in  the  instant  writ 

petition are interlocutory orders. The petitioner’s 

primary grievance is that he cannot afford to pay 

maintenance at the rate of Rs.10,000/- per month 

for  each  of  his  own  minor  children.  The 

petitioner’s  conduct  is  most  inequitable  since  it 

has  candidly  been  admitted  that  no  amount  had 

been  paid  by  him  as 

interim  maintenance 

between  December  2020  and  June  2021.  This  is 

reason  enough  for  the  instant  petition  to  be 

dismissed.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  given  the 

inflation  at  this  day  and  age  interim  maintenance 

of Rs.10,000/- per month for each child is the very 

                
 
 
  
 
2 

              W.P.No.2431/2021 

least  that  the  learned  Family  Court  could  have 

fixed. It is the legal, moral and religious obligation 

of 

the 

petitioner 

to 

provide 

adequate 

maintenance to his own children.  

3. 

As  Section  14(3)  of  the  1964  Act  expressly 

bars  a  right  of  appeal  or  revision  against  an 

interim order passed by a Family Court, the same 

cannot  be  circumvented  by  challenging  such  an 

interim  order  in  the  Constitutional  jurisdiction  of 

the  High  Court.  A  party  aggrieved  by  such  an 

interim  order  has  to  wait  until  a  Family  Court 

passes a final order and then to challenge it in an 

appeal.  This  is  because  an  interim  order  merges 

into  the  final  verdict.  The  purpose  behind  barring 

an appeal or a revision against an interim order of 

the  Family  Court  is  to  avoid  delays  in  disposal  of 

the  cases  by  the  Family  Court.  Since  the  suit 

instituted against the petitioner by his ex-wife and 

minor  children  is  for  recovery  of  maintenance, 

etc.,  the  final  decree  that  may  be  passed  by  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court  would  be  appealable 

under  Section  14  of  the  1964  Act.  Reference  in 

this  regard  may  be  made  to  the  following  case 

law:- 

(i) 

In the case of Syed Saghir Ahmad Naqvi VS 

Province  of  Sindh  (1996  SCMR  1165),  it  has 

been held as follows:- 

“The statute excluding a right of appeal 
from the interim order cannot be passed 
by  bringing  under  attack  such  interim 
orders in Constitutional jurisdiction. The 
party affected has to wait till it matures 
into a final order and then to attack it in 
the proper exclusive forum created for the 
purpose of examining such orders.” 

(ii) 

In  the  case  Mumtaz  Hussain alias  Butta  VS 

Chief  Administrator  of  Auqaf,  Punjab  (1976 

SCMR 450), it has been held as follows:- 

 
 
 
 
 
3 

              W.P.No.2431/2021 

“As the said Ordinance has taken away 
the right of petitioner to interim relief, 
learned counsel submitted that this was a 
ground which entitled the petitioner to 
prosecute  a  writ  petition  despite  the 
pendency  of  the  proceedings  on  the 
District  Court.  The  argument  is 
misconceived  because 
the  writ 
jurisdiction of the superior Courts cannot 
be invoked in aid of injustice and in order 
to defeat the express provisions of the 
statutory law.” 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Maham  Shabbir  VS 

Salman  Haider  (2014  CLC  330),  the  Hon'ble 

Islamabad High Court held as follows:- 

“9. … High Court in exercise of its writ 
jurisdiction is not sitting as a Court of 
appeal,  or  court  of  revision.  Its 
jurisdiction to interfere on the point of fact 
is limited. Interlocutory order if does not 
suffer from any illegality, malafide or is 
not in excess of jurisdiction or lack of 
exercise of jurisdiction or not based on 
misreading, misconstruing or discarding 
of the evidence and material on record 
cannot  be  challenged  in  constitutional 
jurisdiction.  Nevertheless,  the  facts  of 
each  case  are  to  be  considered 
separately and no uniform principle can 
be  determined  for  exercising  the  writ 
jurisdiction.” 

4. 

It is my view that exceptional circumstances 

which could justify invoking the jurisdiction  of the 

High  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution 

would  be  when  the  order  or  action  assailed  was 

palpably  without  jurisdiction,  malafide,  void  or 

coram-non-judice.  The  order  impugned  in  this 

petition is clearly interlocutory in nature and does 

not  dispose  of  the  entire  case  before  the  learned 

Family  Court.  The  impugned  order  is  neither 

without  jurisdiction  nor  malafide,  void  or  coram-

non-judice  so  as  to  warrant  interference  in  the 

Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under 

Article 199 of the Constitution. 

5. 

The 

impugned  orders,  being  purely 

interlocutory  in  nature,  could  not  be  subjected  to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

              W.P.No.2431/2021 

challenge by filing a Constitutional petition before 

this  Court  as  it  would  amount  to  defeating  the 

legislative intent behind Section 14(3) of the 1964 

Act. Therefore, I am not inclined to interfere in the 

said  interlocutory  orders  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge Family Court. 

6. 

Since  I  do  not  find  the  pre-requisites  for 

interference  in  the  Constitutional  jurisdiction  of 

this  Court  with  the 

impugned  orders  dated 

21.11.2020  and  02.06.2021  to  be  satisfied  in  the 

case  at  hand,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  not 

maintainable, consequently the same is dismissed 

in limine.   

Sultan* 

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
