Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       WRIT PETITION NO. 21 OF 2021 

Muhammad Akram Nadeem 
VS 
   Chairman, Arbitration Council/ADLG Islamabad, etc.  

PETITIONER BY:      

Rana Shahid Hussain Khan, Advocate  

RESPONDENTS BY: 

Syed  Asad  Ali  Saeed,  Advocate 
respondent No.3.  
Mr. Abid Hussain Chaudhry, Advocate for 
respondent No.1. 
Syed  Faraz  Raza,  Assistant  Legal 
Advisor, Ministry of  Foreign Affairs.  

for 

DATE OF HEARING: 

24.02.2021. 

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  The  petitioner  is  aggrieved  by 

divorce certificate dated 03.12.2020 issued by respondent No.1 

under section 7(3) of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 

(“Ordinance”)  pursuant  to  proclamation  of  talaq  issued  by 

respondent No.3 on 08.05.2017.  

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  the 

petitioner’s  daughter  and  respondent  No.3  reside  in  United 

Kingdom,  that  they  are  separated  but  are  not  divorced  and 

proceedings regarding custody and maintenance of their children 

are pending in the Family Court of Watford, U.K; that the divorce 

certificate has been issued after a delay of three and a half year 

from  initiation  of  proceedings  before  respondent  No.1  and  in 

breach  of  section  7(1)  of  the  Ordinance  as  the  petitioner  who 

resides in U.K. never received any notice section 7(1); that non-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

compliance  with  mandatory  conditions  prescribed 

in 

the 

Ordinance is a fraud on the statute and in breach of fundamental 

rights  of  the  petitioner;  that  the  impugned  certificate  issued 

without  compliance  of  mandatory  conditions  prescribed  under 

the  Ordinance  is  void  ab-initio  and  of  no  legal  effect;  that  the 

petitioner  is unable to travel to Pakistan due to Covid-19 and is 

also unable to issue a power of attorney certified by the Pakistan 

High Commission due to lockdown currently enforced in U.K. and 

that the petition has been filed in her behalf by her father; given 

that the impugned certificate can be abused by respondent No.3 

to  undermine  valuable  rights  of  the  petitioner’s  daughter  this 

Court  ought  to  exercise  its  equitable  jurisdiction  to  hear  this 

matter,  especially  as  the  petition  has  been  filed  by  the 

petitioner’s father who neither  has any monetary interest in the 

matter  nor  any  interest  adverse  to  the  petitioner  i.e.  his 

daughter.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submited  that  the 

fact  that  the  petitioner  has  authorized  her  father  to  file  the 

instant  petition  can  be  verified  by  the  Court  through  its  video-

conferencing  facility  in  view  of  the  extraordinary  situation 

created due to Covid-19.  

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  relied  on  Mubarik 

Ali Shah and 4 others VS Chief Administrative Auqaf [1988 CLC 

348]  and  Mrs.  Ambreen  Naseem  Khawaja  VS  Federation  of 

Pakistan  and  others  [2015  P.Cr.L.J  506] 

in  support  of 

maintainability. The learned counsel relied on Syed Wajiha Haris 

VS Chairman Union  Council No.7, Lahore [2010 MLD 989], Mst. 

Sana  Asim  Hafeez  VS  Administrator/Chairman,  Arbitration  and 

Conciliation  Court  [2016  MLD  1061]  and  Mst.  Asma  Bibi  VS 

 
3. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

Chairman  Reconciliation  Committee  and  others  [PLD  2020 

Lahore  679]  wherein  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court  held  that 

under  SRO  1086(K)61  dated  09.11.1961  (“SRO”),  officers  of 

Pakistan  Mission  abroad  were  authorized  to  discharge  functions 

of  Chairman  under  the  Ordinance,  1961  and  that  reconciliation 

proceedings  must  be  undertaken  at  the  place  of  residence  of 

nonresident  Pakistanis.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 

submitted that the controversy in the instant petition involves a 

legal  question:  whether  in  case  of  divorce  between  Pakistani 

citizens  who  are  residing  outside  of  Pakistan  at  the  time  of 

divorce,  would  Chairman  of  the  relevant  Union  Council  in 

Pakistan have jurisdiction in view of provisions of the Ordinance 

read together with the SRO. 

4. 

In  pursuance  of  this  Court’s  order  dated  08.01.2021 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  placed  on  record  unattested 

special  power  of  attorney  signed  by  the  daughter  of  the 

petitioner  along  with  cover  email  stating  that  she  is  unable  to 

have  the  said  power  of  attorney  certified  as  the  High 

Commission is shut down due to lockdown in the United Kingdom 

due to COVID-19. This Court verified through video link that the 

petitioner had been authorized by her daughter as due to Covid-

19  and  lockdown  in  U.K  certification  of  power  of  attorney  was 

temporarily suspended by the High Commission.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  submitted  that  no 

officer  had  been  appointed  in  various  Consulates  and  High 

Commissions of Pakistan to perform functions of Chairman under  

 
4. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

the  Ordinance  in  exercise  of  powers  conferred  on  the  Federal 

Government  by  the  SRO.  He  further  submitted  that  in  the 

interest of justice, it would be appropriate that the Foreign Office 

be impleaded as party to seek information on whether or not the 

SRO  had  been  given  effect  and  if  Chairman  for  purposes  of 

section  2(b)  of  the  Ordinance  has  been  appointed  in  Pakistan’s 

Foreign Missions. He  further  submitted  that  there  is  utter 

confusion regarding jurisdiction of respondent No.1 in relation to 

divorce  proceedings  involving  spouses  who  get  married  in 

Pakistan but later become dual nationals or expatriate Pakistanis 

or  are temporarily out of country at the  time of pronouncement 

of  divorce.  He  submitted  that  no  proceedings  for  purposes  of 

section 7 are conducted in foreign missions.  

6. 

The  Foreign  Office  was  issued  notice  and  report  was 

sought  from  it  on  whether  any  officers  at  Pakistan’s  Foreign 

Missions  had  been  notified  to  discharge  the  functions  of 

Chairman under the Ordinance pursuant to the SRO.  

7. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3  submitted  that  on 

08.05.2017  an  application  for  purposes  of  section  7(1)  of  the 

Ordinance  was  filed  before  respondent  No.1  along  with  divorce 

deed  and  that  such  divorce  deed  was  executed  in  Pakistan  on 

08.05.2017.  That  Respondent  No.3  appeared  in  person  before 

respondent No.1 on 10.05.2017 and recorded his statement and 

the proper  procedure  to summon the petitioner  was adopted by 

issuing notice to her at her given address as House. No. 79/4-D, 

Street  No.  32,  F-6/1,  Islamabad.  That  on  31.05.2017  the 

representative  of  respondent  No.3  appeared  before  respondent 

 
5. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

No.1 but the petitioner was not in attendance and another notice 

was  issued  for  her  appearance  on  21.06.2017.  That  the  same 

situation existed on 12.07.2017 when no one appeared on behalf 

of  respondent  No.1.  On  19.07.2015  respondent  received  a 

summon from the learned Civil Judge Islamabad in a suit filed by 

the  petitioner’s 

father  on  her  behalf  wherein  order 

for 

maintenance  of  status  quo  had  been  passed.  The  learned 

counsel  for  Respondent  No.  3  provided  details  of  the  litigation 

that continued before the learned Civil Court and proceedings in 

relation to an application filed on behalf of the petitioner  before 

the Deputy Commissioner, ICT., Islamabad.   

8. 

The learned counsel for respondent No. 3 submitted that 

after rejection of the plaint filed on behalf of the petitioner under 

Order  VII  Rule  11  CPC,  the  proceeding  before  respondent  No.1 

recommenced  and  the  impugned  divorce  certificate  was  issued. 

The learned counsel submitted that in the instant case provisions 

of the Ordinance are applicable as the petitioner and respondent 

No.2  are  both  Pakistani  Nationals  and  their  marriage  is 

registered  at  Islamabad  and  respondent  No.1  is  vested  with 

jurisdiction  under  section  7  of  the  Ordinance.  That  notice  under 

section  7(1)  of  the Ordinance  was  duly  issued  to  the  petitioner, 

as the address mentioned in the instant petition is the same on 

which  the  notice  was  served.  And  that  it  was  after  receipt  of 

such  notice  and  after  acquiring  knowledge  of  the  proceedings 

under  section  7  of  the  Ordinance  that  the  petitioner  filed  a  suit 

before  the  learned  Civil  Court  which  proceedings  continued  till 

the  rejection  of  the  suit  in  November,  2020.  That  there  is  no 

Arbitration  Council  functional  in  Pakistan’s  High  Commission  in 

 
6. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

U.K.  and  that  even  under  the  U.K  Law  no  divorce  of  Pakistani 

nationals  living  in  U.K.  is  recognized  unless  a  divorce  certificate 

has  been  issued  under  the  Ordinance.  Learned  counsel  for  the 

respondent  No.3  produced  before  the  Court  a  copy  of 

instructions  published  by  Government  of  U.K  on  its  website 

(www.gov.uk)  for  guidance  of  recognition  of  overseas  divorces, 

which in relevant part state the following: 

4. SET13.4  Recognition  of  overseas  divorces  which  took 
place on or after 4 April 1988. 

Under the Family Law Act 1986 an overseas divorce obtained by 
means  of  judicial  or  other  proceedings  is  recognized  in  the  UK 
only if: 

it  is  effective  under  the  law  of  the  country  in  which  it  was 

 
obtained; and 

  at  the  relevant  date  (that  is,  the  date  on  which  proceedings 
were  begun),  either  party  was  either  habitually  resident  or 
domiciled in that country or was a national of that country. 

The  term  ‘judicial  or  other  proceedings’  requires  that  there 
should  have  been  some  formal  proceedings,  either  before  a 
court or some other formal body recognized by the state for that 
purpose  (for  example,  in  Pakistan  the  Union  Council).  It  is  an 
important  aspect  that  the  judicial  or  other  body  should  be 
impartial as to the outcome of the proceedings. 

An  overseas  divorce  obtained  otherwise  than  by  means  of 
proceedings is recognised in the UK if: 

  it is effective under the law of the country in which it was 
obtained; and 

  at  the  relevant  date  (that  is,  the  date  on  which  the  divorce 
was  obtained),  both  parties  were  domiciled  in  that  country  or 
one  was  domiciled  there  and  the  other  was  domiciled  in  a 
country which recognized the divorce; and 

  neither  party  had  been  habitually  resident  in  the  UK 
throughout  the  period  of  one  year  immediately  preceding  that 
date. 

The  term  ‘otherwise  than  by  means  of  proceedings’  covers,  for 

example,  a  meeting  of  family  members  convened  to  dissolve  a 

West African customary marriage or to hear the pronouncement 

of talaq. 

5. SET13.5 The Talaq divorce 

Under traditional  Islamic  law a bare  talaq divorce is  deemed to 
have  taken  place  when  the  husband  pronounces  three  times  ‘I 

 
7. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

divorce  thee’.  This  pronouncement  dissolves  the  marriage 
instantly. 

However, the Muslim Family Law Ordinance 1961 (MFLO) sets 
out  formal  requirements  for  the  recognition  of  full  talaq 
divorces  in  all  parts  of  Bangladesh  and  Pakistan  except  Azad 
Kashmir: 

  the  husband  must  give  notice 
the 
pronouncement  of  a  talaq  divorce  to  the  Chairman  of  the 
Union Council of the Ward, 

in  writing  of 

  the husband must also give a copy of this notice to his wife. 

At the end of 90 days (or at the end of the wife’s pregnancy if 
she is pregnant at this time) the divorce will take effect. There 
is  provision  for  attempts  at  conciliation  between  the  two 
parties during this 90 day period. 

Only  a  talaq  under  the  MFLO  is  considered  to  have  been 
obtained by means of proceedings as defined under UK Acts. 

If a full talaq divorce takes place in Bangladesh or Pakistan it 
will be recognised in the UK if the procedures laid down under 
the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance  1961  were  complied  with, 
and: 

  the  husband  or  the  wife  is  a  Bangladeshi  or  Pakistani 
citizen; 
or 
  he or she is habitually resident in Bangladesh or Pakistan; 
  he or she is domiciled in Bangladesh or Pakistan. 

6. SET13.6 Talaq divorce in the UK 

If  a  husband  pronounces  talaq  divorce  in  the  UK  alone,  the 

divorce will not be recognized. 

If  a  husband  pronounces  talaq  divorce  in  the  UK  and  then 

notifies his wife and the Union Council Chairman in Pakistan or 

Bangladesh, the divorce will not be recognised. The UK courts 

have held that an overseas divorce is capable of recognition in 

the UK only if the divorce has been instituted and obtained in 

the same country outside the UK. 

9. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  Foreign  Office,  which  was 

impleaded  as  Respondent  No.  4  by  this  Court  by  order  dated 

18.01.2021, submitted a report which stated the following;  

“That  in  accordance  with  the  Muslim  Family  Laws 

Ordinance,  1961  and  SRO  No.  1086(K)61  dated 

09.11.1961, all Pakistan Missions  abroad are periodically 

 
 
 
 
 
8. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

directed to appoint/update focal persons to discharge the 

functions of the Chairman, Arbitration Council.”  

The report provided a list of focal persons appointed in Pakistan’s 

Foreign  Missions  to  discharge  the  functions  of  Chairman  for 

purposes of section 2(b) of the Ordinance.  

10. 

It is not denied that a notice for purposes of section 7(1) 

was  issued  by  Respondent  no.1  on  behalf  of  Respondent  No.  3 

and sent to the Petitioner  along with the divorce deed executed 

by Respondent No.3 at the address listed in the instant petition, 

which  is  the  permanent  resident  of  the  Petitioner’s  father.  The 

petitioner’s  case  is  that  she  never  received  a  notice  in  physical 

form  as  she  lives  in  U.K.  and  that  respondent  No.1  has  no 

jurisdiction  to  discharge  functions  under  section  7  of  the 

Ordinance  as  the  Petitioner  and  Respondent  No.  3  were  both 

residents of U.K. at the time of pronouncement of divorce. 

11. 

The questions that arise before this Court for adjudication 

of the subject-matter of this petition are the following: 

1.  Does  the  Federal  Government  have  the  authority 

under section 2(b) of the Ordinance to authorize Director 

General  (Administration)  Ministry  of  External  Affairs  to 

appoint  officers 

to  Pakistan’s  Foreign  Missions 

to 

discharge functions of Chairman as defined under section 

2(b) of the Ordinance? 

2.  Do  provisions  of  Ordinance  have  extra-territorial 

application and apply to divorce proceedings in relation to 

Pakistani  spouses  not  physically  present  in  Pakistan  at 

the time of pronouncement of divorce? 

3.  Where  divorce  is  pronounced  between  spouses  who 

are  Pakistani  nationals  at  a  time  when  they  are  outside 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 

                      W.P No. 21 of 2021 

the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  Pakistan,  whether  due  to 

being  dual  nationals  or  expatriate  Pakistanis  or 

temporary  residents,  are  they  obliged  to  pursue  divorce 

proceedings  before  an  officer  appointed  as  Chairman  for 

proposes  of  section  2(b)  of  the  Ordinance  in  Pakistan’s 

Foreign  Mission  and  in  such  case  is  the  Chairman  of  the 

relevant  Union  Council  in  Pakistan  devoid  of  jurisdiction 

in relation to such divorce proceedings?  

12. 

Before  we  engage  with  these  questions,  let  us  consider 

the relevant provisions of the Ordinance: 

Section 1(2) 

It  extends  to  whole  of  Pakistan,  and  applies  to  all  Muslim 

citizens of Pakistan, wherever they may be. 

Section 2(a) 

“Arbitration Council” means a body consisting of the Chairman 

and  a  representative  of  each  of  the  parties  to  a  matter  dealt 

with this Ordinance: 

Provided that  where  any  party 

fails 

to  nominate  a 

representative  within  the  prescribed  time,  the  body  formed 

without such representative shall be the Arbitration Council. 

Section 2(b) 

(b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Union Council or a 

person  appointed  by 

the  Federal  Government 

in 

the 

Cantonment  areas  or  by  the  Provincial  Government  in  other 

areas  or  by  an  Officer  authorized  in  that  behalf  by  any  such 

Government  to  discharge  the  functions  of  chairman  under 

Ordinance: 

Provided that where the Chairman of the Union Council is 

a non-Muslim, or he himself wishes to make an application to 

the  Arbitration  Council,  or  is,  owing  to  illness  or  any  other 

reason,  unable  to  discharge  the  functions  of  Chairman,  the 

Council shall elect one of its Muslim members as Chairman for 

the purposes of this Ordinance. 

Section 7 

(1)  Any  man  who  wishes to  divorce his  wife  shall,  as soon  as 

may  be  after  the  pronouncement  of  talaq  in  any  form 

whatsoever, give the chairman a notice in writing of his having 

done so, and shall supply a copy thereof to the wife. 

 
 
 
10.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

(2)  Whoever,  contravenes  the  provisions  of  sub-section  (1) 

shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which 

may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five 

thousand rupees, or with both. 

(3)  Save  as provided  in  sub-section (5)  talaq,  unless revoked 

earlier,  expressly  or otherwise,  shall  not  be  effective  until  the 

expiration of ninety days from day on which notice under sub-

section (1) is delivered to the Chairman. 

(4)  Within  thirty  days  of  the  receipt  of  notice  under  Sub-

section  (1),  the  Chairman  shall  constitute  an  Arbitration 

Council  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  about  a  reconciliation 

between  the  parties,  and the  Arbitration Council  shall  take  all 

steps necessary to bring about such reconciliation. 

(5)  If  the  wife  be  pregnant  at  the  time  talaq  is  pronounced, 

talaq shall not be effective until the period mentioned in Sub-

section (3) or the pregnancy, whichever later, ends. 

(6)  Nothing  shall  debar  a  wife  whose  marriage  has  been 

terminated  by 

talaq  effective under  his  section 

from 

remarrying  the  same  husband,  without  an 

intervening 

marriage  with  a  third  person,  unless  such  termination  is  for 

the third time so effective. 

13. 

In exercise of powers under section 11 of the Ordinance, 

the  Government  of  West  Pakistan  promulgated  West  Pakistan 

Rules  under  the  Muslim  Family  Law  Ordinance,  1961  on 

10.07.1961. Rule 3 is germane to the question of jurisdiction of 

Chairman Union Council. And the proviso to Rule 6(1) and (2) in 

instrumental  in  considering  the  role  envisaged  for  Consular 

Officers in Pakistan in the event that a notice is to be served on 

a person not in Pakistan at the relevant time. The text of Rules 3 

and 6 is reproduced below: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

Rule-3 

3.  The  Union  Council  which  shall  have  jurisdiction  in  the 

matter  for  purpose  of  clause  (d)  of  section  2,  shall  be  as 

follows namely: – 
[ 
(a) in the case of an application to contract another marriage 

under subsection (2) of section 6, it shall be the Union Council 

of  the  Union  or  Town  in  which  the  existing  wife  of  the 

applicant, or where the husband has more wives than one, the 

wife  with  whom  the  applicant  was  married  last,  is  residing  at 

the 

time 

of 

his 

making 

the 

application; 

Provided  that  if  at  the  time  of  making  the  application, 

such  wife  is  not  residing  in  any  part  of  West  Pakistan,  the 

union council that shall have jurisdiction shall be:— 

i)  in  case  such  wife  was  at  any  time  residing  with  the 

applicant in any part  of West Pakistan, the union Council 

of the Union or Town where such wife so last resided with 

the applicant; and                                                                                                                             

ii)  in  any  other  case,  the  Union  Council  of  the  union  or 

Town where the applicant is permanently residing in West 

Pakistan; 

(b)  in  the  case  of  a  notice  of  talaq  under  sub-section  (1)  of 

section 7, it shall be the Union Council of the Union or Town in 

which the wife in relation to whom talaq has been pronounced 

was residing at the time of the pronouncement to talaq; 

Provided  that  if  at  the  time  of  pronouncement  of  talaq 

such  wife  was  not  residing  in  any  part  of  West  Pakistan,  the 

union Council that shall have jurisdiction shall be:– 

i)  in  case  such  wife  was  at  any  time  residing  with  the 

person  pronouncing  the  talaq  in  any  part  of  West 

Pakistan, Union Council or the Union or Town where such 

wife so last resided with such person; and 

ii)  in  any  other  case,  the  Union  Council  of  the  union  or 

Town where the person pouncing the talaq is permanently 

residing in West Pakistan; and 

(c) in the case of an application for maintenance under section 

9, it shall be the Union Council of the Union or Town in which 

the wife is residing at the time of her making the application, 

 
 
 
 
 
12.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

and  where  application  under,  that  section  is  made  by  more 

than  one  wife,  it  shall  be  the  Union  Council  of  the  Union  or 

Town  in  which  the  wife  who  makes  the  application  first,  is 

residing at the time of her making the application. 

Rule-6 

6(1) Within seven days of receiving an application under sub-

section (4) of section 6 or under sub-section (1) of section 9, 

or  a  notice  under  sub-section  (1)  of  section  7,  the  Chairman 

shall,  by  order  in  writing,  call  upon  each  of  the  parties  to 

nominate his or her representative, and each such party shall, 

within seven days of receiving the order, nominate in writing a 

representative  and deliver the  nomination  to  the  Chairman or 

send it to him by registered post. 

(2)  Where  a  representative  nominated  by  a  party  is,  by 

reasons of illness or otherwise, unable to attend the meetings 

of  the  Arbitration  Council,  or  willfully  absents  himself  from 

such  meeting,  or  has  lost  the  confidence  of  the  party,  the 

party,  may,  with  the  previous  permission  in  writing  of  the 

Chairman, revoke the nomination and make, within such time 

as the Chairman may allow, a fresh nomination. 

        Provided that where a party on whom the order is to be 

served  is  residing  outside  Pakistan,  the  order  may  be  served 

on such party through the Consular Officer of Pakistan in or for 

the country where such party is residing. 

14. 

The  text  of  the  SRO  on  the  basis  of  which  it  has  been 

argued by the Petitioner that Respondent No. 1 (i.e. the relevant 

Chairman  Union  Council)  is  devoid  of  authority  for  purposes  of 

section 7 of the Ordinance, is as follows: 

“In  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by  clause  (b)  of 

section  2  of  the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961 

(VIII  of  1961),  the  Central  Government  is  pleased  to 

authorize  the  Director  General  (Administration),  Ministry 

of External Affairs to appoint officers of Pakistan missions 

abroad to discharge the functions of Chairman under the 

aforesaid Ordinance.” 

 
 
 
 
 
13.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

15. 

The  first  question  before  this  Court  is  whether  the  SRO 

was validly issued in exercise of power duly vested in the Federal 

Government  under  section  2(b)  of  the  Ordinance.  The  ordinary 

meaning  of  the  text  of  section  2(b)  seems  to  identify  five 

categories of persons who fall within the definition of Chairman: 

(1)  Chairman  Union  Council;  (2)  a  person  appointed  by  the 

Federal  Government  in  the  Cantonment  Areas  to  discharge  the 

functions of Chairman; (3) a person appointed by the Provincial 

Government in areas other than Cantonment Areas to discharge 

the  functions  of  Chairman;  (4)  an  officer  appointed  by  the 

Federal  Government  in  the  Cantonment  Areas  to  discharge  the 

functions  of  Chairman;  and  (5)  an  officer  appointed  by  the 

Provincial Government in areas other than Cantonment Areas to 

discharge the functions of Chairman. 

16. 

The  text  of  section  2(b)  could  alternatively  be  read  as 

identifying  four  categories  of  persons  who  fall  within  the 

definition of Chairman as opposed to five i.e. (1) Chairman Union 

Council;  (2)  a  person  appointed  by  the  Federal  Government  in 

the  Cantonment  Areas  to  discharge  the  functions  of  Chairman; 

(3)  a  person  appointed  by  the  Provincial  Government  in  areas 

other  than  Cantonment  Areas  to  discharge  the  functions  of 

Chairman;  (4)  an  officer  appointed  by  the  Federal  Government 

or  the  Provincial  Government  to  discharge  the  functions  of 

Chairman  devoid  of  territorial  restrictions.  Such  reading  of 

section  2(b)  would  not  limit  the  power  of  the  Federal 

Government  to  appoint  an  officer  to  discharge  the  functions  of 

Chairman only within Cantonment Areas. 

 
 
14.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

17. 

This  second  reading,  however,  raises  two  issues.  One, 

the  words  in  section  2(b)  where  governments  are  authorized  to 

appoints  ‘officers’  to  discharge  functions  of  Chairman  uses  the 

words  “in  that  behalf”  while  identifying  the  fourth  and  fifth 

category of persons falling within  the definition of Chairman. To 

read  the  provision  as  empowering  the  Federal  Government  to 

appoint an officer to discharge the functions of Chairman not just 

within  a  Cantonment  Area  but  anywhere  across  Pakistan  and 

also within Pakistan’s Foreign Missions, would require attributing 

redundancy to the words “in that behalf”. It is a settled principle 

of interpretation that each and every word used in a statute is to 

be  given  meaning  and  redundancy  is  not  to  be  attributed  to 

words used by the legislature. 

18. 

The second issue is that of territorial and subject-matter 

jurisdiction of respective governments within our federation. The 

functions of Chairman belong to the third-tier of government i.e. 

local  bodies,  which  in  turn  falls  within  the  domain  of  the 

provinces and not the centre. The second reading of section 2(b) 

could  fall  foul  of  the  principle  of  federalism  and  could  possibly 

conceive  setting  up  of  parallel  offices  of  Chairman  for  discharge 

of functions under the Ordinance in the event that the power of 

the  Federal  Government  to  appoint  officers  to  discharge 

functions  as  Chairman  is  read  disjunctively  from  the  initial  part 

of  section  2(b)  that  limits  the  authority  of  the  Federal 

Government  to  appoint  persons  for  discharge  of  such  functions 

only  in  Cantonment  Areas.  In  such  case,  both  the  Federal 

Government and the relevant Provincial Government would have 

 
15.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

authority to simultaneously appoint Chairmen for purposes of the 

Ordinance, resulting in a conflict.  

19. 

In  view  of  the  Ordinance  and  the  Rules, 

it 

is 

inconceivable that the legislature had envisaged establishment of 

Arbitration Councils headed by Chairmen in each Foreign Mission 

at  the  discretion  of  Director  General  (Administration)  of  the 

Ministry  of  External  Affairs,  that  would  then  also  oust  the 

jurisdiction  of  the  Chairman  of  the  relevant  Union  Council  for 

purposes of the Ordinance. Rule 3 of the Rules reproduced above 

addresses  the  question  of  jurisdiction  of  the  relevant  Union 

Council  at  length  to  prevent  conflict  of  jurisdiction  in  case  the 

spouses  do  not  reside  within  the  same  Union  Council.  The 

proviso  to  Rule  6(1)  and  (2)  provides  for  service  of  notice  on  a 

party  to  proceedings  before  the  Arbitration  Council  through 

Consular Officers in Foreign Missions. Given that the Rules were 

promulgated  on  10.07.1961  and  the  SRO  was  issued  a  few 

months  later  on  08.11.1961,  the  Government  could  easily  have 

addressed  the  matter  of  establishment  of  office  of  Chairman  in 

Foreign Missions in Rule 3, instead of providing that notices can 

be served on parties through Consular Officers while proceedings 

are  continuing  before  Arbitration  Council  in  the  relevant  Union 

Council in Pakistan.      

20. 

In  view  of  the  above  it  cannot  be  implied  from  a  plain 

reading of the Ordinance and the Rules, that Arbitration Councils 

headed  by  Consular  Officers  as  its  Chairman  are  to  be 

established 

in  Foreign  Missions  of  Pakistan,  which  once 

 
16.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

established  would  oust  the  jurisdiction  of  Chairmen  Union 

Councils in Pakistan in relation to expatriate Pakistanis. 

21. 

The SRO also suffers from a further infirmity. It purports 

to vest authority in Director General (Administration) Ministry of 

External  Affairs  to  appoint  officers  as  Chairman  for  purposes  of 

section  2(b),  even  though  the  power  to  appoint  an  officer  as 

Chairman  (even  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  Federal  Government 

has the power to make such appointment across Pakistan and in 

Foreign  Missions  abroad)  has  been  vested  in  the  Federal 

Government,  without  any  authority  vested  in  the  Federal 

Government to sub-delegate the power further. 

22. 

In  Karachi  Cooperative  Housing  Societies  Union  Ltd.  VS 

Government  of  Sindh  (1990  MLD  389),  a  division  bench  of  the 

learned Sindh High Court held the following: 

19.  We  are  inclined  to  hold  that  if  a  judicial  power  or  even 

executive  power  is  conferred  by  the  relevant  statute  upon  a 

particular named Government functionary, the same cannot be 

delegated  in  the  absence  of  express  words  or  necessary 

implication,  as  the  maxim  "delegatus  non  potest  delegare",  a 

statutory power must be exercised only by the body or officer 

in whom it has been vested, will be applicable. 

The learned Sindh High Court relied on and reproduced para 32 

from  the  Halsbury's  Laws  of  England  (Fourth  Edition)  Volume  I, 

which, in relevant part, reads as follows: 

"32-SUB-DELEGATION  OF  POWERS.--In  accordance  with 

the  maxim  delegatus  non  potest  delegare,  a  statutory  power 

must  be exercised  only  by  the  body  or officer in  whom  it  has 

been  confided,  unless  sub  delegation  of  the  power  is 

authorised by express words or necessary implication. There is 

 
 
  
17.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

a strong presumption against construing a grant of legislative, 

judicial  or  disciplinary  power  as  impliedly  authorising  sub-

delegation;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  any  power  to  the 

exercise of which the designated body should address its own 

mind.  Even  where  a  power  to  make  decisions  is  exercisable 

only by the delegate itself, however, considerations of practical 

convenience  may  justify  the  entrustment  to  a  committee  or 

officers  of  powers  to  conduct  an  investigation  and  to  make 

recommendations as to the decision to be taken. 

23. 

In  Muhammad  Ashraf  Tiwana  VS  Pakistan  (2013  SCMR 

1159)  the  august  Supreme  Court  held  that  statutory  powers 

conferred  on  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of 

Pakistan by the legislature could not be delegated further, while 

explaining the underlying principles as follows: 

“It  is  well  settled  in  our  jurisprudence  that  a  discretionary 

authorization conferred on a person or body by statute, cannot 

be  delegated. 

It  has 

repeatedly  been  held  by  our 

Constitutional  Courts  that  the  exercise  of  such  discretionary 

function  is  in  the  nature  of  entrustment  and  the  statutory 

functionary  who  is  entrusted  with  exercising  his  judgment, 

acts  as  a  fiduciary.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  such  fiduciary  is 

obliged  to  exercise  discretionary  decision-making  functions 

himself,  it  is  also  a  necessary  concomitant  of  such  fiduciary 

performance  of  duties,  that  the  same  are  exercised  in  good 

faith for furtherance of the objectives of the statute.” 

24. 

This  court  in  Oil  and  Gas  Development  Company  vs 

Federal  Board  of  Revenue  (2016  PTD  1675)  set  aside  a  show-

cause notice issued by for want of jurisdiction and explained the 

principle underlying delegation of statutory powers and functions 

as follows: 

“18.       It  is  settled  law  that  a  delegate  cannot  further 

delegate its powers unless expressly authorized under the law. 

It  is  also  settled  law  that  in  order  to  enable  a  person  to 

 
 
 
18.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

delegate the powers or functions, there must be an authority, 

expressed or implied, to delegate. When power is conferred on 

a particular person, then that person alone has to exercise the 

powers and cannot transfer its exercise to another person. The 

august  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  'Muhammad  Ashraf 

Tiwana and others v. Pakistan and others' [2013 SCMR 1159] 

while  examining  the  power  of  appointment  of  Commissioners 

vested  in  the  Federal  Government  under  the  Securities  and 

Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan  Act  1997,  observed  and 

held that it was well settled law that a statutory delegate could 

not sub-delegate his or her powers. It would also be pertinent 

to quote relevant paragraph from the celebrated treatise titled 

'De Smith's Judicial Review' Seventh Edition as follows.- 

“A  discretionary  power  must,  in  general,  be  exercised 

only  by  the  public  authority  to  which  it  has  been 

committed. It is a well-known principle of law that when a 

power  has  been  conferred  to  a  person  in  circumstances 

indicating  that  trust  is  being  placed  in  his  individual 

judgment  and  discretion,  he  must  exercise  that  power 

personally  unless  he  has  been  expressly  empowered  to 

delegate it to another.” 

The  Indian  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  'Sahni  Silk  Mills 

(P)  Ltd.  and  another  v.  Employee's  State  Insurance 

Corporation' [(1994 5 Supreme Court Cases 346] has held as 

follows.- 

“By now it is almost settled that the legislature can permit 

any statutory authority to delegate its power to any other 

authority, of course, after the policy has been indicated in 

the  statute  itself  within  the  framework  of  which  such 

delegatee  is  to  exercise  the  power.  The  real  problem  or 

the  controversy  arises  when there  is  a sub-delegation.  It 

is  said  that  when  Parliament  has  specifically  appointed 

authority  to  discharge  a  function,  it  cannot  be  readily 

presumed that it had intended that its delegate should be 

free  to  empower  another  person  or  body  to  act  in  its 

place.” 

24. The principle underlying the maxim “delegates non potest 

delegare”  (i.e.  when  power  is  conferred  by  statute  on  a 

 
  
  
            
19.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

particular person it must be exercised by such person and not 

be  delegated  further  unless  the  statute  also  confers  authority 

upon  such  person  to  further  delegate,  either  expressly  or  by 

necessary implication), was applied by the learned Sindh High 

Court in Fareed Ahmad A Dayo VS Chief Minister Sindh (P L D 

2017  Sindh  214)  and  the  learned  Peshawar  High  Court  in 

Saleem  Wazir  Professor  Community  Medicine  vs  Government 

of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (2019 P L C (C.S.) 224). 

25. 

Thus,  in  view  of  settled  understanding  regarding  the 

principle  of  “delegates  non  potest  delegare”  alone,  the  SRO  is 

ultra vires section  2(b) of the Ordinance. As the SRO  is  without 

jurisdiction,  any  appointment  of  Chairman  made  by  Director 

General  (Administration)  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  a  foreign 

mission would be devoid of legal authority. And as no Chairman 

or  Arbitration  Council  exists  in  any  Foreign  Mission  of  Pakistan, 

including  Pakistan’s  High  Commission  in  United  Kingdom,  the 

question of ouster of jurisdiction of the relevant Chairman Union 

Council in Pakistan in the instant case does not even arise. 

26. 

The  second  question  for  this  court  identified  in  para.  11 

above  is  whether  provisions  of  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance, 

1961  have  extra-territorial  application  and  apply  to  divorce 

proceedings  in  relation  to  Pakistani  spouses  not  physically 

present in Pakistan at the time of pronouncement of divorce. 

27. 

The  question  was  considered  and  addressed  by  the 

learned  Lahore  High  Court  in  In  Muhammad  Talat  Iqbal  Khan 

through  General  Attorney  v.  Tanvir  Batool  through  Wasim  Iqbal 

and 2 others (2005 CLC 481), wherein it held the following: 

13.  The  submission  made  upon  the  basis  of  rule  3(b)  by  the 

learned  counsel  for  respondents  when  placed  in  juxtaposition 

 
20.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

with  the  provisions  of  Rule  3(A)  leads  to  the  inescapable 

conclusion  that  Rule  3(b)  only  relates  to  a  specific  situation 

where  the  wife  to  whom  divorce  has  been  pronounced  was 

actually residing within the territorial jurisdiction of one or the 

other  Union  Councils.  It  is  in  this  context  alone  that  it  has 

been  prescribed  that  a  Union  Council  where  the  wife  was 

residing  at  the  time  of  pronouncement  of  Talaq  shall  have 

exclusive  jurisdiction.  This  provision  is  not  exhaustive.  An 

exception to the same has been expressly provided in Rule 3-A 

which  provides  for  a  situation  where  the  whereabouts  of  the 

wife or her relatives is not known at all. The service of notice 

of divorce can be effected through proclamation in the press. 

14. For a parity of reasons, it is held that both the Ordinance 

of  1961  as  well  as  the  Rules  framed  have  extra  territorial 

applicability  and  apply  to  all  Muslim  Citizens  of  Pakistan 

wherever they may be. 

15. The rule of construction which the learned counsel for the 

respondents wants to be placed upon Rule 3(b) of the Rules of 

1961 would lead to very serious, nay absurd consequences. It 

would  imply  that  despite  the  pronouncement  of  divorce  by  a 

Muslim  husband,  the  wife  would  continue  to  remain  clothed 

with the status of his wife for simple reason that spouses were 

presently residing in a Foreign Country beyond the jurisdiction 

of  respondent  No.2  the  construction  would  defeat  the 

Injunctions  of  Islam  and  would  lead  to  anomalous  results. 

Indeed such an interpretation must be avoided. 

28. 

Section  1(3)  of  the  Ordinance  clearly  states  that,  “[i]t 

extends  to  whole  of  Pakistan,  and  applies  to  all  Muslim  citizens 

of  Pakistan,  wherever  they  may  be”.  Rule  3  addresses  the 

question of jurisdiction of the relevant Union Council in the event 

that  a  party  to  proceedings  under  the  Ordinance  is  not  residing 

in  Pakistan  at  the  relevant  time  and  the  proviso  to  section  6(1) 

and  (2)  also  provides  for  service  upon  a  party  through  a 

Consular  Officer  of  the  relevant  Foreign  Mission.  There  is  no 

 
  
  
 
21.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

explicit  provision  in  the  Ordinance  ousting  jurisdiction  of  the 

Chairman  of  the  relevant  Union  Council  in  case  proceedings 

under  the  Ordinance  involve  a  spouse  residing  outside  Pakistan 

nor  is  there  anything  in  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  or  the 

Rules by virtue of which such ouster can be implied. 

29. 

In  Pakistan  a  marriage  can  be  terminated  without  the 

need to establish fault on part of a spouse who is being divorced 

or  from  whom  divorce  is  being  sought.  It  was  held  in  Khurshid 

Bibi v. Muhammad Amin, PLD 1967 SC 97, that it is sufficient for 

a  wife  to  state  that  she  would  be  unable  to  live  with  the 

husband,  without  establishing  fault  on  part  of  the  husband  and 

the principle of no-fault divorce has been established ever since. 

The  question  of  whether  or  not  the  conduct  of  the  husband  is 

unconscionable  and  has  caused  the  wife  to  seek  divorce  is  only 

relevant for purposes of her entitlement to dower.  

30. 

The learned Lahore High Court held in Mst. Khurshid Mai 

v.  The  Additional  District  Judge  (1994  MLD  1255)  that,  “a  lady 

cannot  be  pinned  down  to  live  with  a  man,  against  whom  she 

has developed utmost aversion, and with whom she is finding it 

increasingly difficult  to live a normal life as wife. In Shakila Bibi 

v.  Muhammad  Farooq  (1994  CLC  230)  the  Lahore  High  Court 

was  even  more  unequivocal:  “It  is  also  well-established  in  law 

that a wife is not supposed to justify the reasons, on account of 

which she had developed hatred for her husband. It is sufficient, 

if it is shown that the wife has fixed aversion and hatred towards 

her  husband  and  there  was  no  possibility  of  any  reconciliation 

between  them.”  The  same  principle  was  reiterated  by  the 

 
22.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

learned  Peshawar  High  Court  in  Muhammad  Faisal  Khan  v.  Mst. 

Sadia  (PLD  2013  Peshawar  12)  and  by  the  learned  Baluchistan 

High Court in Bibi Feroza and 5 others v. Abdul Hadi (2014 CLC 

60). 

31.  Whether  it  is  a  husband  pronouncing  divorce  while 

following  the  procedure  prescribed  under  the  Ordinance,  a  wife 

dissolving her marriage pursuant to section 8 of the Ordinance in 

exercise of power to divorce delegated to her in the Nikah Nama, 

or  a  wife  seeking  dissolution  of  marriage  under  West  Pakistan 

Family Courts Act, 1964, the principle of no-fault divorce applies.   

32. 

The  principle  of  no-fault  divorce  in  Pakistan  also  helps 

construe the scheme of the Ordinance. The relevant case law for 

purposes  of  considering  the  third  question  listed  under  para  11 

above (i.e. the jurisdiction of Chairman Union Council in Pakistan 

in  relation  to  proceedings  under  the  Ordinance  involving 

expatriate Pakistanis) is summarized below: 

(i).  In  Muhammad  Salahuddin  Khan  v.  Muhammad  Nazir 

Siddiqui  and  others  (1984  SCMR  583)  it  was  held  that  if  the 

divorce is pronounced in accordance with the Islamic Law and 

the notice is sent to Chairman, Arbitration Council the divorce 

would be effective after ninety days of receipt of such notice.   

(ii).  In Ahmed Nadeem v. Chairman, Arbitration Council (1991 

MLD  1187)  it  was  held  that  no  form  of  notice  has  been 

prescribed by law and that any intelligible method can be used 

for such purpose.  

(iii). In  Mst.  Zahida  Shaheen  and  another  v.  The  State  and 

another  (1994  SCMR  2098)  it  was  held  that  even  failure  to 

send  notice  of  divorce  to  the  Chairman  Arbitration  Council 

does not render the divorce ineffective in Shariah.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

(iv). In  Muhammad  Asad  v.  Humera  Naz  (2000  CLC    1725) 

where the Muslim divorce fulfills the requirement of injunction 

of  Islam,  it  is  complete  by  itself  and  notice  of  divorce  to  the 

Chairman is merely operative as a proof thereof.  

(v).  In Syeda Wajiha Haris v. Chairman, Union Council No. 7, 

Lahore  (2010  MLD  989)  the  couple  was  in  Romania  and  the 

learned  Lahore  High  Court  relied  in  view  of  SRO  No. 

1086(K)61  dated  08.11.1961  that  it  created  a  remedy  and  a 

forum  for  reconciliation  between  the  spouses  under  Muslim 

Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 would be Pakistani Mission in the 

countries of their residence.  

(vi). In  Mst.  Sana  Asim  Hafeez  v.  Administrator/  Chairman, 

Arbitration  Council  and  Conciliation  Court  (2016  MLD  1061) 

the learned Lahore High Court held that both the parties were 

permanent residents of UK and Arbitration Council in Pakistan 

had  no  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  the  matter.  In  this  case  the 

husband was pursuing his divorce in Pakistan as the marriage 

was solemnized in Lahore, Pakistan.  

(vii).  In  Mst.  Gul  Zameeran  v.  Mst.  Aasia  (2017  CLC  1431)  it 

was  held  that  after  reconciliation  proceedings  fails  the 

Arbitration  Council  must  issue  certificate  for  effectiveness  of 

talaq after expiry of ninety days.     

(viii).  In  Muhammad  Afzal  Khan  v.  Chairman  Arbitration 

Council and another (2018 CLC 1125) the learned Lahore High 

Court held the following: 

16. The purpose of Arbitration Council is to hold reconciliation 

proceedings  between  the  spouses  and  if  the  matter  is  not 

reconciled,  the  Chairman  Arbitration  Council  has  to  issue 

certificate  of  effectiveness  of  Talaq  after  expiry  of  90  days, 

whereas it is prerogative and authority of the person, who files 

the  application  along  with  notices  of  Talaq  for  issuance  of 

certificate  of  effectiveness  of  Talaq  to  withdraw  the  same 

before  expiry  of  the 90  days  and if  the  said  application is  not 

withdrawn by the applicant (whether the applicant is husband 

or  wife),  the  Chairman  Arbitration  Council  cannot  refuse  to 

issue  certificate  of  effectiveness  of  Talaq,  especially  in  those 

cases,  when  the  other  side  does  not  appear  for  reconciliation 

proceedings.  Similarly,  if  wife  (in  case  of  delegated  right  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

divorce)  has  approached  the  Chairman  Arbitration  Council  for 

issuance  of  certificate  of  effectiveness  of  Talaq  and  notices 

have been issued to other side, whereas the other side fails to 

appear  before  the  Chairman  Arbitration  Council  and  in  the 

meanwhile  the  applicant  (wife)  or  the  person,  who  applied, 

dies  then  it  can  only  be  presumed  that  the  executor  of  the 

notices of Talaq had intention to pronounce Talaq as the same 

can  be  gathered  from  the  documents  of  Talaq.  Reliance  is 

placed upon Malik Khalid Riaz v. The Administrator, Arbitration 

Council, Hafizabad and another (2016 CLC 1522). 

(ix). In Mst. Asma Bibi v. Chairman, Reconciliation Committee 

and others (PLD 2020 Lahore 679)  the spouses were living in 

USA  and  the  learned  Lahore  High  Court  held  that  at  the  time 

of pronouncement of talaq wife was living in U.S and in view of 

the SRO No. 1086(K)61 dated 09.11.1961 officers of Pakistan 

Mission  abroad  were  authorized  to  discharge  the  functions  of 

Chairman  under  the  Ordinance  and  the  Chairman  Union 

Council had no authority to issue divorce certificate. 

33. 

In  view  of  the  reasoning  in  relation  to  the  first  two 

questions  mentioned  in  para.  11  as  discussed  and  addressed 

above  and  having  found  that  the  SRO  is  ultra  vires  the 

Ordinance, this court is not inclined to follow the judgments cited 

as Syeda Wajiha Haris v. Chairman, Union Council No. 7, Lahore 

(2010  MLD  989),  Mst.  Sana  Asim  Hafeez  v.  Administrator/ 

Chairman,  Arbitration  Council  and  Conciliation  Court  (2016  MLD 

1061),  Mst.  Asma  Bibi  v.  Chairman,  Reconciliation  Committee  and 

others (PLD 2020 Lahore 679). 

33. 

The legislative intent behind promulgating  the Ordinance 

seems  to  include,  inter  alia,  that  (i)  details  of  all  marriages  are 

to  be  recorded  in  a  register  that  is  available  for  public  scrutiny, 

(ii)  that  in  case  of  a  second  or  third  or  fourth  marriage,  the 

marriage is subject to grant of prior permission granted pursuant 

 
 
 
 
 
25.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

to  provisions  of  the  Ordinance,  (iii)  the  issuance  of  a  certificate 

declaring  that  a  divorce  is  effective  is  preceded  by  an  effort  on 

part of Chairman aided by representatives of the two spouses to 

attempt  a  reconciliation  within  a  period  of  90  days  from  the 

pronouncement of divorce. Given that in Pakistan the principle of 

no-fault  divorce  applies,  the  dissolution  of  marriage  is  not 

contingent  upon  compliance  with  procedural  requirements  of 

Section 7.  

34. 

Section 7 of the Ordinance is meant to put the spouse to 

whom  a  proclamation  of  divorce  has  been  addressed  by  the 

other spouse on notice and further to put in place a mechanism 

for  attempting  reconciliation  between  the  parties  within  the  90-

days prescribed period, failing which the divorce attains finality. 

Section  7(1)  is  mandatory  in  a  sense  that  not  abiding  by  it 

invites  penal  consequences  prescribed  under  section  7(2). 

However, the fate of a marriage does not hang on following the 

prescribed  procedure.  Section  7(3)  itself  provides  that  the 

divorce,  unless  revoked  by  the  party  issuing  it,  will  become 

effective  upon  the  expiry  of  the  90-days  period  prescribed  for 

purposes  of  reconciliation.  Thus,  while  not  following  mandatory 

requirements  of  section  7(1)  can  produce  penal  consequences 

for  the  person  acting  in  breach  thereof,  such  non-obedience 

doesn’t affect the validity of the divorce that automatically goes 

into  effect  after  expiry  of  the  90-days  period  from  the  date  of 

proclamation of divorce.     

35. 

The intent of the Ordinance is to regulate the recording of 

the  particulars  of  marriages  as  well  as  their  dissolution  and 

 
 
 
26.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

making  such  particulars  a  part  of  verifiable  public  record.  It  is 

such  public  record  that  is  then  relied  upon  for  purposes  of 

municipal law in Pakistan  to determine the status of a marriage 

(and  ancillary  purposes  such  as  for  example  the  right  to 

inheritance  etc.  upon  the  demise  of  a  person).  In  view  of  the 

scheme  and  purpose  of  the  Ordinance,  it  would  make  no  sense 

to  assume  that  a  parallel  marriage  dissolution  process  is  to  be 

established under an SRO purportedly vesting power in an officer 

to the Ministry of External Affairs to appoint Chairmen across the 

world 

in  Pakistan’s  Foreign  Missions,  without  creating  a 

mechanism  for  sharing  the  information  regarding  dissolution  of 

marriages  with  the  Union  Council  or  another  central  registry  in 

Pakistan.  

36.  Without  such  sharing  of  information  and  data,  the 

information  regarding  dissolution  of  marriages  pursuant  to 

proceedings  conducted  within  Foreign  Missions  abroad  would 

remain  in  silos,  defeating  the  underlying  purpose  of  the 

Ordinance to make such information available publicly for access 

and  verification.  In  view  of  the  pith  and  substance  of  the 

Ordinance,  it  cannot  be  implied  that  the  mere  appointment  of 

Consular  Officers  in  Pakistan’s  Foreign  Missions  to  act  as 

Chairman  for  purposes  of  section  2(b)  of  the  Ordinance,  would 

oust  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Chairman  of  the  relevant  Union 

Council by implication.   

37. 

In  order  to  appoint  Chairmen  and  Arbitration  Councils 

within  Pakistan’s  Foreign  Missions,  there  is  need  to  bring  about 

appropriate  changes  in  the  law.  In  order  to  give  effect  to  the 

 
 
 
27.                        W.P No. 21 of 2021 

object  and  purpose  of  the  Ordinance,  such  amendment  in  law 

would no doubt provide a mechanism to record the proceedings 

conducted  in  relation  to  Pakistani  nationals  (even  if  dual 

nationals  or  expatriate  Pakistanis)  by  the  Chairmen  and 

Arbitration Councils in Foreign Missions in such manner that such 

record  can  be  inspected  through  a  public  registry  accessible  in 

Pakistan.      

38. 

It  was  for  the  aforesaid  reasons  that  the  following  short 

order was passed on 24.02.2021: 

i.  S.R.O. No.1086-K/61 dated 08.11.1961 is ultra vires 

Section 2(b) of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 

(“Ordinance”). 

ii.  There is no Arbitration Council presently functional in 

Pakistan’s High Commission in UK that is able to conduct 

reconciliation  proceedings  for  purposes  of  Section  7  of 

the Ordinance and issue a Divorce Certificate. 

iii.  The  petitioner  has  been  unable  to  point  out  any 

illegality in the issuance of the Divorce Certificate issued 

pursuant  to  proceedings  undertaken  by  the  Arbitration 

Council in Islamabad. 

  The instant writ petition is accordingly Dismissed. 

           (BABAR SATTAR) 

   JUDGE 

Approved for reporting.  

Saeed. 
Dated: 26/3/2021 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
