ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Criminal  Appeal  No.198/2018 

Walayat Hussain  & another 

VS

The State, etc. 

Appellants  by: 

Mr. Jam Khursheed Ahmed, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Hasnain Haider, State Counsel. 
Ms. Qurratul Ain Ayesha, Advocate. 
M. Ishaq Khan, S.I/I.O. 

Criminal  Revision  No.31/2020 

Muhammad  Safeer Ahmed 

VS

The State, etc. 

Petitioner  by: 

Ms. Qurratul Ain Ayesha, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Hasnain Haider, State Counsel. 
Mr.  Jam Khursheed Ahmed, Advocate. 
M. Ishaq Khan,  S.I/1.0. 

Date of Hearing: 

20.07.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  J:  Through  this  single  judgment,  I 

intend  to  decide  the  captioned  criminal  appeal  and  criminal  revision  as  the 

same  are  arising  out  of one  and  same judgment  dated  10.10.2018, passed  by 

the  learned  Additional  Sessions Judge-II, (East) Islamabad  in case FIR No.23, 

dated  20.03.2015, U /Ss  302, 324, 34  PPC,  P.S.  Nilore,  Islamabad,  whereby 

appellants  Walayat  Hussain  and  Chenzeb  have  been  convicted  by  the  trial 

Court  in  terms  of Section 302(c) PPC  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  20 

years  with  fine of Rs.1,00,000/- each. They have  also been convicted  U /S  324 

PPC and  sentenced  to imprisonment  for 05 years with fine of Rs.50,000/- each. 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

2 

2. 

Brief facts referred in the instant criminal case arising out of complaint 

Ex.PA are that on 20.03.2015, complainant Safeer Ahmed/PW-1 was present at 

his  house  alongwith  his  sister  Mst.  Fareeda  Bibi, brother-in-law  Jahangir 

Ahmed,  mother  and  two  other  brothers  Munir  Ahmed  and  Muhammad 

Jahangir. At about 05:00 p.m. Chenzeb armed with  .30  bore pistol, his father 

Walayat Hussain,  armed  with  12 bore  rifle and  Muhammad  Ashraf armed 

with hatchet, appeared  on their rooftop and Muhammad Ashraf raised lalkara 

to  [ahangir  to  come  out  in  order  to  teach  him  lesson  for  supporting  and 

helping  Mst.  Amna  Bibi. In  the  meanwhile,  both  father  and  son  started 

indiscriminate firing, upon which complainant and  his family members tried 

to save themselves. Complainant's brother Amjad, who is a labour working in 

the vicinity came in the house after hearing the firing, Chenzeb with  his  .30 

bore pistol resorted  to firing, which landed  on the chest of Amjad, who  fell 

down  after receiving injuries. When complainant and  his family in  order  to 

save his  brother  Amjad rushed,  accused Chenzeb fired  with  .30  bore  pistol 

upon Farhat Jabeen W / o Muhammad [ahangir, which landed on her left side 

chest, whereas Walayat resorted to firing with his .12 bore rifle which landed 

on the legs of Mst. Fareeda Bibi/ complainant's sister and  one fire shot hit on 

left foot of complainant's  mother, who  also injured in the said incident. The 

said  incident  was  seen  by  complainant  as  well  as  his  brother  Muhammad 

Jahangir,  Munir  Ahmed  and  his  brother-in-law  Jahangir  Ahmed.  Injured 

persons  were  taken  to  hospital  where  complainant's  brother  Amjad, sister 

Mst. Fareeda Bibi and sister-in-law Mst. Farhat Jabeen succumbed to injuries, 

whereas mother remained under treatment. The complaint was converted into 

FIR No.23, dated  20.03.2015, U /S  302, 324, 34 PPC, P.S.  Nilore,  Islamabad 

(Ex.PJ).  Investigation was  completed by  Muhammad  Abbas, Inspector/PW- 

15,  Muhammad  Akbar,  S.1/PW-16  and  Muhammad  Aslam  Kalyar, 

Crl. Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl. Revision No.31-2020 

3 

lnspector/PW-18  in  different  intervals  of time,  arrested  the  accused  persons, 

recovered  weapons  of offence and  challaned  the appellants  in terms  of Section 

173 Cr.P.C. for the purpose  of trial. The trial Court  after recording  of evidence 

of 18 PWs and  03 DWs concluded  the trial and  convicted  the appellants  in the 

following manner:- 

In  the  light  of  above  discussions  and  findings; 
this  Court  is  of  the 
considered  opinion  that  the  two  accused  persons  namely  (1)  Walayat;  and 
(2)  Chenzeb  in furtherance  of their common  intention  have  committed  the 
offence(s)  of: 

(1)  qatle  amd  defined  under  Section  300  PPC  and  they  are  awarded 
punishment  under  Section  302(c)  PPC  and  are  convicted  as  such, 
for  a  sentence  of imprisonment  of twenty  (20)  years;  and  they  both 
have  to pay compensation  indioiduallq  to  the legal heirs of deceased 
Amjad,  Farhat  ]abeen  and  Farida  Bibi  in  the  sum  of  Rs.100,000/  
(Rupees  One  Lac  Only) 
to  each  of  the  legal  heirs  of  the  three 
deceased  persons  separately,  under  section  544-A  Cr.P.  C.  and  in 
case  failure 
to  further 
undergo  imprisonment  of Six  (6) months; 

to  pay  compensation, 

they  shall  have 

(2)  Attempt 

to  qatle  amd  punishable  under  Section  324  PPC  and  are 
convicted  as  such, for  a  sentence  of imprisonment  of five  (5)  years 
with  fine  of  Rs.50,000/-  (Rupees  Fifty  Thousand  Only)  each;  and 
in  case  of  their failure  to  pay  the fine  they  shall  have  to  further 
undergo  imprisonment  for  a  term of six  (6)  months; 

(3)  All  the  sentences  awarded  to  the  two  accused  persons  namely  (1) 
Walayat;  and  (2)  Chenzeb  are  directed  to  run  concurrently  and 
they are extended  benefit of Section  382-B  Cr.P.C. 

3. 

Appellants  are  aggrieved  with  the  impugned  judgment  and  claimed 

their acquittal,  whereas  respondent/ complainant's  side is also aggrieved  with 

the  same  judgment  and  claimed  enhancement  of  sentence  through  criminal 

revision as three  persons lost their lives in this case. 

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  contends  that  trial  Court  has 

committed  error  while  convicting  the  appellants 

in  violation  of  settled 

principles  of  law  where  prosecution.  has  failed  to  prove 

its  case  nor 

corroborated  the evidence through  independent  mode  and  manner;  that  PW-1 

and  PW-2 have  lodged  the FIR after consultation  with  family members  and  as 

such  considerable  delay  was  caused  in  the  registration  of FIR which  creates 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

4- 

doubt and  suspicion; that there are material contradictions and  discrepancies 

and dishonest improvement of eyewitnesses i.e. PW-1 & PW-5; that recoveries 

are  ineffective viz.  a  viz.  the  role  attributed  by  the  prosecution  witnesses 

which  has  not  been  proved  through  independent  evidence;  that  there  is 

glaring contradiction in the medical and ocular evidence and pallets recovered 

from  dead  body  of  Amjad were  of  .12  bore  gun  and  this  aspect  has  been 

referred in para-12 of the impugned judgment but all these aspects have been 

ignored by the trial Court and convicted the appellants only on one count that 

three persons have lost their lives, although the motive has not been proved, 

even the mode and manner was not explained by PWs, even parties have not 

come up with complete truth. 

5. 

Conversely, learned counsel for the complainant, who is also petitioner 

in  Crl.  Revision No.31/2020 argued  that  case has  been  proved  against  the 

appellants who have been assigned with specific role and committed murder 

of three  innocent  persons  without  any  justification whereas  trial  Court  has 

committed error and judgment impugned  is full of self contradictions which 

lacks the requirement  of a complete judgment  under  the law, even principle 

appreciated by the trial Court for award of sentence in terms of Section 302(c) 

PPC  is  not  made  out  from  the  bare  reading  of  evidence  recorded  by  the 

prosecution as it is case of capital sentence, whereas  settled principle of law 

has  not  been  considered  in  this  matter; that  appellants  should  be convicted 

U/S  302(b) PPC and  they  are  liable to  be  awarded  with  death  sentence on 

three counts. 

6. 

7. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that prosecution in order to prove its case has 

produced  Dr. Tanveer  Afsar Malik/PW-13 and  Dr.  Henna  Azmat, Medical 

Officer/PW-17, who  conducted the  autopsy/postmortem  of Amjad Hussain 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

5 

deceased,  Farhat  Jabeen  deceased,  Farida  Bibi deceased  respectively.  PW-13, 

who has conducted  the autopsy  of Amjad Hussain  has observed  three firearm 

injuries in the following manner:- 

i. 

u. 

Fire  arm  entry  wound  on  the  front  of  the  right  chest  on  the  3rd 
intercostals  space  5  cm  from  midline  with  slight  blackening  and 
charring  marks  measuring  1x1' cm.  X-Ray  was  done  and  pallet  was 
recovered  (metallic foreign  body)  overlying  10th  rib posterior  on  right 
side handed over  to police.  No  Exit  wound. 

Fire  arm  entry  wound  on  the  left  arm  lateral  aspect  with  slight 
blackening  and  charring  marks  measuring  1x1  cm.  X-Ray  was  done 
and  pallet  was  recovered from  wound  and  handed  over  to  police.  No 
exit  wound. 

iii.  Fire  arm  entry  wound  5  cm  below  the  axilla  left  side  with  slight 
blackening  and  charring  marks  measuring  1x1  cm  with  inverted 
edges.  Pallet was  recovered from  the wound  and no exit  wound. 

Whereas  PW-17 has  conducted  the  autopsy  of  Farhat  Jabeen  and  noted  the 

following injuries.-. 

1. 

Fire  arm  entry  wound  on  the  right  side  of chest  below  axilla  lateral 
aspect  measuring  1.5  cm  x  1.5  cm  with  slight  blackening  and 
charring marks  and inverted  edges.  No exit  wound. 

Bruise mark on  left lumbar aspect measuring  4 x 3  cm. 

2. 
X-Ray  was conducted  and pallet was found  and recovered from  left lumber 
aspect  area,  in  the  12th  rib  and  handed  over  to  police  in  the  sealed  bottle. 
Incision  was given  in  this area. 

Similarly,  injuries  noted  by  PW-17 on  the  dead  body  of  Farida  Bibi are  as 

under:- 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Fire  arm entry  wound  about  0.5 x  0.5  cm,  on  posterior  aspect of mid 
thigh 071  right  leg with  no blackening  but  slight  charring  marks. 
Fire  arm exit  wound  0.5 x  0.5 cm above  the right  knee on  lateral  side 
anteriorly. 
Fire  arm  entry  wound  0.5  x  0.5  cm  on  posterior  aspect  of mid  thigh 
on  left  leg  with  no  blackening  but  slight  charring.  Pallet  recovered 
from  the  wound  upper  aspect  of the  thigh  and  handed  over  to  police. 
No exit  wound. 
Fire  arm entry  wound  on  lateral  aspect of right  calf measuring  1  x  1 
cm  with  no blackening  but  slight  charring. 
Fire  arm exit  wound  on  the  medial  aspect  of right  calf measuring  1  x 
1  cm. 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

6 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Fire  arm  entry  wound  0.5  x  0.5  cm  on  medial  aspect  of right  ankle 
with  no blackening  but slight charring. 
Fire  arm  exit  wound  on  the  lateral  melleolus  of  the  right  foot 
measuring  0.5 x 0.5 cm. 
Bruise  with  entry  wound  over  the  medial  aspect  of  right  leg  above 
the  ankle  of right foot  measuring  0.5  x  0.5  cm.  Pallet  shown  in  the 
X-Ray  done. 

8. 

The above referred  evidence clearly spells out  that  all three  deceased 

have received firearm injuries, even pallets were recovered from dead bodies 

and  handed  over  to  the  1.0  alongwith  blood  stained  clothes  with 

corresponding hole as noted in the examination by the Doctors. 

9. 

The  prosecution  has  also  produced  the  National  Forensic  Science 

Agency report  Ex.PZI, which  confirms  the  use  of  four  kinds  of  weapons 

including shot gun, .30 bore pistol and smooth bore ammunition. 

10. 

The prosecution has produced  the eyewitnesses Muhammad Safeer as 

PW-1, Muhammad  Jehangir  as  PW-2,  Munir  Ahmed  as  PW-3, Jehangir 

Ahmed as PW-4 and  Mst. Raqeeba Bibi (injured) as PW-5, who corroborated 

each other and remained consistent on the point of attribution of specific role 

to each accused. 

11. 

Initial  investigation  was  conducted  by  PW-15 Muhammad  Abbas, 

Inspector,  who  reached  at  hospital  after  receiving  the  information  of 

occurrence, prepared  injury  statement  Ex.PS, PQ  &  PU  of  three  deceased 

persons and  managed  their  autopsy, however, investigation was transferred 

to Muhammad  Akbar, S.I  on 21.03.2015 on the very  next day  of the alleged 

incident who has fulfilled other requirements of investigation while preparing 

the recovery memos of blood stained clothes and  other articles given by the 

Doctor.  Matter  was  also  investigated  by  Muhammad  Aslam  Kalyar, 

Inspector/PW-18, who  received the complaint from Safeer Ahmed on which 

FIR was registered, prepared  un-scaled site plan  Ex.PZC and  also recovered 

the fire empties of .30 bore pistol, 09 empties of .12 bore through Ex.PZD from 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

7 

the  place  of  occurrence, arrested  the  accused  person  Muhammad  Ashraf, 

transmitted the recovered empties to FSL, also arrested Walayat and Chenzeb, 

interrogated  them  and  got  recovered weapons  of offence from  the  accused 

persons  and  submitted  final  report.  Statement  U/S  342  Cr.P.C.  of  the 

appellants was recorded by the trial Court, whereby accused Walayat Hussain 

admitted  his  presence  in  the  incident  while  answering  question  No.3  and 

claims  that  complainant  side  is  the  aggressor  who  attacked  at  his  house. 

Relevant extract of Q.No.3 is as under:- 

It  is  incorrect.  Actually  ]ehangir,  his  brother  Safeer,  Muneer,  Amjad 
(deceased)  son  of ]ehangir  Mohsin,  both  sons  of Muneer  namely  Husnain 
and  Saqlain,  the  uncle  of ]ahangir  namely  Khalil  Ahmed,  his  son  Rustam 
and  ladies  Fareeda  Bibi,  Amna  Bibi  and  Farhat  ]abeen  etc  suddenly 
attacked  my  house  whereupon  my  wife  Zamurd  Bibi,  daughter  Saiqa 
Parveen  and  daughter  in  law  Forin  Bibi  locked  me  in  a  room  and put  lock 
outside  the  room.  The  raiders  were  armed  with  deadly  weapons.  I  was 
three  ladies  (my  wife  Zamurd,  daughter  Saiqa  Parveen, 
alone  with 
daughter  in  law  Foreen  Bibi).  I  was  unarmed  at  home,  no  other  male 
member  was  present  at  home.  The  co-accused  Ashraf  and  Chanzaib  were 
not present  at home. 

Whereas  accused  Muhammad  Ashraf  denied  the  incident  and  accused 

Chanzeb has also denied the incident. All three accused appeared  as defense 

witnesses and recorded their stance in terms of Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. 

12. 

Learned trial Court while considering the entire evidence convicted the 

appellants and sentenced them for 20 years in terms of Section 302(c) PPC by 

highlighting certain discrepancies, which are as under:- 

• 

"Admittedly,  prosecution  has  not  produced  Mst.  Amina  Bibi  as  a 
witness  of this  case  nor  the  defence  side when  opted  to produce  defence 
evidence.  None  of  the  parties  brought  the  actual  details  of  the  motive 
aspect  of  the  case.  But  irrespective  of  the  fact  that  any  lalkara  was 
given  by accused Ashraf  or not as  the complaint  and FIR are  lodged  by 
complainant  party  after  deliberations  and  consultation  with  each 
other,  yet  from  above  evidence  one  thing  cannot  be  discarded  from 
consideration 
the  family  of 
that  there  was  some  dispute  between 
]ahangir from  complainant  side  and of Walayat from  accused  side  but 
both  the parties did not come  up with  truth  of the matter." 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

8 

• 

•  PW-18, 

the  vicinity 

IO/Inspector  Muhammad  Aslam  Kalyar 

in  his  cross 
the  fact  that,  " .....  .I  did  not  associate  any 
examination  admitted 
witness 
including  neighbourers  except  blood 
from 
relations."  No  explanation  is  offered  as  to  why  despite  presence  of 
score  of people  who  could  have  been  made  PWs,  the  IO/Inspector  did 
not  make  them  witness  of  incident  and  to  show  independency  of  the 
actions  of the police performed  in  the investigation. 
In  the  last  two  spells  which  were  of the  effective firing  accused Ashraf 
was  not  in  the  picture  anywhere  and  the  second  incident  of firing  was 
after a  pause  of atleast  10  minutes.  Like  witness  PW-3  Munir  deposed 
before  the  court  in  cross  examination,  " .......  Second  spell  of firing  is 
carried by  Chenzeb from  his rooftop  at my  brother deceased Amjad  and 
same  is  started  after  10  minutes  of  the first  spell".  It  is  an  admitted 
fact  that  there  is  no  use  of hatchet for  causing  injury  to  anyone.  I also 
found 
that  even  issuance  of  Lalkara  which  the  other  eye  witnesses 
saying  was before  the first  incident  of ineffective firing,  PW-4  Jahangir 
deposed  in  his  in  chief  that  such  Lalkara  was  after  the  second  spell  of 
firing,  in  which  deceased  Amjad  was  hit from  fire  of  Chanzeb.  PW-4 
Jahangir  Ahmed  materially  contradicted  the  other  eye  witnesses  here. 
Similarly  PW-3  Munir'  s deposition  that even  the second  spell of firing 
was from  the  rooftop  is  also  materially  contradicting  the  deposition  of 
other witnesses. 

•  Besides  I also found  a  contradiction  in  the  deposition  of eye  witnesses 
where  order  of causing fire  short  to  the  victims  was  differing.  Like  all 
saying  that first  Amjad  was  hit  then  at second  Farhat  Jabeen,  then  at 
third Farida  Bibi and  then at fourth  Raqeeba  Bi.  Whereas  PW-3  Munir 
in  the order of effective firing  brought  Farida  Bibi at second and Farhat 
Jabeen  at third in  the order. 

the 

their 

testimonies 

•  When  test of the  case  of Niaz  Supra  is applied  here  it seems  that it  is a 
case  where  the  witnesses  are  interested  witnesses  and  were  not  coming 
require 
truth.  Thus, 
up  with  whole  of 
corroboration  but  what  I  noticed  is  that  neither  the  medical  nor 
forensic  nor  the  other  evidences  df prosecution  are  supporting  its  case. 
Like all eye  witnesses  deposed  that accused  Chenzeb  had 30 bore  pistol, 
and  attributed  his  fire  shots  on  deceased  Amjad,  whereas  as  per 
medical  and  forensic  evidence  deceased  Amjad  suffered  12  bore 
gunshot  injuries  (see  relevant evidence  in  the  discussion  of points  No.I 
to III).  Similarly  scale  site plan at the place of deceased Amjad  does  not 
corroborate  where  two  empties  of 30  bore  were found  which  otherwise 
is  one  less  in  count  of the  injuries  suffered  by  deceased  Amjad.  This  is 
besides  that  the  injuries  suffered  were  never found  to  be  of from  a  30 
bore  weapon  rather of 12  bore gun. 

•  From  above,  it can  be said  that  the ocular account  of prosecution  is not 
straight  forward  and  is  not fitting  in  the  natural  circumstances  of  the 
case;  therefore,  to  seek  support  from  corroborative  pieces  of  evidence 
was  a  sine  qua  non  but  unfortUnately  what  appears  is  that  all  the 
corroboratory  pieces  of  evidence 
to  what 
prosecution's  ocular accounts  suggest  by deposing. 

in  negation 

stand 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

9 

13.  While considering the  above factors highlighted by  the  trial Court in 

the impugned judgment the trial Court has concluded the sentencing portion 

while relying upon 2017SCMR1639 

(Muhammad  Zafar  VS  Rustam  Ali)  and 

awarded  them  sentence in  terms  of Section 302(c) PPC with  the  concluded 

reasons in the following manner:- 

But  when  I  come  across  to  determine  the  question  of quantum  of 
97. 
punishment  for  this offence  to accused  Walayat  and  Chenzeb,  I found  case 
law  of  Muhammad  Zafar  v.  Rustam  Ali,  2017  SCMR  1639  (FB), 
where  in  the  similar  circumstances  when  a  learned  Division  Bench  of the 
Honourable  Lahore  High  Court,  Bahawalpur  Bench,  observed  that none of 
the  parties  came  with  whole  truth  and  both  the  parties  had  tried  to  twist 
and  mould  the  story  of  occurrence  in  its favour,  thus,  the  real  igniting 
cause  and  as  to  what  immediately  preceded  the  occurrence,  remained 
suppressed  by  respective  parties,  their  lordships  of  the full  bench  of  the 
Honourable  Supreme  Court  while  appraising  above  circumstances  in 
para-B found  themselves  of  the  considered  opinion  in  para-9  that  the  case 
against  the  said  accused  is  covered  under  Section  302(c)  PPC  and  not 
under  Section  302(b)  PPC.  So  in  awarding  the  punishment  I  would  be 
following  the case  law. 
98. 
Raqeeba  Bi injured  person,  the document  of MLR  was not formally 
produced  before  the  court,  thus,  cannot  be  seen.  But  it  is  borne  out from 
the  case  that  the  injuries  to  her person  were  during  the  incident  and from 
the fire  shot of accused Walayat. 
It  is,  thus,  since  the  two  accused  persons  Walayat  and  Chenzeb 
99. 
suppressed  material facts  and  their  conduct  of abscondance  suggests  that 
they had common  intention  and  they acted  in furtherance  of their common 
intention 
therefore  are  also  held for  criminal  liability  of  the  attempt  to 
qatle  amd  under  Section  324  PPC to Mst.  Raqeeba  Bi.  However,  since  the 
MLR 
the  accused  Walayat  cannot  be  awarded 
punishment  for  the  hurt  he  caused  to  Mst.  Raqeeba  Bi  in  addition  to 
punishment  of Section  324 PPC. 

is  not  produced, 

14. 

I  have  gone through  the  evidence as well  as  above referred reasons 

which  prevailed  the  trial  Court  for  award  of  sentence  of  20 years  under 

Section 302(c) PPC but not convinced with the reasons which are made basis 

for  award  of  said  sentence, rather  the  entire  judgment  seems  to  be  self 

contradictory whereby the trail Court has not appreciated the evidence on the 

touchstone  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  especially  when  accused 

persons/ appellants have come up with their specific pleas in terms of Section 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl. Revision No.31-2020 

10 

340(2)  Cr.P.C.,  wherein  principal  accused/ appellant  Walayat  Hussain 

acknowledged his presence in the incident and appeared as DW-2 in the trial. 

In such situation it is the duty of trial Court to apply the principle of sifting the 

grain from chaff would fix the responsibility of an accused following the rule 

of independent  corroboration, hence it  is the  duty  of the  Court  to  find  out 

truth  and  the  extent  of  responsibility  of  an  accused.  The  evidence  of  the 

witness  cannot be  brushed  aside  and  ruled  out  of consideration against  all 

accused for mere reason that one or more accused in the case were found not 

guilty  as  held  in  case reported  as  PLD 2002 SC 643 (Shera Masih  VS  The 

State). 

15. 

Similarly, trial Court has not set up the case in the impugned judgment 

while  considering  and  appreciating  the  law  regarding  the  award  of 

punishment  in cases where situation was not clear, although it is the duty  of 

prosecution  but  the  reasons  referred  by  the  trial  Court  for  declaring  the 

incident that  parties did  not come up  with  complete picture and  truth  is not 

justiciable from record, even the evidence, ocular account and FSL report were 

not evaluated vis-a-vis  the medical evidence, which clarifies the entire picture. 

16. 

I have gone through the judgment of trial Court word by word with the 

able assistance of the parties, which persuaded  me to hold that major portion 

of the impugned judgment negates the earlier part of the impugned judgment, 

even  the  highlighting  of  different  points  for  determination  as  referred  in 

Para-16, the mode and manner in which judgment was written, is considered 

to be an approach adopted by the Civil Courts while deciding different issues 

in  the  competent  civil jurisdiction,  such  aspect,  though  not  unlawful,  but 

bifurcating  the  evidence  in  bits  and  pieces further  complicate the  scenario 

referred  in  the  impugned  judgment,  rather  it  looks  a  confusing judgment 

where  motive  has  been  disbelieved, especially when  there  was  no  motive 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

11 

brought  on  record  by  the  prosecution,  even  the  trial  Court  has  declared  the 

prosecution  as  well  as  accused  party  that  they  have  not  come  up  with 

complete  truth,  it might  be the case, but  it is duty  of the Court  to consider  the 

admissible  evidence  in line with  the principle  of Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984 

for decision  of a case in a reasonable  manner.  The mistakes  conducted  by the 

1.0 could not be given a beneficial interpretation  in favour  of accused. 

17. 

The  judgment  relied  upon  by  trial  Court  is  also  considered  by  this 

Court  with  the  view  that  sentence  awarded  to  the  appellants  in  terms  of 

Section  302(c)  PPC  is  justiciable  or  otherwise.  In  order  to  answer  this 

proposition 

I  have  gone  through 

the  judgments  reported  as  PLD  1980 

Peshawar  1  (Gul  Hassan  Khan  VS  Government  of Pakistan  and  another), 

2000 SCMR  406 (Abdul  Zahir  and  another  VS  The State),  PLD  2003 SC  512 

(Muhammad  Saleem  VS  The State),  1981  SCMR  174 (Talib  Hussain  VS The 

State),  2001 YLR 3198 (Haji Shaukat  Ali  VS The State),  2005 MLD 389 (Saeed 

Shah  and  others  VS The State  and  others), whereby  this  Court  is convinced 

that principle  for award  of sentence while differentiating  the case from Section 

302(b) PPC to Section 302(c) PPC are different  which  were  not  appreciated  by 

the  trial  Court  in a  proper  manner.  The case of sudden  provocation  where  it 

could  not  be  ascertained  as  to  what  factors  motivated  the  commission  of 

offence or  where  grave  and  sudden  provocation  was  seen  in  the  moment  of 

passion  without  any  premeditation,  planning,  sentence  would  be  given  in 

terms of Section 302(c) PPC or where murder  was committed  by the legal heirs 

of  deceased.  The  golden  principle  settled  in  sentencing  regime  in  terms  of 

Section 302(c) and  302(b) PPC is qisas  and  tazir.  Similarly, Section 302(c) PPC is 

attracted  to those murder  cases which were committed  in those circumstances 

which do not attract  the qisas.  The injunction of Islam has provided  the qisas  as 

sentence, which  is not  applicable  in certain  circumstances,  therefore  for ready 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl. Revision No.31-2020 

12 

reference and guidance judgment reported as 2012 YLR 1366 (Tariq Mehmood 

VS State),  2003 P.Cr.L.11619 (Khan Muhammad  VS The State),  1998 P.Cr.L.T. 

111  (Walayat VS The State),  2003 YLR  727 (Nasir  Khan  VS The State),  PLD 

2007  SC  111  (lftikhar-ul-Hassan  VS  Israr  Bashir),  PLD  1996  SC  274  (Ali 

Muhammad  VS Ali  Muhammad)  and  PLD  2015 SC 77 (Zahid  Rehman  VS 

State)  were to be considered relevant for such kind  of proposition, although 

the  Apex Court  in  recent orders  remanded  the  criminal case where  certain 

principles of law  have  not  been considered in  a  proper  manner  by the trial 

Court, therefore, guidance has been sought from 2020 SCMR 414 (Nadar Wali 

VS  Sumaya  Gul),  2020  SCMR 293  (Naseer  Khan  VS  Said  Qadeem),  2019 

SCMR 542  (Talal  Ahmed  Chaudhry  VS  State),  2018  SCMR 511  (Shakeel 

Ahmad  Siddiqui  VS  Muhammad  Nauman  Siddiqui),  2018  SCMR  141 

(Muhammad  Ajmal  VS  State),  PLD  2018 SC  837 (State  VS Haji  Nabi  Bux) 

and 2017SCMR1946  (Tahir laved@  Tara VS State),  hence, by applying these 

principles  of  remand  it  is  appropriate  that  this  Court  will  not  decide  the 

appeal for the purpose of sentence or acquittal nor answer the proposition for 

enhancement  of  sentence  claimed  by  the  petitioner  through  connected 

criminal revision as it is the role of trial Court to apply its mind judicially for 

settlement  of  proposition  in  the  light  of  statutory  law  as  well  as  guiding 

principles of superior Courts in such eventuality. 

18.  While considering the above parameters, guidance and the evidence of 

this case, the learned Trial Court has wrongly awarded  the sentence in terms 

of Section 302(c) PPC without  application  of legal  principles settled  by  the 

superior Courts referred above despite the fact that ocular account vis-a-vis  the 

medical  evidence  speaks  otherwise, therefore,  impugned  judgment  of  trial 

Court  is not  in  accordance with  law. Hence the  captioned  Criminal  Revision 

No.31a020  (Muhammad  Safeer  Ahmed  VS  The  State,  etc.),  is hereby ALLOWED 

Crl.  Appeal  No.198-2018  & Crl.  Revision  No.31-2020 

13 

in the  manner  that  the  sentence  awarded  to the  appellant  is contrary  to legal 

principles, 

therefore,  same 

is  hereby  SET  ASIDE  and 

the  matter 

is 

REMANDED 

to the  trial Court  to give rehearing  to the parties  concerned  and 

rewrite  the judgment  in accordance with  law without  being prejudiced  by any 

of the observations  made by this Court  or from the previous  findings  recorded 

in  the  impugned  judgment.  Learned  Sessions  Judge  (East), Islamabad  shall 

consider  it appropriate  to decide  the  matter  herself or by entrusting  the same 

to any other Court  having  competent  jurisdiction.  However,  it is expected that 

court  seized with  the matter  shall conclude  the same within  the period  of two 

(02) months  by all means after summer  vacations. 

19. 

The  captioned  Criminal  Appeal  No.19Ba018  (Walayat  Hussain  & another 

VS  The State, etc.) is hereby DISPOSED  OF in above terms.  .  • 

(MOHSIN' Af<fff Aif'f<A'1(NI) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in open Court  on  <>(4  II\:  '{y-o@J.o  · 

Zahid 

