ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P No. 3279-2019 

Zafran Ali  

VS

Additional District Judge (East), Islamabad and others.  

Petitioner by: 

Ch. Naeem Ali Gujjar, Advocate.  

Respondent by: 

Hafiz Farmanullah, Advocate.  

Date of Decision:   

20.04.2022. 

…………………………………………………………………………………………  

   MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI  J.  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition,  the  petitioner  is  aggrieved  with  the  findings  of  the  Courts 

below, whereby suit for recovery of maintenance allowance as well as 

recovery  of  gold  jewelry  has  been  decreed  concurrently  in  favour  of 

respondent Saliya Tahzeem. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  writ  petition  are  that  the 

respondent Saliya Tahzeem has filed suit for recovery of maintenance 

allowance, expenses of delivery, recovery of gold ornament for herself 

as well as maintenance of her minor son on the ground that she was 

married to petitioner on 17.04.2011 against the dower of Rs. 2,000/-, 

which was paid. However, five (05) Tola gold ornaments were gifted to 

the  plaintiff/respondent  by  the  petitioner.  Both  the  spouses  were 

blessed with minor son Alian Ali on 23.06.2012, but as per stance of 

the  respondent  wife,  the  delivery  expenses  were  not  paid  by  the 

petitioner,  even  the  petitioner  has  not  maintained  her,  rather 

deserted  her  after  the  birth  of  minor  son  and  snatched  the  gold 

jewelry, which persuaded her to file suit for recovery of maintenance, 

expenses  of  delivery  and  recovery  of  gold  ornaments  on  20.01.2012. 

However, during the pendency of the suit, petitioner also filed suit for 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

W.P No. 3279-2019 

restitution  of  conjugal  rights,  but  same could  not  be  materialized  as 

the  petitioner  has  divorced  the  respondent  on  12.12.2014  and  suit 

for restitution of conjugal rights has been withdrawn and trial Court 

after  recording  of  evidence  of  the  parties,  has  passed  the  judgment 

and  decree  dated  29.11.2018,  whereby  the  maintenance  to  the 

respondent wife was granted @Rs.4000/- per month from April, 2012 

till the completion of Iddat period i.e. 12.12.2014 and Rs.4000/- per 

month  was  also  fixed  as  maintenance  of  minor  son  from  the  date  of 

his  birth  till  date  and  future  maintenance  alongwith  10%  annual 

increase.  In  addition  to  above,  the  claim  of  the  respondent  wife 

regarding gold jewelry has been settled as it has been maintained by 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (East),  Islamabad  vide  judgment 

and decree dated 15.06.2019, hence this petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  learned  Trial 

Court  has  not  appreciated  the  evidence  in  its  true  perspective, 

despite  the  fact  that  overwhelming  evidence  was  available  that 

respondent  is  a  disobedience  wife  and  she  is  not  entitled  for  the 

maintenance  as  she  herself  is  not  willing  to  reconcile  in  the 

matrimonial bonds, which is evident in the suit of conjugal rights. It 

has  further  been  contended  that  when  jewelry  was  already  with  the 

respondent ex wife, but courts below have not appreciated this aspect 

and drawn the conclusion contrary to record. 

4. 

Conversely, learned counsel for respondent No.1 contends that 

the  Courts  below  have  rightly  decreed  the  suit  on  the  basis  of 

available  record  and  evidence,  no  illegality  has  been  observed,  as 

such  the  scope  of  constitutional  jurisdiction,  especially  in  such  type 

of cases is very limited. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard and record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that marriage between petitioner and 

respondent  took  place  on  17.04.2011  against  dower  of  Rs.2,000/- 

3 

W.P No. 3279-2019 

alongwith gold jewelry of 05 Tola, which have been referred in clause- 

16  of  the  Nikahnama  Ex.P3,  which  is  admitted  between  the  parties. 

However,  parties  were  blessed  with  minor  son  Alian  Ali  on 

23.06.2012  at  PIMS  Hospital,  Islamabad  and  the  medical  expenses 

has  been  borne  by  the  father  of  the  respondent  wife.  However,  after 

that  she  has  taken  a  stance  that  she  has  been  deserted  and  not  a 

single  penny  has  been  paid  by  the  petitioner  as  it  was  the  primary 

responsibility of the petitioner to bear all the expenses incurred over 

delivery,  though  the  factum  of  desertion  has  been  denied  by  the 

petitioner  husband,  but  in  his  written  statement,  he  has  taken  a 

stance  that  the  plaintiff/respondent  was  bound  to  perform  her 

matrimonial  bonds,  but  she  is  spending  deserted  life  on  her  own 

wishes  without  consent  and  desire  of  the  defendant/petitioner.  He 

even  acknowledges  that  the  relationship  between  the  parties 

remained  cordial  till  10.01.2012.  However,  the  Courts  below  have 

fixed  the  maintenance  rate  w.e.f  April,  2012  on  the  basis  of  result 

extracted from the evidence, which is admitted position on record as 

such it is not the case of the petitioner that he has paid the same to 

the  respondent  wife  till  divorce  as  referred  in  the  evidence  in  an 

unequivocal terms:- 

7. 

This partition of the evidence has settled the entire claim of the 

respondent  wife  and  rightly  appreciated  by  the  trial  Court,  however, 

the  petitioner  has  not  disputed  the  rate  of  maintenance  as  he  is 

working  in  Medical  Company,  even  otherwise  he  has  referred  in  his 

evidence that he is ready to pay Rs.1000/- per month maintenance of 

the  minor  son,  though  it  is  not  relevant  at  this  stage  as  petitioner 

himself confined the case to the extent of maintenance of respondent 

wife,  which  is  admittedly  under  lawful  marriage  contract  with  the 

petitioner  till  date  of  divorce.  Mere  filing  of  suit  for  restitution  of 

  
     
4 

W.P No. 3279-2019 

conjugal rights could not be considered as valid justification for non 

payment of maintenance, especially when no positive effort has been 

placed  on  record,  in  which  default  is  attributed  to  the  ex-wife,  as 

such  the  respondent  lady  has  taken  the  plea  that  she  has  been 

treated  badly  in  inhuman  manner,  which  persuaded  her  to  file  the 

suit, soon after the desertion by the petitioner.  

8. 

Now adverting to the second question of gold jewelry, which is 

also  admitted  by  the  petitioner  in  the  evidence,  even  it  has 

specifically been referred in clause-16 of the Nikahnama, therefore, in 

the  light  of  admitted  position  and  record,  the  plea  raised  by  the 

petitioner is not justiciable. Even otherwise, the respondent wife has 

taken  a  plea  that  petitioner  has  snatched  the  gold  jewelry  on  the 

initial days of marriage with the help of his mother and sister, which 

factum  has  been  brought  on  record  in  her  cross-examination  by  the 

petitioner  counsel,  hence  such  admission  adversely  affect  the  entire 

case of the petitioner. 

9. 

In  view  of  above,  the  judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the 

Courts  below  are  with  four  corners  of  law,  no  illegality  has  been 

observed  in  the  concurrent  findings  as  question  of  fact  has  already 

been resolved against the petitioner, which could not be interfered by 

this Court in constitutional jurisdiction, hence instant writ petition is 

misconceived and same is hereby DISMISSED. 

RAMZAN 

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
              JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
