   ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.3608 of 2013 

Nosheen Agha etc 
 VS
Addl.District Judge, Etc 

Date of Hearing: -        23rd October, 2014 
Petitioner By: -            Hafiz Arafat Ahmad Chaudhary & Kashifa Niaz Advocates. 
Respondents By: -      Raja Rizwan Abbasi Advocate. 

MUHAMMAD  ANWAR KHAN KASI, CJ: 

J U D G M E N T 

   Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  petitioner  No.1  and  respondent  No.2  were 

spouses pursuant to their marriage solemnized on 9.11.2010 according to muslim rites. 

Subsequently, out of the wedlock a child namely Shah Bano was born on 19.8.2011. In 

the meantime, differences rose between the parties as according to petitioner, respondent 

No.2/husband  contracted  second  marriage  whereafter she  instituted suit  for  recovery of 

maintenance  for  herself  and  for  minor  daughter.  Simultaneously,  the  respondent  No.2 

filed a suit for jactitation of marriage against petitioner No.1 which is pending adjudication.  

During  the  course  of  proceedings  upon  suit  for  maintenance  filed  by  petitioner,  learned 

Family Judge vide order dated 2.2.2012 fixed interim maintenance of Rs.15,000/- for the 

minor girl, but the respondent No.2 failed to pay the same despite direction. Consequently 

vide  order  dated  15.4.2013,  learned  Judge  Family  Court  struck  off  the  defense  of 

respondent No.2 and decreed the suit in accordance with prayer whereby maintenance of 

Rs.  1,50,000/-  per  month  was  sought  since  August,  2011.  The  judgment  debtor 

[respondent  No.2  herein]  moved  appeal  which  culminated  upon  impugned  Judgment 

dated  4.6.2013  whereby  the  quantum  of  maintenance  fixed  by  learned  Judge  Family 

Court was reduced to the tune of Rs. 15,000/- per month with annual increase  @ 15 % 

beginning from August, 2011 till her marriage or till the adverse decision of learned Civil 

Court  regarding  legitimacy  of  minor  child.  Aggrieved  thereby,  petitioner  moved  present 

Writ Petition with following prayer;- 

“The  impugned  Judgment  dated  4.6.2013  passed  by  the  learned 
Addl.District  Judge  may  graciously  be  set  aside  by  upholding  the 
order/decree passed by the learned Family Judge, Islamabad.” 

2.             Learned counsel for petitioners submits that the impugned Judgment & Decree 

passed  by  learned  Appellate Court  is  preposterous  and  devoid  of  sound  reasonings  as 

the  conduct  of  respondent  No.2  before  learned  Trial  Court  has  been  completely 

overlooked by the learned Appellate Court. 

3. 

It  is  further  submitted  that  the  decree  passed  by  learned  Trial  Court  is  in 

accordance with statutory provisions contained under Section 17-A of Family Court Act, 

1964  as  the  suit  can  be  decreed  if  defendant  makes  default  in  payment  of  interim 

maintenance.  The reduction in quantum of maintenance by the learned Appellate Court 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  Writ Petition No.3608 of 2013 
2 

from  Rs.1,50,000/-  to  Rs.15,000/-  is  summersault  upon  the  rights  of  petitioner  without 

authority of law or reasoning.   

4. 

   It  is  next  submitted  that  respondent/husband  kept  prolonging  the  matter  of 

paying the maintenance for one reason or the other and when vide order dated 2.2.2012 , 

learned Family Court fixed the interim maintenance, he moved Review Application and an 

application  for  conducting  DNA  test  disputing  the  paternity  of  child,  but  the  said 

applications were dismissed vide order dated 1.2.2013 and the learned Trial Court passed 

an order by warning the respondent No.2 that if he failed to pay the interim maintenance, 

his right of defence will be considered closed, yet he failed to pay the same and instead 

moved  Writ-Petition  before  this  Court  which  was  dismissed  in  limine  vide  order  dated 

20.2.2013  and  I.C.A  thereagainst  also  failed.  The  learned  Trial  Court  after  dismissal  of 

I.C.A , once again ordered the respondent for payment of interim maintenance vide order 

dated 15.4.2013, but he did not pay any heed to it. Resultantly vide order dated 4.6.2013, 

his  defence  was  closed  and  the  suit  was  decreed  as  prayed  for  under  Section  17-A 

Family Court Act, 1964. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  further  stated  that  learned  Appellate  Court  transgressed  its 

jurisdiction by giving relief to the respondent No.2/appellant which he had not sought as 

the  appellant  had  merely  prayed  for  setting  aside  of  the  order  dated  15.4.2013,  but 

learned ADJ traveled beyond the scope of prayer by reducing the quantum of  decree to 

an extent of his own choice which runs counter to the law on subject, because a Court 

cannot award relief beyond the pleadings at appellate stage. 

6. 

  Learned counsel next averred that the impugned Judgment does not point out 

any evidentiary material on the basis of which it resorted to modify the Judgment passed 

by learned Trial Court. He pointed out that the respondent/husband is a cricketer of inter 

national 

level  with  abundant  resources  of  earning 

through  multinational/national 

companies and cricket clubs as well as advertisements and media appearances, thus he 

earns millions of rupees a month, hence the maintenance of Rs.1,50,000/- was very much 

in  accordance  with  the  status  of  respondent  No.2,  who  did  not  pay  a  single  penny  on 

account of maintenance to minor girl.  

7. 

 It  is  lastly  submitted  that  the  respondent  No.2  leveled  highly  unethical  and 

immoral allegations against the petitioner No.1 despite having remained unsuccessful in 

DNA expedition. He did not contribute in upbringing of minor knowingly that petitioner is 

not  an  independent  woman  as  her  parents  have  died  and  she  has  limited  sources  to 

maintain the family. The learned counsel for petitioner has placed reliance on case laws 

titled as (i) “ Messrs A.R.Builders (PVT) Ltd. VS Faisal Cantonment Board etc” [ PLD 2004 

Karachi 492]  wherein it is held that “ This is an established law that the Courts would not 

travel outside the scope of suit to grant either final or interim relief of the nature, which has 

no nexus with the facts pleaded in the plaint and/or relief sought in the suit. The denial of 

facts in the written statement and pleading additional grounds in written statement would 

not authorize the Courts to enlarge the scope of suit, when plaintiff had not pleaded any 

such  fact  nor  had  sought  relief  of  the  nature.  The  Courts  are  bound  in  law  to  confine 

themselves to the reliefs sought and/or which flow from the facts pleading in the suit , (ii) “  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                  Writ Petition No.3608 of 2013 
3 

Mst.Jannat  Bibi.  VS  Sher  Muhammad  etc”  [1988  SCMR  1696]  wherein  it  is  held  that  “ 

Party  is  not  permitted  to  deviate  from  his  or  her  pleadings,  nor  can  the  Court  set  up  a 

different  plea  for  a  party  and  decide  the  suit  on  that  basis,  much  less  at  the  appellate 

stage,---  (iii) “ Noor Muhammad and another. VS Muhammad Ishaq and another “[2000 

MLD 251] wherein it is held that “Party was not permitted to deviate from his pleadings nor 

could  the  Court  set  up  a  different  plea  for  a  party  and  decide  the  suit  on  the  basis 

muchless at appellate stage, --- (iv) “Khawaja Jameel Ahmad. VS Judge, Family Court, 

Multan and two others” [2007 YLR 1401], wherein it is held that “ Default in payment of 

maintenance by petitioner. Interim maintenance allowance of Rs. 1000/- fixed by Family 

Court, was upheld by Appellate Court. Applications by petitioner for recalling order fixing 

amount of dower had been dismissed by Appellate Court, validity ----- Held, Family Court 

was  fully  justified  in  closing  petitioner’s  right  of  defence  under  Section  17-A  of  West 

Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  when  petitioner  defaulted  in  payment  of  interim 

maintenance”—(v)  “  Arif  Sana  Bajwa.  VS  Additional  District  Judge  (Mushtaq  Ahmed 

Tarar), Lahore and four others” wherein it is held that “ Family Court was not denuded of 

its power under the provisions of West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964, to pass interim 

order for maintenance. Both under statutory law and Islamic Law, the father was obliged 

to provide maintenance to his child. Order of Family Court directing the father was obliged 

to  pay  maintenance  to  his  minor  children  during  the  pendency  of  the  suit  was  just  and 

according  to  the  situation  demanded.  Father  was  given  opportunity  to  deposit  part  of 

maintenance allowance which had become due against him as token of goodwill but he 

had refused to deposit any amount. Conduct of the father throughout the proceedings of 

the matter also did not entitle him to any discretionary relief.--- No illegality or irregularity 

had been committed by Appellate Court while passing the Judgment against the father----- 

High  Court,  in  exercise  of  Constitutional  jurisdiction  declined  to  interefere  with  the 

Judgment  and  decree  passed  by  the  Courts  below-----  Constitutional  petition  was 

dismissed in circumstances and (vi) “Syed Zubair Shah. VS Mst.Shahnaz Anwar and two 

others”  [2010  MLD  726]  wherein  it  is  held  that  “  Section  17-A  of  West  Pakistan  Family 

Court  Act,  1964  empowered  the  Family  Court  to  pass  interim  order  for  maintenance 

during the pendency of suit for maintenance and in case of default by the defendant, the 

Court could strike off the defence of the defendant and could also decree the suit--- . In 

the present case, on account non-payment of interim maintenance, order passed by the 

Family Court on the application filed by the plaintiff Under Section 17-A of West Pakistan 

Family  Courts  Act,  1964  was  strictly  in  accordance  with  law  and  did  not  call  for 

interference by any Court.   When the order of  Family Court was not complied with, the 

defence  of  the  defendant  was  rightly  struck  off  and  the  suit  of  the  plaintiff  was  rightly 

decreed.”  

8. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  refuted  the  above 

arguments by submitting that real intent of petitioner No.1 is to extort money from him on 

the pretext of maintaining minor girl. He alleged that the petitioner No.1 belongs to show 

business  field  and  is  a  model  by  profession  who  revealed  her  original  ways  soon  after 

getting married as she used to mix up with wealthy people and became pregnant when he 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                  Writ Petition No.3608 of 2013 
4 

was  abroad  on  a  cricketing  tour  to  New  Zealand  and  he  immediately  denounced 

parentage whereafter divorced her on 17.4.2011 in presence of witnesses.  

9. 

Learned counsel next submits that respondent moved transfer application to the 

learned  District  Judge  which  was  pending  at  the  time  when  Judgment  &  decree  dated 

15.4.2013  was  passed  and  said  order  was  brought  into  the  knowledge  of  learned  Trial 

Court, but still it proceeded to pass the decree by striking off his defence. 

10. 

Learned  counsel  lastly  submits  that  the  impugned  appellate  order  has  been 

passed  correctly as  the quantum  of  maintenance  was  fixed  by  learned  Trial  Court itself 

vide  order  dated  2.2.2012  as  interim  maintenance  while  taking  into  account  the  same 

earning resources at that time. He clarified that respondent is earning an amount of Rs. 

72,945/-    being  member  of  ZTBL  cricket  team,  therefore,  the  quantum  of  maintenance 

decreed  by  learned  Trial  Court  is  way  above  the  total  monthly  earnings  of  respondent 

No.2.  Learned counsel for respondent No.2 has placed reliance on case laws titled as “ 

Lieutenant Iffat Kazmi etc. VS Shuja Akbar Shah etc” [PLD 2005 SC 395], “ Javed Ahmad 

alias  Javed  Iqbal.  VS  Addl.District  Judge  Lahore  and  others”  [2013  YLR  1362],  “ 

M.Saleem Ahmad. VS Mst.Sabira Begum etc” [2001 YLR 2329], “ Iftikhar Nazir Ahmad 

Khan etc. VS Ghulam Kibria and others” [PLD 1968 Lahore 587], “ Manzoor Hussain .VS 

Zahoor Ahmad etc “ [ 1992 SCMR 1191], “ Bashir and others. VS Ilam Din and others” 

[PLD 1988 SC 8], “ Shah Jahan and others. VS Syed Amjad Ali, Hawaldar and others.” [ 

2000  SCMR  88],  “  Tariq Mehmood.  VS  Collector,  District Gujranwala  and  two  others”  [ 

1991 CLC 793], “ Faiz Ahmad and twenty three etc. VS Ahmad Khan and seven others” 

[PLD 2013 Lahore 234], “ Abdul Waheed through legal heirs and others. VS Mst.Mumtaz 

Gulshan  and  two  others”  [2013  YLR  239],  “  The  Province  of  East  Pakistan.  VS 

Muhammad Hussain Mia” [PLD 1965 SC 1], “ Syed Imtiaz Hussain .VS Muhammad Salim 

etc.  “  [2004  MLD  1548].  “  Muhammad  Salim.  VS    Lahore  Development  Authority  etc” 

[1993  MLD  2312],  “  Syeda  Sameera  Akhlaq  and  another.  VS  Judge  Family  Court, 

Lahore” [2011 MLD 964], “ Awal Ameer. VS Additional District Judge and others.” [2013 

MLD  1342],  “  Shah  Nawaz  and  another.  VS  Nawab  Khan”  [PLD  1976  SC  767],    &  “ 

Shafqat Abbas. VS Zabia Shafqat” [2003 YLR 2364].  

11. 

12. 

Heard & record perused. 

Before  evaluating  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  present  case  it  would  be 

pertinent  to  note  that  if  defendant  defaults  in  making  payment  of  interim  maintenance, 

Section 17-A of Family Court Act, 1964 provides two separate penal consequences; one 

striking off the right of defense while the second outcome may be to decree the suit. From 

the joint reading of Sections 17-A and 17-B of Act supra it is clear that by having used the 

word ‘may’  the legislature did not intend to make passing of decree mandatory rather it 

has  been  left  upon  the  discretion  of  learned  Trial  Court  to  consider  facts  and 

circumstances of each case.  For ready reference Section 17-A is reproduced;- 

“Section 17-A. Interim order for maintenance..- At any stage of 
proceedings  in  a  suit  for  maintenance  ,  the  Family  Court  may 
pass an interim order for maintenance, whereunder the payment 
shall be made by the fourteenth of each month, failing which the 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                  Writ Petition No.3608 of 2013 
5 

Court  may  strike-off  the  defence  of  the  defendant  and  decree 
the suit. ‘’ 

13. 

Insertion of Section 17-B further explains the circumference as well as the mode 

of  exercising  the  authority  in  the  shape  of  making  reasonable  inquiry  of  the  matter  in 

question before decreeing the suit, due to default. For ready reference, Section 17-B is 

reproduced hereunder;- 

“  Power  of  the  Court  to  issue  Commission.  Subject  to  such 
conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may issue a 
Commission to.- 

Examine any person, 
Make a local investigation, and  

(a) 
(b) 
(c)       Inspect any property or document. “ 

14. 

Reverting to the instant case, it is evident from record of proceedings before the 

learned Trial Court that vide order dated 2.2.2012, interim maintenance to the tune of Rs. 

15,000/- was ordered to be paid by respondent No.2/defendant, but on the next date of 

hearing i.e 8.3.2012 defendant moved application for permission to conduct DNA test of 

minor, which remained pending till order dated 1.2.2013, therefore, it was dismissed and 

case  was  again  adjourned  for  payment  of  interim  maintenance,  but  it  remained  unpaid 

and  on  next  date  i.e  20.2.2013  once  again  case  was  adjourned  for  2.3.2013  when 

defendant  moved  application  for  further  time  to  pay  interim  maintenance,    which  was 

allowed and the case was adjourned for 4.3.2013. In the meantime, defendant/respondent 

No.2  assailed  order  dated  2.2.2012  through  Writ  Petition  No.  653/2013  which  was 

dismissed in limine and I.C.A was also dismissed.  On 4.3.2013, case before learned Trial 

Court  was  adjourned,  but  despite  dismissal  of  said  Writ  Petition  and  I.C.A  thereagainst 

defendant did not pay the interim maintenance, resultantly vide order dated 15.4.2013, his 

right  of  defense  was  struck  off  and  the  suit  was  decreed  as  prayed  for.  This  position  

verifies the fact that there has been a clear default on the part of defendant/husband in 

payment  of  interim  maintenance  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  learned  Trial  Court  wrongly 

invoked the provision of Section 17-A I of Family Court Act, 1964. 

15. 

However,  the  learned  Trial  Court  as  well  as  the  learned  Appellate  Court  while 

decreeing  the  suit  did  not  refer  to  any  material  on  the  basis  of  which  quantum  of 

maintenance was adjudged. This error floating on the surface amounts to negation of the 

requirement  contained  in  Section  17-B  of  Family  Court  Act,  1964,  because  both  the 

Courts on one hand failed to inquire into the financial position of defendant/husband and 

also did not take into account the justification in the context of normal needs of minor girl 

in custody of her mother. 

16. 

Moreover, mandate of second penal consequence provided under Section 17-A 

embraces the expression of ‘decree’  which though has not been defined in Family Court 

Act, 1964, yet according to settled law a  decree invariably refers to judicial determination 

of a matter in controversy and such determination cannot be done without  application of 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  Writ Petition No.3608 of 2013 
6 

mind  in  accordance  with  evidence  and  law  on  the  subject,  therefore,    impugned 

Judgments mechanically upholding prayer of a suit cannot be called a decree. Guidance 

is sought from case of “Hyderabad Development Authority through M.D VS Abdul  Majeed 

etc” [PLD 2002 SC 84] and “ Messers UBL. VS Messers Silver Oil Mills Ltd. [ 2003 SCMR 

116].  

17. 

In  consideration  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  case  as  well  as  the  huge 

amount of maintenance demanded by the minor  through her next friend, it was incumbent 

upon  the  learned  Trial  Court  to  have  sought  evidence  of  plaintiff-petitioner  in  proof  of 

justification concerning the quantum of maintenance and financial position of defendant-

respondent No.2, similarly reduction in quantum of maintenance by the learned Appellate 

Court without dilating upon the above factors is also unwarranted. 

18. 

In sequel of above discussion, the present petition is disposed-of in the manner 

that  impugned  Appellate  Judgment  dated  4.6.2013  is  set  aside  and  the  Judgment  & 

decree  passed  by  learned  Trial  Court  is  restored  to  the  extent  of  striking  of  defense  of 

respondent No.2 while to the remaining extent, the case is remanded to the learned Trial 

Court  to decide the quantum of maintenance after taking evidence of petitioner viz-a-viz 

financial  status  of  respondent  No.2.  The  suit  shall  be  decided  within  a  period  of  one 

month. The parties are left to bear their own costs. 

                                  (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Announced in Open Court, on this 2nd   day of December,  2014.     

Approved for Reporting. 

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

S. Akhtar 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
