ORDER SHEET
tN TH,E  ISLATVTABAD  HIGH COURT.  ISLAMABAp.
JUqrchL  DFPAFTM.ENT

Crimlnal  Misc. No. 937-8l  2O2O
Nazim Hussain
VS
The State

S. No. of
order/
proceedlngs

Date of
order/
Proceedlnos

03.09.2020

Order with signature  of Judge and that of parties
or Gounsel where necessary.

Mr. Sajjad Ahmad  Bhatti, Advocate for petitioner,
Syed  Shahbaz Shah, learned State Counsel,
Abdul Sattar Baig S.H.O. and lnspector  Anees
Akbar/|.O. with record.

Through  the instant petition,  petitioner
(Nazim Hussain) seeks post-arrest  bail in FIR
No.115,  dated  27.O4.2O2O,  under Section 3O2,
1.4&149  PPC, registered  at Police  Station
Nelore, lslamabad.
2.  Briefly,  the allegations  set-forth in the FIR
are that Mst. Ayesha Bibi (deceased)
contracted love marriage with one Muhammad
Ali and FIR No.59l2O2O  under Section  365-8/34
PPC was registered on 01.03.2020,  wherein
she got recorded statement under Section  164
Cr.P.C  to the effect that she was not abducted
by anyone and contracted  marriage with her
free consent.  The petitioner  and others got the
marriage dissolved  through a divorce deed
which was not accepted by the !ady; that on
27.04.2020  at about O7:45 pm, when she was
confronted with the said divorce deed,  she
refused to accept  the same and rushed out of
the house; that she was then chased by the
petitioner,  co-accused Nasir  Hussain,
Jahangir, Noor, Talib Hussain  and Haji Ahmad;
she was intercepted in the fields where co-

Criminal  Misg. Nq. 937-8/202!

-2-

accused  Nasir Hussain caused her death  by
firing with .30 bore pistol.
3.  Learned counsel for  the petitioner
contends  that it was an unseen occurrence;  no
overt act is attributed to the petitioner; co-
accused Jahangir, Noor Hussain, Talib and
Haji Ahmad  have been declared innocent by
the police; no recovery  was effected  from the
petitioner; investigation  is complete  and he ls
no more required for further probe. Learned
counsel placed reliance  upon case  laws
reported  as PLD 2004 SC 477, 1997 SCMR 445

and 1998 PCT.LJ  11.
4.  On the other hand, learned  State
Counsel  argued that the material collected by
the prosecution  fully implicates  the petitioner
for the commission of alleged offence,  whereby
an innocent lady had been murdered as a
result of honour killing;  offence alleged entails
death punishment and that no one has the
authority to take law in his own hands in the
name of so-called honour, therefore,  petitioner
is not entitled to the concession of bail.
Learned State Counsel refers case laws
reported as 2019 PCT.LJ  143 [KarachiJ  and 2018
PCT.LJ  181 [Peshawar].
5. 
6. 
Record  reveals  that father and wife of
the petitioner namely  Khadim Hussain  and
Mst.Abida  Bibi in their respective statements
under Section 161 Cr.P.C specifically
nominated the petitioner  to have chased the
deceased along with principal accused Nasir
Hussain,  who intercepted the late in the open

Arguments  heard, record perused.

Criminal  Misc. No. 937-8/2020

-3-

flelds and caused her death by firing with .30
bore pistol  in the presence  of the petitioner.

There is no denial of the fact that the
deceased  had contracted love marriage with
one Muhammad Ali and FIR No.59/2020
regarding  the said episode was registered on
01.03.2020 under Sections  365-8/34  PPC,
wherein  she got recorded  statement under
Section 164 Cr.P.C to the effect that she was
not abducted  by anyone  and that she
contracted marriage  with her free will.
7. 
lt also emerges from the record that the
petitioner along with others managed  to get the

"ngry, 

marriage  dissolved  and when allegedly  the late
was confronted with the divorce deed, she
refused to accept the same and
became 
in retaliation rushed out of the house,  chased
by the petitioner  and his brother, principal
accused Nasir Hussain, who was having  .30
bore pistol. The late was intercepted in the
fields, where allegedly  in  presence of
petitioner,  principal  accused Nasir Hussain
caused her death with .30 bore pistol. The role
of the petitioner appears to  be one of
commanding  in nature.
8. 
The material  placed  on record, prima
facie, connects the petitioner  with the
commission  of alleged  offence which  entails
death punishment.  There  is nothing on record
or even been argued that the petitioner had
falsely been implicated or that he had no
objection  over the love marriage  of the late.
9. 
The Hon'ble Lahore High Court in
Uner Ql? V. The State and others (2017 YLR

Crimina!  Misc. No. 93?-F{20.20

-4-

Note 378), in an identical situation, rejected  the
bail application of  the  father of  the
victim/deceased  girl, even on the ground of
delay in conclusion  of trial since more than two
years of his arrest.  lt was held that-

"The post arrest bail on statutory  ground  is
being sought by the father of the victim in an
honor killing case. Petitioner stood
nominated in the FIR as the one who was
present at the time of occurrence.  ln other
words,  as per the record, the offence was
committed in his presence  in his house and
he being the head of the family at least
remains inactive to avoid the offence. Before
his eyes, at least his daughter  was being
mercilessly  killed but  he  acts  with
desperatlon.  Any father expected  to be more
careful and protective for the daughter
instead of son."

10.  The Hon'ble Peshawar  High Court in
Eiz  Ullah V. The State (2016 P.Cr.LJ  681)
refused to grant bail to an accused  of Karo Kari
(Honour Killing) even on  the  basis of
compromise  by observing that according  to
Section 343 Cr.P.G, in cases of Karo Kari
(Honour  Killing), Section  302 PPC has not been

declared  as compoundable.
11. 
The case laws relied upon by learned
counsel for the petitioner do not extend any
help to the petitioner due to having  distinct
facts and circumstances.
12. 
ln view of above  tentative assessment,
petitioner is not entitled to the concession  of
post arrest bail, consequently, the instant bail
petition is dismissed.
13. 
Needless to  mention that this is
tentative  assessment for the purpose of this

Criminal  Misc. No. 937-BI2O2O

-5-

petition only, which shall not affecUinfluence
trial of this case in any manner.

lmrrn

(FIAZ  AHMAD  ANJUM JANDRAN)

JUDGE

