JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Civil  Revision  No.  389 /2018. 

Capital  Development  Authority 

VS

Muhammad  Saeed  & others. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr. Amir  Latif  Gill, Advocate. 

Respondent  by: 

Raja  Rizwan  Abbasi  and  Ch.  Gulfam  Ashraf  Gora ya, 
Advocates. 

Date  of Decision: 

09.03.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHfAR  KAYANI,  J:-  Through 

this  Civil  Revision, 

the 

petitioner  CDA  has  assailed  the  judgment  &  decree  dated  28.05.2018,  passed  by 

learned  Civil  Judge,  l"  Class  (East),  Islamabad  and  order  dated  05.09.2018,  passed 

by learned  Additional  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad,  whereby  suit  for declaration, 

permanent  and  mandatory  injunction  filed by respondents  was  decreed  concurrently. 

2. 

Brief facts referred  in the  instant  civil revision  are  that  respondents  filed a suit 

for  declaration,  permanent  and  mandatory  injunction  on  the  ground  that  they  are 

entitled  for plot  No.354,  Chak  Shehzad,  Islamabad  which  was  approved  by CDA  to 

be  allotted  to  the  respondents  against  their  claim  for  built-up  property  under 

rehabilitation  scheme/policy, 

issued  by  the  CDA  but  the  allotment  letter  was  not 

issued to him. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  CDA  contends  that  respondents  are  not 

eligible  for  allotment  of  plot  under  Rehabilitation  Policy,  1984  as  well  as  under 

Rehabilitation  Policy,  1996 but  despite  this  fact  their  case  has  been  considered  in 

connivance  with  CDA  official i.e.  the  then  Deputy  Director  Land,  who  appeared  as 

DW-1/Taimoor  Ahmed,  Deputy  Director  Land,  CDA  and  while  appearing  before 

the  Court  during  trial  conceded  the  claim  of  plaintiffs/respondents  and  extended 

C.R  No.389/2018 

2 

undue  benefit  to  the  respondents  for  allotment  of  plot;  that  Tairmoor  Ahmed, 

Deputy Director Land,  CDA when recorded his statement before the trial Court he 

was not in possession of any record, nor any such record has been prepared by the 

CDA under any process and trial Court has blindly passed the impugned judgment & 

decree without  any  record; that  at  that  time  counsel for  CD A  was  also part  and 

parcel of entire fraud  with  officials of CDA  as well as  respondents and  gave his 

opinion not to file any appeal against the said judgment & decree of the trial Court, 

however, when the said fraud has been surfaced on record, appeal was already time 

barred  and  as  such  the  entire  chain  in  the  claim  of  respondents  including 

respondents, CDA  officials as well as  counsel for CDA  were in  league with each 

other to  commit this  fraud in  the  Court through  technical maneuvering; that  this 

Court in civil revision has ample powers to consider the evidence and record, where  

after this Court may condone the delay caused in filing of appeal; that  such hyper 

technical objection and  time limitation should not  be considered in  the interest of 

justice to set aside the irregularities and illegalities committed by the Courts below, 

which should not be allowed to perpetuate on the basis of a wrong judgment of the 

Courts below. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  contends  that  concurrent 

findings of the courts below in favour of respondent could not be set aside merely on 

technical grounds as CD A/petitioner  has conceded the claim of respondents in the 

Court and such conceding statement could not be set aside at this stage; that appeal 

filed by  the  CDA  before  the  Appellate  Court  was  time  barred  and  same  was 

dismissed on the said ground as no valid justification has been rendered on record for 

filing of the  appeal beyond the time period; that  instant civil revision is  also time 

barred and such delay could not be condoned. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  respondents  being  plaintiffs  filed  suit  for 

declaration, permanent and mandatory injunction against the  CD A  with the claim 

that  they  are  entitled  and  eligible allottee  under  rehabilitation  benefit  as  their 

C.R  No.389/2018 

3 

property  has  been  acquired  by  the  CDA  through  award  and  name  of  father  of 

plaintiffs/respondents has been recorded in the  award Ex.P-2 at  S.No.12, whereas 

under  CDA  Rehabilitation  Policy  they  are  eligible for  allotment  of  plot  being 

affectees of  acquisition  process  of  CDA  under  CDA  Ordinance,  1960.  As  per 

contents of the plaint,  CDA authorities are reluctant to allot plot despite the fact that 

respondents/plaintiffs case has  been processed and  they  were given assurance for 

allotment of Plot No.354, Chak Shehzad, Islamabad. 

7. 

On  the  other hand,  CDA  filed written statement with  only  one contention 

against the relevant claim that  "denied for want  of knowled:e",  which was signed by 

Deputy Director Land,  CDA.  The  trial Court  after deciding the  application U/O 

XXXIX Rules I  & 2 CPC framed the following issues vide order dated 15.03.2017:- 

1. 

2. 

Whether  the plaintiff  ts entitled for decree  of declaration, permanent  and 
mandatory  injunction,  as prayed for?  OPP 

Whether  the plaintiff has no cause of action to file  the instant  suit,  hence, 

it is liable to be dismissed? OPD 

3. 

Relief! 

8. 

Respondents  while  appearing  as  PW-I  through  their  attorney  stated  that 

plaintiffs/respondents are  affectees of  Mouza  Chak  Shehzad  and  their  land  was 

acquired by  CDA  vide  award  dated  20.04.1977 Ex.P.2  and  they  were  declared 

entitled for allotment of plot  and  their case was  accepted by  CDA,  whereby Plot 

No.354, Chak Shehzad, Islamabad was approved but allotment letter was not issued. 

During the course of cross-examination, it was not denied that respondent's land was 

acquired, however, on the other hand petitioner's side produced Tairmoor Ahmed, 

Deputy Director Land, CDA as DW-1, who recorded his statement to the following 

effect.- 

i.:f..}~Li)J,J:ytf ,,-..;:.] L5JlttJJ1.V-i./.1'(:.)t"A,L  J.J..I 

(:.)~ .J.  l.).tthlJoV'1J;~J-LJ.t1J~T(J.VICDA 

J.) ..I"  12 /.'-Le L  5At' ),,  v.rJ11J)?)(Lit..J!i..f'-ifl-  APL30x70  .,!..-~),1v.r-=:...  LJ- 

C.R  No.389/2018 

4 

.::..1~,i;.J(liL~I CDA-J.tl"  Lf-1J1<;--,.13150/-  (:7 -''"J\";,£11:J(..~C/710r~iv1--, 

_.::.,.  J J ~ J J.11J1  i.f L  ~v i.h J CDA  -'''  .::...  JJ.;)l 
. 
' 

' 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

9.  While considering the above background, there is no denial that land/built-up 

property  of  respondents  has  been  acquired  through  award  Ex.P-2  and  name  of 

respondents'  father has  been reflected at  S.No.12  of the  award,  whereby built-up 

property  measuring  710  Sq.  ft.  was  acquired  in  Mouza  Pindorian  and  on  the 

conceding statement  of  concerned Deputy  Director  Land,  CDA/DW-1,  the  trial 

Court passed the judgment & decree in favour of respondents. In order to resolve the 

controversy, I have gone through the Islamabad  Displaced Persons Rehabilitation  Policy, 

1984, which is applicable to the affectees, whose land were acquired by the CDA on 

or before 01.10.1984 as per clause 1(3) of the said policy, however, unsettled cases of 

past have been covered by this policy but the most important aspect of this case is as 

to whether every person whose land or built-up property acquired comes under the 

definition  of  affectee  in  terms  of  clause  2(1)  of  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons 

Rehabilitation  Policy,  1984, the same is hereby reproduced as under:- 

2(1)  "Affectee"  means  a  person  or persons  whose  agricultural  land  and/or 

built-up property  is acquired under the CDA  Ordinance. 

10.  However, in terms of clause 4 of the Policy certain restrictions for the built-up 

property have  been referred in clause 4(a) and  4(b) of  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons 

Rehabilitation  Policy,  1984, same are reproduced as under.- 

(A) 

Affectees  due  to  acquisition  of Built-up  Property  only=Where  only 

built-up  property  is  acquired from  the  affectees,  residential  plots  in  the  Sub 

Urban Centres would  be  offered to them  as a consideration for their permanent 

rehabilitation.  The basis of such an offer will be a single family  unit. 

(B) 

Affecttees  due to acquisition  of/and  or land and  built-up  property:- 

I. 

Where  built-up property  or land  not  less  than  4  kanals,  or land 

and  built-up  property  is  acquired  and  the  acquired  area  is  less 

than  40  kanals  of cultarable  land  but  more  than  4  kanals  the 

affectee would  qualify for allotment  of a residential plot  in  a  Sub 

Urban Centre. 

C.R  No.389/2018 

5 

2. 

Where  land  or  land  and  built-up property  is  acquired  and  the 

area  acquired  is  40 kanals  to  100  kanals  of cultarable  land  then 

the  affectees  would  become  entitled to  consideration for  allotment 

of one  agro  unit  (approx  :  20  kanals  of agricultural  land  and  a 

residential plot  in an agroville. 

3. 

Where  land  acquired  is  more  than  140  kanals  of cultarable  land 

[with  a margin  of(--)  5 kanalsj,  the affectee  would  be considered 

for  the allotment  of two agro  units and  a residential plot  in one of 

the proposed agrovilles. 

4. 

In  case  of joint family  entitlement  on  the basis  of (1) & (3) above, 

the  affectee family  would  qualify for  allotment  of corresponding 

number  of agro  units  and  residential  plots  in  agroville  and/  or 

Sub  Urban  Centre as the case may  be. 

5. 

Those  affecttees  who  wish  to  be  covered  under  the  old scheme  of 

obtaining  land  available  in  Colony  Districts,  would  be  issued 

eligibility  certificates  according 

to  new  entitlement, 

i.e. 

if 

cultarable  land lost in acquisition  is 40 kanals or more. 

11. 

I  have  also attended  to  the  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons  Rehabilitation  Policy, 

1996,  which  is  applicable to  the  acquisition of land  or  built-up property prior  to 

01.01.1996, but in this policy the concept of built-up property has been defined in 

Section 2( d)  of  Islamabad  Displaced  Persons  Rehabilitation  Policy,  1996,  which  is  as 

under:- 

2(d) 

"Built  up  Property"  means  a  residential  house  with  covered  area  not 

less then 300 square feet. 

And  allotment  of  residential  plot  has  been  referred  in  clause  4  of  Islamabad 

Displaced Persons Rehabilitation Policy, 1996 in the following manner:- 

4. 

Allotment  of residential  plots:  The residential plots shall  be allotted to 

the affectees  according  to the following  scale namelyt- 

(i}  Where  the  land  acquired  is  with  or  without  built  up  property 

thereon  and the area of land acquired is:--- 

(a) 

4  Kanals  or  More  but 

less than  10 Kanals. 

(b) 

JO Kanals  or more. 

= 

= 

a plot  of size 25x50 

a plot  of size 30x60 

C.R  No.389/2018 

6 

Provided  that  where the  land  acquired is less  than  4 Kanals,  the 

Affectee  will  be  allowed  to join  other  ajfectees to  make  up  the 

deficiency  in  the  minimum  area  of 04  Kanals  to  be  eligible for 

joint allotment  of a plot. 

(ii)  Where  built  up  property  is  acquired  in  Abadi  Deh,  residential 

plots  will  be  allotted  to  the  affectees,  notwithstanding 

the 

ownership  of  the  land  beneath  the  built  up  property,  on  the 

following  criteria:- 

Areao(BUP 

Plot  Size 

i) 

ii) 

300 to 499 Square feet 

Plot of size 25'x50' 

500 

Square 

feet 

and 

Plot of size 30'x60' 

upwards 

The  allotment  will,  however,  be  subject to  the  condition  that  the 
ajfecttee has not availed any  benefit against  acquisition  of/and,  if 

any,  acquired from  him,  provided  that  where  the  acquired  built 

up property  is located outside. Abadi  Deh,  residential plots will be 

allotted  to  the  affectee  of the  built  up property,  as  in  the  case  of 
Abadi  Deh,  only  if the  land  beneath  is  owned  by  the  affectee 

himself. 

12. 

Similarly, there are certain general conditions highlighted in the said policy 

for the old cases of acquisition prior to 1978, which have been governed under clause 

8(2) of the said policy. 

13. 

I  have gone through both  the policies in  detail and  confronted the  learned 

counsel for the respondents to justify their entitlement of the  suit plot  which they 

have claimed in the plaint, whereby learned counsel for the respondents has given 

only a single argument that conceding statement has been given by Deputy Director 

Land CDA in their favour and such statement was given on the basis of some record, 

although the entire court file  is  silent qua any record nor even any such record has 

ever been called by the respondents in the Court, even there is  no admission in the 

written statement on the part of CDA that some plot was allotted to the respondent, 

therefore, while considering the position argued by the parties before this Court, it is 

necessary to  consider the  question of  onus  of  proof,  whereby Article  117  of the 

Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984 deals with concept of burden of proof which imposes a 

C.R  No.389/2018 

7 

duty upon a person who desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or 

liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those 

facts exist and such person to prove the existence of such fact is  under obligation to 

discharge the burden of proof which lies on him. Reliance is placed upon 2016 SCMR 

1225 (Phu/ Peer Shah  VS  Hafeez Fatima)  and 2010 SCMR  1358 (Muhammad  Saee VS 

Mst.  SharafElahi.  etc.). Similarly, if the burden of proof in a suit or proceedings lies 

on a person who would fail to prove the existence of such fact, it has been assumed 

that  burden  has  not  been  discharged in  terms  of Article  118  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat 

Order, 1984,  especially when the entire record is  silent qua the plot number which 

has been referred in the plaint by respondents/plaintiffs. 

14. 

It is trite law that beneficiary has to discharge the onus at the first instance i.e. 

the  respondents  in  this  case,  who  have  referred Plot  No.354  on  record  but  no 

document or record has been placed before the Court to justify the stance rather the 

collusive and conceding statement of DW-1 the then Deputy Director Land,  CDA 

has been managed to justify the  case of respondents, such conduct  on  the part  of 

CDA  official as  well  as  counsel  for  CDA  is  highly  objectionable  and  illegal, 

especially when there is no record. 

15. 

The  counsel  for  petitioner/CDA 

i.e,  Mr.  Amir  Latif  Gill,  Advocate 

contended that the entire scheme was managed by CDA official as well as counsel 

for  CDA  at  that  time,  who  were  in  league  with  each  other  to  help  out  the 

respondents to  establish a  false claim which is  not  possible otherwise under Land 

Rehabilitation Policy,  1984 as well as  1996  mainly on the ground that respondents 

do not fulfill the requirement of Rehabilitation Policy. 

16.  As  of today,  I  have  confronted the  learned  counsel for the  respondents to 

justify his eligibility under Rehabilitation Policy which provides different parameters 

for eligibility of plot as in this case respondents were holding built-up property of 710 

Sq. ft., which does not fulfill the criteria to fall under eligibility of the plot. 

17. 

I have gone through the judgment of learned trial Court with able assistance 

of learned counsel for both the parties and as such the findings on issue No.I  are not 

C.R  No.389/2018 

8 

substantiated from record nor  even looked into  by  the  Courts below in  a  proper 

manner in terms of Articles 117 & 118 of Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 1984, the onus has 

not been discharged, no independent evidence has been brought on record, nor even 

corroborated from any independent source, neither even a single document has been 

brought on record to justify that Plot No.354 is in existence in any scheme. 

18. 

I have also gone through the order of Appellate Court, whereby Civil Appeal 

filed  by  CDA  was  dismissed  being  time  barred,  although  the  application  for 

condonation of delay has been filed alongwith appeal, whereby it has been referred 

in the said application that  "it  is relevant  to mention  here  that  the previous  CDA  counsel 

also  caused  unjustified  delay  intimatint  about  the  outcome  of civil  suit  for  further  feral 

proceedings  to challenge  the  imDU.f1ted judrment  and  decree dated  28. 05.2018  "· 

19.  While considering the above position, it has been argued by Mr. Amir Latif 

Gill, Advocate for the petitioner/CDA  that the then counsel for CDA namely Mr. 

Musharaf Khan,  Advocate  was  in  connivance with  the  respondents  and  has  not 

informed the CDA authorities for filing of appeal, rather has given his opinion that it 

will  be  wastage  of  time  and  money  and  the  said  opinion  of  the  then 

advocate/counsel was considered by the then Deputy Director Land,  CDA, who is 

member of entire racket in  this fraud. The  petitioner/CDA  in  order  to justify his 

position has appended the opinion given by the then counsel which is part of record, 

therefore, it is necessary to reproduce the same, which is as under:- 

SUBJECT. 
COURT 

SAJAD  MAHMOOD  VS CDA  (SEVEN  CASES)  IN  CIVIL 

The undersigned  is counsel on behalfofCDA 

in seven cases title as following 

1. 

Sajad Mahmood  VS CDA 

2.  Muhammad  Ameen  VS CDA 

3. 

Sufaidan  bibi  VS CDA 

4.  Muhammad  Saeed  VS CDA 

5. 

6. 

7. 

Ejaz Mehmood  VS CDA 

Waheed Akhter  VS CDA 

Imran  etc  VS CDA 

All  the above mentioned  suits for  declaration  and permanent  injunction 

have  been filed  by  the affectees of Moza  Mohrian,  Moza  Chak  Shehzad,  Moza 

C.R  No.389/2018 

9 

Pandori,  and  Moza  Shana  etc with  the contention  that  approval  has been given 

by  CDA for  allotment  of plots  to them  and  they are entitled for  allotment  of plot 

because  their land  has  been  acquired,  and  approval for  allotment  already given 

for  allotment  of plot  to them  may  not be cancelled. 

The  plaintiff  presented  their  evidence  in  connection  with  the  above 

mentioned  contentions  and  after closing  their  evidence  the  CDA  also presented 

the  evidence.  The  evidence  of CDA  as per  record  was  in  consonance  with  the 

contentions  of plaintiffs.  After  arguments  of both  the parties  the  Court  (Samia 

Noureen,  Civil  Judge  (West),  Islamabad  decreed  all  the  suits  of plaintiffs. 

(Copies are enclosed). 

That  keeping  in  view  the  above  position  and  evidence  presented  by 

CDA  there  is  no  need of any  appeal as it will  be  wastage  of time  and  money  as 

well,  however  if not  agreed the  undersigned  have stopped  the  limitation  period 

of six days and  may  be contact to the undersigned as soon  as possible. 

Submitted  for  information  and farther  orders. 

20. 

The above referred fact if considered to be correct then there is no need for 

further explanation as the then counsel Mr.  MusharrafK.han, Advocate has given his 

own opinion despite the fact that there was not a  single record to  substantiate that 

suit plot has  ever been allotted to  the respondents. I  have  attended  to  the written 

statement of the then counsel of CDA in the light of case reported as 2004 SCMR 

1247 {Faisalabad Development Authority  VS Raja Jahanzir Nasir. etc.) and 2019 SCMR 

738 {Kenneth F.  Solomon  and  Sterathal Katzaelson  Montiinv  LLP  VS  Judith  Matte  

Thompson  and  166376  Canada  Inc.).  However,  under  Chapter  XII  (Canons  of 

Professional Conduct and Etiquette of Advocate) of the Pakistan Legal Practitioners 

and Bar Councils Rules, 1976, it is primary duty of an Advocate to give his opinion 

in the best interest of his client in accordance with law so that the legal right of his 

client could be achieved from the court of law. The Advocate is an agent of principal 

i.e.  his client and if he fails to disclose a material fact to its  client when an opinion 

has been sought or concealed the material fact from a court oflaw  or he is aware that 

what he is  disclosing before the Court through a fact not reflected from the record or 

in evidence placed before the Court, he becomes part of misconduct or accomplice to 

the situation, therefore, a  lawyer should take every remedial measures so  that  the 

C.R  No.389/2018 

10 

court of law shall not reach at wrong conclusion, even the lawyer may refuse to offer 

such material, document or fact that he reasonably believes to be false. 

21. 

In  view  of  above, the  opinion rendered by  the  then  counsel for  CDA  for 

non-filing of appeal is contrary to record and such request could not be considered at 

this stage, especially when the entire judgment & decree was managed through fraud. 

The Appellate Court has not considered all these aspects and grounds referred in the 

application for condonation of delay,  which are material for holding that appeal was 

time barred especially when the petitioner/CDA  at  that  time being appellant was 

hampered  on  hyper  technical grounds by  its  own  employee i.e.  Deputy  Director 

Land as well as the counsel in league with respondents, the beneficiary of decree. As 

a  result of the  said decree respondents are  getting the benefit of plot who  are not 

entitled for the same and officials are getting benefit which is  not on record but it is 

State land which could not be given to a person who is not entitled for the same and 

State being the custodian, can take every step to protect its land/ assets, even where 

fraud has been played through Court to extend the benefit to a non-entitled person. 

Hence the dismissal of appeal on technical grounds is  not warranted under the law, 

although  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (East),  Islamabad  has  categorically 

referred  in  the  impugned  order  "a1!J!ellant  has  not  attached  anvthinz  with 

the 

application  for  condonation  of delay  to  show  that  any  action  has  been  taken  a:ainst  the 

one  who  is  instrumental 

in  delay 

for  filinz  of  a1!J!eal".  I  have  attended  to  this 

proposition in the light of PW  1989  SC 627  (Deputy  Collector  of Customs  and  2  others 

VS Muhammad  Tahir  and  another),  which has further been considered by the Apex 

Court in  case reported  as  2016  SCMR.  1410  (Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa 

throu:h  Secretary  Industries  Commerce  and  Mineral  Development.  Peshawar  and  others 

VS Frontier  Chemical  Industries  Ram  Bazh.  Mardan)  in the following manner:- 

8. 

Next  comes delay  of 41  days  in filing  the petition  for  leave to  appeal. 

According  to  the  learned  Add!.  A.  G.,  delay  in filing  the  petition  occurred 

because of late  supplies  of copies and  lengthy  correspondence between  various 

tiers of the department.  This explanation,  in the matrix  of the case appears to be 

satisfactory.  It  is  more  so  when  we  see  the  conduct  of  the  subordinate 

C.R  No.389/2018 

11 

fanctionaries  who being sell-out are ever ready to do away  with  anything  public 

for  petty  gains.  In  the  case  of Deputy  Collector  of Customs  and  2  others  v. 

Muhammad  Tahir  and  another (supra)  while  dealing  with  an  identical aspect 

held as under:- 

"It has  recently  been  held  by  this  Court  that  the petitions  on  behalf of 

the  Government  or  Government  fanctionaries 

in  matters  involving 

Government  interest  or public  interest,  the petitioners  no  doubt  would 

be  treated  at par  with  ordinary  citizens;  but  they  would  be  given  the 

same  concessions  and  considerations  as  given  to  the  other  citizens.  It 

has  also  to  be  observed  that  while  examining  the  merits  of a'RJ2lication 

for  condonation  of delay  the  Court  can  look  into  the  conduct  of the 

subordinate  functionaries.  on  whose  conduct  the  higher  policy  maker 

functionan·es  have only a remote physical control.  Hence.  the conduct of 

the  lower  functionaries  can  in  arwropriate  cases  be  taken  as  a  good 

ground  for condo nation  of delay.  In  this  case.  prim.a  facie.  some  of the 

lower  functionaries.  as  explained  in  the  application.  seem  to  have 

misconducted  in  the  matter  of vigilance  and  preparation  for  filing  of 

petition  for  leave  to  appeal.  And  further.  as  admitted  at  the  Bar. 

departmental  action  is  being  taken  against  them  in  this  behalf;  This 

amongst  other shows bona  !ides on  Government's  part.  We consider it a 

fit  one  for  condonation  of delay.  Accordingly  the  application  in  that 

behalfis  allowed and the delay is condoned.  " 

22.  At last the case argued before this Court by both  the parties persuaded this 

Court to believe that systematic fraud has been played by the CDA officials in order 

to give benefit to a person who is  not  entitled for plot under Rehabilitation Policy 

and counsel for CDA is  also part of this fraud and same is reflected from statement 

of the then Deputy  Director Land,  CDA, who  accepted the  claim of respondents, 

whereas the CDA denied the claim of respondents in the written statement "being 

denied for want of knowledge", therefore, in such situation Court cannot sit as silent 

spectator rather  discharged its  constitutional and  legal obligation as highlighted in 

case reported as 1981SCMR.294  (Abdul Rahim.  etc.  VS  The State). 

23.  While considering all these aspects, this Court has to exercise its powers in 

terms of Section 115(1) CPC read with Section 151  CPC to eliminate the fraud by 

exercising inherent  powers and  the  discretionary jurisdiction,  especially when  the 

C.R  No.389/2018 

12 

illegality has  been  noticed  by this  Court,  such powers  would  only  be  exercised  in aid 

of justice  and  not  to  defeat  its  ends.  I  am  mindful  of  the  fact  that  power  U/S  115 

CPC  will not  be exercised  to  correct  every irregularity  in  the  exercise  of jurisdiction, 

but  the  same  has  to  be  exercised  where  grave  injustice  or  hardships  on  account  of 

fraud  is  apparent.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  2010 CLC 1215 Lahore (Province ofPuniab 

through Collector District Lahore  VS  Muhammad  Latifl,  PLD 2008 SC 155 (Asmatullah 

VS  Amanat  Ullah>.  PLD  2008  Islamabad  11  (Miss Kiran  Arif Man  VS  Miss  Kinza 

Khalid). PLD 2010 SC 1186 (Mst. Banori  VS  JilaniJ, PLD  2012 SC 400 (Hafeez Ahmad 

VS  Civil Judge. Lahore) and  2016 SCMR. 24 (Nazim-ud-Din  VS  Sheikh  Zia-ul-Qamar). 

The entire  edifice constructed  by the respondents  through  the  foul play  and  fraud  left 

nothing  in their  favour  to achieve  the benefit for which  they  are not  entitled,  even the 

time  barred  matters  have  been  considered  by  the  Apex  Court  being  custodian  of the 

rights  of the  parties,  even  in  cases  where  reasons  enumerated  in  the  condonation  of 

delay  application  were  not  convincing  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  established  fact 

that  matter  was one  of public importance. 

24. 

I  have  considered  the  proposition  in  the  light  of PLD  2007  SC  582 (Zul/iqar 

and others VS  Shahdat  Khan)  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  non-suiting a liti:ant  for 

not Ii/in: aweal would amount to punishin:  him for not availin:  a riiht.  which ensured to 

his benefit. Similarly  in  another  case  reported  as PLD  2002  SC  630 (Col. (Rtd)  Ayub 

Ali Rana  VS Dr. Carlite S. Pune and another) wherein  it has  been  held  that  mere wron: 

advice by  a  counsel in  the  matter  by  itself,  was not  considered as suf]ident  :round  for 

condonation ofdelav  but  each case had to be considered in  which question of/imitation 

was raised keeping  in  view peculiar  drcumstances of that  case the  High  Court rithtly 

proceeded to set aside the same by condonin: the delay bv holding that in such matters. the 

point  of limitation  would not stand  in  the way  of Court to do iustice. I  have  also  gone 

through  the  case  reported  as  2007  SCMR. 1574 (Government  ofBalochistan  through 

Secretary Board of Revenue. Balochistan Ouetta and others  VS  Muhammad  Ali and  11 

others) wherein  it has been  held  as under:- 

C.R  No.389/2018 

13 

Declaration  of title---Appeal  barred  by  limitation=Public  property=Public 

fanctionaries,  negligence  of--Plaintiffs  sought  declaration  of title  against  suit 

property,  ownership  of which  vested  with  Forest  department---Trial  Court 

decreed  the  suit  in favour  of plaintiffs---Appeal  against judgment  and  decree 

passed  by  Trial  Court  was  dismissed  by  Lower  Appellate  Court solely  on  the 

ground  of its  being  barred  by  limitation---High,  Court  in  exercise  of revisional 

jurisdiction  after  discussing  merits  of the  case  declined  to  interfere  with  the 

judgment  passed  by  Lower  Appellate  Court---Plea  raised  by  authorities  was 

that  as  appeal  before  Lower  Appellate  Court  was  not  decided  on  merits, 

therefore,  merits  of the case should not have been  dilated upon  by High  Court--  

Validity---Due  to serious  lapses  and failure  to  discharge  legal duties promptly 

and  within  the prescribed period of/imitation  by all concerned in the matter,  in 

view  of the  decree  of the  Trial  Court,  no  actual  loss,  damage  or deprivation  of 

rights  had  occurred  to  public  fanctionaries  concerned  in  the  matter,  rather 

Government  and  Forest  Department  stood  completely  deprived  of the  public 

property solely meant  to be used,  utilized and  dealt with  in public  interest being 

a  public  property  of which  Government  and  the  Department 

through  its 

fanctionaries  were the custodian---Decree  of Trial  Court was not assailed before 

Lower  Appellate  Court within  the prescribed period  of limitation  and for  such 

reason  alone,  appeal  was  dismissed,  upheld  by  High  Court  as  well, 

consequently Government stood divested of huge property for  being its custodian 

and  thereby  interests  of public  stood completely jeopardized  merely  because  of 

grave  omissions  and  inaction  on  the part  of concerned public fanctionaries--  

Supreme  Court,  in  view and for  doing complete justice;  took  notice  of delay  in 

preferring  appeal  before  Lower  Appellate  Court  and  having  preferred  civil 

petition  for  leave  to  appeal before  Supreme  Court much  beyond  the prescribed 

period  of limitation-  and  condoned the de/ay---Judgment  and  decree passed  by 

Lower  Appellate  Court  was  set  aside  and  appeal  was  remanded  to  Lower 

Appellate  Court for  decision  afresh  on  merits---Supreme  Court  directed  the 

competent authority  to proceed against all the concerned delinquent  officers  and 

public fanctionaries  by  taking  disciplinary  action  under  the  appropriate  law 

and  rules  for  not  having  approached  Lower  Appellate  Court  and  Supreme 

Court within  the prescribed period of limitation  and  in  accordance  with  law--  

Appeal  was allowed. 

25. 

Similarly,  the  delay  has  also been  condoned  in cases where  some  of the lower 

functionary  has  played  fraud  and  committed  misconduct  in  the  matter  of  vigilance 

and  they  should  be  dealt  with  by  way  of departmental  action.  Reliance  is  placed 

C.R  No.389/2018 

14 

upon  PW  1989  SC  627  (Deputy  Collector of Customs and  2  others  VS  Muhammad 

Tahir  and  another), therefore, the ground of limitation argued by the  respondents' 

side  in  the  filing  of  appeal  as  well  as  in  this  revisional jurisdiction  is  of  no 

significance. 

26. 

The  entire epitome of discussion above gives rise to  situation that  even in 

cases where conceding statement was given by the defendant, it is  obligation of the 

Court to satisfy itself regarding the evidence as to whether mere conceding statement 

of defendant is  enough  to  award  the  relief to  the  plaintiff and  if  the  relief is  still 

dependent upon  other  documentary evidence, witnesses or record,  the  Court shall 

call all those evidences and satisfy its conscious. It is  also the duty of the trial Court 

to be more vigilant in cases of State Land and Assets where some official just put his 

appearance on behalf of any department and record his statement, the  Court shall 

verify the record by going through the same, subject to relevant law and if Court is 

satisfied then it is necessary to pass the appropriate order. 

2 7. 

It is  also the duty of the Court in such type of matters to apply inquisitorial 

approach and direct the official to submit his statement after approval of competent 

authority in writing in accordance with record so that no fraud could be played qua 

the State assets. Hence,  this Court comes to irresistible conclusion that no record was 

available qua the allotment of any plot nor the same was produced by CDA in Court, 

neither plaintiffs/respondents were able to justify his eligibility and entitlement under 

the law as well as under the policies involved, which has not been appreciated by the 

Courts below, therefore, the instance civil revision is allowed and concurrent findings 

of the learned Civil Court as well as of the learned Appellate Court are hereby set 

aside and matter is remanded to learned trial Court to decide afresh while considering 

the record of CDA and if in case no  such record is  available or produced then the 

fate  of  suit  be  decided  accordingly within  a  period  of  three  (03) months  under 

intimation to this Court. 

28. 

Before parting with this judgment, it is necessary to pass appropriate direction 

to  the  Chairman  CD A  to  initiate  action  against the  then  Deputy  Director  Land 

C.R  No.389/2018 

15 

CDA,  who  has recorded  the  statement  without  any record,  however,  in inquiry  ifit  is 

established  that  the  record  is  available,  which  has  been  withheld,  then  appropriate 

measures  be  taken  as  to  why  the  officials  and  functionaries  of the  CDA  could  not 

produce  their  own  record.  Similarly,  the  counsel  who  has  become  tool  of beneficiary 

may  not  be  allowed  to  represent  department  in  future  and  CDA  shall  re-visit  the 

conduct  of their  officials and  their  counsel  who  are in league  with  the  individuals  for 

their  illegal gains. 

Zahld 

(MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAY~) 
I 

JUDGE 

