ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT. ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Crl. Misc. No.735/B/2019.

Mukarram Khan

VS

The State etc

S. No. of
order/
proceedinss

Date of order/
Proceedings

Order with  signature of Judge and that  of parties or counsel
where necessarT.

04.12.2019.

Sardar Muhammad  Hafeez Khan,  Advocate for the petitioner
Mr. Naeem Ahmed Awan,  State Counsel.
Chaudhry  Qaiser  Imam,  Advocate for respondent No.2.
Tanveer, ASVI.O,  P. S Shalimar,  Islamabad  alongwith  record.

Through instant petition, the petitioner  has prayed for post

arest  bail in case FIR No.216l2019,  dated 27.06.2019,U15  324,

365, 452,  341, 148, 149 PPC,  P.S Shalimar,  Islamabad.

2.  Brief facts are that respondent  No.2/complainant  got lodged

the above  mentioned  FIR with the allegations  that on27.06.2019,

at about 8:30 p.m,  he came to the house  of his nephew,  where

Syed Qamer  Abbas and  Syed Ilyas Raza alongwith family were

present, in the meanwhile 3/4 persons armed  with pistol  and

other  weapon of offlence  entered  in the house by scaling  over  the

wall and made  hostage  all the family,  thereafter  they  tried to

kidnap  Syed Ilyas Raza on gun point, on which  Syed  Qamer

Abbas intervened and  resisted  the abduction  near main door of

the house, when  Mukaram  Khan (present  petitioner),  Noshad

Khan and Haji Said Wali entered in the house alongwith  3/4

unknown  persons  and directed  one of the unknown  person to

take Syed  llyaz Raza.  Haji Said Wali raised Lalkara  to murder

Qamer  Abbas and on his instruction  Mukarma  Khan (present

petitioner) and Noshad assaulted Qamer  Abbas and later on the

petitioner fired with .30 bore pistol upon Qamer Abbas, which

hit him on right thigh. Upon  hue  and  cry nephew  of respondent

No.2, came out of the Masjid  and  intervened when the accused

2

Crl. Misc.  No.735-Bl2019.

persons  were shifting Syed  Ilyas Raza  forcibly  in the vehicle, the

accused  persons made fire shots  upon Syed Imran  Saghir,  which

hit on his legs. The'accused  persons resorted  to aerial firing and

fled away from the scene  alongwith  Syed Ilyas Raza. The

accused  persons  came on two cars Cultus and Corolla. The

motive  behind the incident is dispute amongst  the parties

regarding  guarantee  cheque  issued  by Syed  Ilyas Raza.

3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner contends  that the

petitioner  is innocent  and has falsely been  implicated  in this  case;

that cross-version  ofthe petitioner  has already  been  recorded  by

the police  in the same FIR on the direction  of Ex-Officio  Justice

of Peace;  that  the petitioner  alongwith his brother  went  to visit

Syed  Ilays  Raza with whom they had civil  dispute  regarding

different plots of CDA, which could not be transferred by him

despite  receiving  Rs.1,60,00,000/- in different  interval  of times

and when they reached  to the Syed  Ilyas Raza, entire family

including respondent  No.2/complainant attacked  upon the

petitioner  and his brother, however, they fled away from the

scene and later on they came to know that the FIR has been

lodged against them; that this is case of cross-version,  therefore,

the petitioner  is entitled  for concession  of post arrest bail on the

ground of further  inquiry;  that role attributed to the petitioner  is

of causing  firearm  injury on the right thigh of Qamer Abbas,

which is non-vital  part; that the petitioner  is no more required  for

the purpose of further investigation as challan  has been  submitted

in the Cor.rt.

4.  Conversely,  learned counsel for 

respondent

No.2/complainant  contends that the petitioner is master mind of

the entire  incident, in which  he alongwith  his co-accused  came to

the house of Syed Ilyas  Raza and kidnapped Syed Ilyas Raza  on

gunpoint  and in the said incident  the petitioner  injured Syed

3

Crl. Misc.  No.735-Bl2019.

Qamer  Abbas with firearm in his house;  that co-accused of the

petitioner  Noshad  Khan  and Haji Said Wali  injured his nephew

Syed Imran  Saghir by firing as such  the offence UIS 324 PPC is

attracted and falls within prohibitory  clause of section  497

Cr.P.C; that  the petitioner has acknowledged  his presence  on the

spot in his cross-version  as well as in the application filed by him

UIS 22-A,  Cr.P.C and there  is no doubt  qua  his presence  in the

said incident  and he cannot  be given premium of cross-version,

which is not justified,  especially  when Syed Ilyas  Raza  recorded

his statement  U/S 164, Cr.P.C  and confirmed  role of the

petitioner in specific  manner.

5.  Learned  State Counsel  contends that investigation  has been

completed  and challan has been submitted before  the Court; that

one of co-accused  Noshad Khan is still at large,  hence,  the

petitioner  is not entitled for concession  of post arrest  bail.

6.  I have  heard  the arguments and perused  the record.

7 .  Tentative  assessment of record  reflects that the petitioner  is

nominated accused  in case FIR No.2l612019,  dated 27.06.2019,

UIS 324,365,  452,341,  t48,  149  PPC, P.S Shalimar,  Islamabad

registered  on the complaint of respondent  No.2.  The petitioner

has been attributed  specific  role of kidnapping  Syed  Ilyas Raza

from  his house in presence  of his family members  on gunpoint

with the help  of co-accused,  who were also armed and during the

said incident the present  petitioner Mukarram Khan fired  upon

Syed  Qamer Abbas, which landed on his right thigh and other

co-accused  of the petitioner  resorted  to firing, due to which

nephew of respondent  No.2 Syed Imran  Saghir received  7

firearm  injuries on his legs,  whereby the petitioner  alongwith

other co-accused  successfully  kidnapped  Syed Ilyas Raza.

8.  Cursory  glimpse  of the record reveals that the dispute

amongst  the parties is of dishonour  of guarantee  cheque  issued

4

Crl. Misc. No.735-Bl20  19.

by alleged abductee  Syed Ilyas  Raza in the name of petitioner

Mukarram  Khan. The petitioner  has taken plea of cross-version,

where  he acknowledged  that  he visited  house of Syed Ilyas Raza

on the day of occurrence and tried to settle the issue and no event

of abduction took place  and he is also not aware  as to how and

when the other  P.W has been injured. This  factum  prima facie

proves that the petitioner was present on spot  and he has been

arrested  on 8.10.2019 after about 3 months of the alleged

occurrence. During  the investigation, the petitioner  got recovered

the weapon  of offence  i.e. pistol on 14.10.2019 as such the

petitioner  has been  linked with the alleged occurrence,  which  has

further been corroborated with the statements  of the witnesses,

who were injured  in the alleged  incident  and  even  Syed Ilyas

Raza  alleged abductee  was released  by the petitioner  and his co-

accused on the same day of occurrence, who got recorded his

statement  U/S  164, Cr.P.C  and  explained  role  of the petitioner  in

the said incident.  One of co-accused  Noshad Khan is still at

large.

9.  The accumulative  effect of entire  case discloses that  the

petitioner is involved  in the alleged  kidnapping  of Syed Ilyas

Raza  by entering  in his house,  which itself is an offence  U/S 365

and 452 PPC i.e. house  trespass  after  preparation  of causing hurt

to any person  or for assaulting  any person  or for wrongfully

restraining any person or for putting  any person in fear of hurt or

of assault or of wrongful restraint, which provides  sentence  of 7

years with fine. Moreover,  oflence U/S  324 PPC is non-bailable

and falls under  prohibitory  clause  of section 497, Cr.P.C.

10. The plea of cross-version  can only be seen  at the time of

trial. Prima  facie it appears  that the petitioner alongwith  his co-

accused  kidnapped Syed Ilays Raza in order to resolve his civil

dispute in desperate manner after  preparation  while trespassing

5

Crl. Misc.  No.735-Bl2019.

into his house. The conduct  expressed  by the petitioner  does not

justify  any ground of further  inquiry or any benefit  in his favour

for grant of post arrest bail, especially  when challan  has been

submitted  before  the Court on 25.1  1.2019 and one  of co-accused

is still at large. Even the vehicles  used in the incident  have not

been recovered  and the investigation  is in progress.  Challan has

been submitted  before the Court. In these  circumstances,  the

petitioner  is not entitled for concession  of post arest bail and it is

appropriate  to issue direction  to Trial Cor:rt for early conclusion

of the Trial. Reliance  is placed tpon2W

Ullah VS The  State and  anotherl.

I L  For what  has been discussed above,  the instant petition is

dismissed.  However,  learned  Trial Court seized  with the matter is

directed  to conclude  the trial within a period  of 06 months  from

the date of receipt of copy of this order under intimation to this

Court.

R.Anjrm

(MOHSTN

KA

JUDGE

