,

Form No: HCID/C-121
JUDGMENT SHEET.

rN THE TSIAMABAD HIGH COURT,
ISLAMABAD.

Writ Petition  No.3896 of 2015

Aimen  Ibrar and another.

VS

Muhammad  Ibrar Jadoon and another.

Petitioners  By

Respondents By

Mr. Ali Hussain  Bhatti and Mr. Zulfiqar
Ahmed Sial,  Advocates.

Mr. Baber Saeed Butt, Advocate for
Respondent No.1.

Date of Hearing

2s.09.2019

*****

AAMER  FAROOQ  J. -  The instant petition  calls in question  the

judgments dated  29.04.20L5  and 23.06.2015,  passed  by respondent  No.Z  and

Additional  District  Judge  (West), Islamabad.

2.

The facts, in brief, are that petitioner No.2 filed a suit seeking

remedy of maintenance  for herself  and petitioner No,l, recovery of dowry

articles as well itS, inter-alia, Rs.5,00,000/-  as damages for divorce by

respondent  No.1.  Out of divergent  pleadings,  issues  were frarned and one of tlre

issue was whether  plaintiff No.2 is entitled to recover  dowry  afticles, gold

ornaments and Rs.5,00,000/- as prayed  for, The learned  Trial Court as well the

Appellate Couft turned  down  the claim of Rs.5,00,000/- by petitioner  No.2 on the

ground  of jurisdiction.

3

Learned  counsel  for the petitioners,  inter-alia,  contended that under

the facts and circumstances,  the Family Court  does have the jurisdrrJion  to

enteftain  claims  of such nature.  Reliance  was placed on cases reported as "Mst.

-2-

W.P  No.3896  of 2075

Yasmeen Bibi VS Muhammad  Ghazanfar  Khan and others"  (PLD 2076 SC 673)

as well as "Muhammad Bashir Ali Siddiqui  VS Mst. Sarwar Jahan Begum and

another" (2008 SCMR 186).

4. 

Learned  counsel  for the respondent  submitted  that since the matter

does  not fall within the Schedule-I  to the Family Coufts Act, 1964, hence  Family

Court had rightly  held that it has no jurisdiction  in the matter. Reliance  was

placed  on cases repofted as "Muhammad Akram VS Mst. Haira Bibi and 2

others"  (PLD 2007 Lahore 575), "Syed  Mukhtar  Hussain  Shah VS Mst. Saba

Imtiaz and others' (PLD 2077  SC 260), "Muhammad  Masood Abbasi VS Mst.

Mamona Abbasi" (2004 YLR 482) and "Mst. Zeenat Bibi VS Muhammad  Hayat

and 2 others" (2072 CLC 837).

5. 

Arguments  advanced by learned counsel for the parties have  been

heard and the documents placed  on record examined  with their able assistance.

In clause  19 of the Nikahnama,  a condition was imposed that in case

6. 
respondent  No.1 pronounced divorce to petitioner  No.2, he shall pay her

compensation/ damages in the sum of Rs.5,00,000/-. The sole question for the

Court  is whether  claim for Rs.5,00,000/-  could have been filed before the Family

Court or for the same the petitioners had to agitate the matter  before  the Coufts

of plenary jurisdiction. The Hon'ble Supreme Court  of Pakistan  while interpreting

a clause in the Nikahanama  in case repofted as "Mst.  Yasmeen Bibi VS

Muhammad  Ghazanfar Khan and others' (PLD 2076 SC 673) obserued  as

follows:-

ul7.  As in this case the landed  property,  given to the wife,
or the undertaking  given in the "Nikah  Noma",  to he
transferred  to her name is conclusive  in nature  and may be
construed as a part of dower or a gift in consideration of

marriage  therefore,  it wasfalling  within  the exclusive  domain

of the Family Court at Multan, as the wde was/is  residing

-3-

W,P  No,3896 of 2075

there,  which has not been denied by the respondent,
therefore, in our considered view, the District Appeal  Court
and the learned Judge in Chamber of the High Court,
Multan  Bench,  Multan fell into legal error by holding  the
view to the contrary.  Any departure madefrom  the true object

and spirit of law, enacted by the Legislature would  defeat  the

same, which is not permissible under any cannon of justice

and principle of law, nor the Courts are having  any authority

or powers  to import  their own opinion  therein, defeating  the

clear intention  of the Legislature and when the provisions of
Ss. 16 to 20 of the C.P.C. stand excluded  from  the
proceedings  before the Family Court then, the question of its
territorial  jurisdiction  would  never arise,  provided that the

Family Court  where  the wife resides, shall have  the exclusive
jurisdiction  over all such matters  for the sake of convenience
because  Rule 6 of the West Pakistan  lramily Court  Rules,

1965  so provides.

7

Under Similar  facts and circumstances,  the Hon'ble  Supreme Court of

Pakistan  in case titled "Syed Mukhtar  Hussain  Shah VS Mst. Saba Imtiaz and

others" (PLD 2077 5C 260) obserued as follows:-

3. 
Heard.  We have deemed  proper  to decide this matter
in the terms whether  the family Court has jurisdiction  to
entertain and adjudicate  the claim of the respondent/plaintiff

and not on account of the noted  judgment of the Supreme

Court. In this regard,  it is specilied  that the Aci is a special

law which  is meant to cater for a specific  object  and special
kind of cases  strictly  covered  by the items  mentionecl in the
schedule thereto. It is settled  law that the civil courts are the
courts of inherent and plenary jurisdiction competent  to
adjudicate  all the disputes  of the civil nuture  between  the
litigating  parties.  However,  such jurisdiction  stands  ousted in.

terms  of section  9, C.P.C., either expressly  or by necessarily
implication.  But in  order to  evaluate  whether such
jurisdiction has been tuken away, the special law under
which it is so done,  must  not only  he strictly constructed  hut

also  be accordingly  applied.  Therefore, if in the above context

the provision  of section 5 of the Act are read with the entries

-4-

W.P  No.3896  of 2075

of the schedule,  there  shall he no confusion or ambiguity
about  the cases falling  within  items  Nos. I to I thereto. Entry
No.9, which  has been incorporated  in the original  schedule,

by way  of an amendment through  Ordinance  No.LV  of 2002

reads as "personal  property  and belonging of the wde" and
while considering  and interpreting this (entry) for  the
purposes ofiurisdictian  in the case (Nasrullah 'supra) having
almost the samefacts  and the claim,  it has been held:-

"Nout  the said condition by all means vests  the
respondent  lady with  a right to bring an action  against

the petitioner  to claim  the said amount upon proof

that she was divorced  without  any reason attributable

to her. This being so, the respondent  lady is vested

with a right of action or what is termed  as "actionable

cluim" in the Transfer  of Property Act,  1882.  Now the

moment the said conclition becomes  operative  the

petitioner  became indebted  to the respondent  in the

said amount. Even if such debt or beneJicial  interest

so accruing  is conditional  or contingent,  falls within
the meaning of actionable  claim  which is a property

and transferable  as such. In my humble  opinion claim

of respondent wife to the said amount  accruing to her

upon  an unjustifted  divorce by all meons a property
and clearly falls within ltem  No.9 of the Schedule
read with section 5 of Family  Courts  Act,  1964."
lilhereas,  in the other judgment  from the Lahore jurisdiction
i.e. Muhammad Akram (supra),  the proposition  has been

dealt  conversely  in the following  manner:--

"As regards  the question,  whether  the suit ri
competent  before  the Family Court, it is the case of
respondent  No.I, and also held by the learned

Additional  District  Judge  that the matter  falls within
the Entry No.9 of the Schedule  to section 5, i.e.

"personal  property  and belonging  of the wde". I feel
amazed  lo note as to how the amount of Rs. 1,00,000

allegedly payable  by the petitioner on account of the

divorce or bad relations  between the, parties, is the

'personal  property  or belonging of respondent No.I,
so as' to bring the case within the jurisdiction of the

-5-

W.P  No.3896  of 2O75

Family  Court. Such personal property or belonging

referued  to in Entry No.9, in my considerecl  view, is a

residuary provision,  which enables  the wife  to recover

through the process of the Family Courts  Act, 1964,

whatever property she has acquired  during  the
subsistence  of the marriage,  which  is not the part of

her dowry,  through  her own independent  means  or

even through the means provided by the husband,

such us her clothes, ornaments  snd items of personal

use and  nature,  this may ulso include anything  which

has been gtfted to the wife by the husband  or any of

his or her relatives  or the friends; such property  and
belonging  may be the one acquired  by the wde out of

the money  given to her by the husband, her saving

from household allowance, or pocket  money,from  the
money provided  by her parents  and relatives.  But
deftnitely the aforesaid entry does not cover any

amount  which  is not yet the property  of the wife and

she only has a claim to recover  from the husband  on
the basis  of any special condition  incorporated in the
Nikahnama. I am not convinced by the argumenl that
the amount in question  is covered under the rules of

actionable claims as envisaged  by section 130 of the

Transfer of Property Act, 1882. The term  "actionable
claim" in general  means, a claimfor which an action

will lie, furnishing  a legal ground  for an action  and
accorcling  to section  3 of the Transfer  of Property Act,
a claim towards a debt. On account  of both the
meanings such claim cannot  be equated fls a
"personal  property and belonging of the wtfe."
Resultantly, in my considered  view,  the family  Court
has no jurisdiction in the matter and the suit in this

behalf  before  the said Court was not competent.t'
In  both the afore-mentioned  conJlicting  legal
4. 
opinions, tlte key proposition is about the applicability  or
otherwise  of the term/concept  "actionable claim". fn one
judgment, it has been strenuously relied upon  and used as

foundational  for the interpretation of Entry  No.9, wltile in the
other  it is completely discarded.  Therefore, in order  to resolve

-6-

W.P  No.3896  of 2075

the matter, it seems expedient to uscertain,  what  is the true

connotation  of the said expression, in: its general  terms; as

deJined  in section  3 of the TPA and the application  of this

dejinition for the interpretation of the said entry. Besides it is
also important  to dilate-upon  and express d the deJinition
provided by a statute can be resorted  to for the interpretation
of another  statute,  though in the latter there is no mention or

reference  of such a deftnition or the expression  at all.
5. 
In the above context,lirstly  I shall embark  on to Jind
out d such  a concept  is available  in foreign legal  systems.  In
English  und American  jurisprudence  the concept  t'actionable

claim" as such, is not prescribed or provided; but to an extent

it may be equated  with their terms i.e. "chooses  in action"  or
"chooses of action".  Therefore, it shall be germane  and
signiftcant  to comprehend  as to what does that mean.  In

Words  and Phrases, permanent  edition,  it is propounded  that

the words  "chooses of action" mean  nothing more and can
have no broader signiJication than the words "rights of
action"  which in other word means as a personal  right not

reduced  into possession but recoverable  by a law suit.

According  to Halsbury's Law of England  fourth
edition "the expression'choose  in action'  or'thing  in action'
in the literal sense means a thing recoverable  by action as

contrasted with a chose in possession, which is a thing of

which a person  may  have not only  the ownership  but slso the

physical possession". The meaning of the expression is also

used to describe  all personal  rights of property  which  can

only be claimed  or enforced  by an action, and not by taking

physical  possession.  In English Law, as per classijication  the

"chooses  in action" are of two kinds,'legal chooses  in action'
and 'equitable  chooses  in action'  the former are those which
could  be recovered  and/or  enforced  by an action  at law,  as for
instance  a debt, bill of exchange,  or s claim  on an insurance

poliry etc, whereas  the equitable choose  of action  though
again enforceable  through the process of Courts, but in
connection  with the rights, share or interest  relating to

partnership, trust funds, legacy,  under the will, right  oJ' the
mortgagee to any surplus  proceeds of the sale  etc. Ilowever
the subject  matter, in  both the categories of  actions

W.P  11o.3896 of 2O75

aforementioned  (the suit) which may  even be for the recovery
of a "debt", by itself shall not be the personal property of the
claimants  until  and unless  the claim in the legal  action  has

been  allowed by the Court  and  a decree  to that  effect has been
passed. It is thus clear from  the preceding  discussion that for
interpreting  the entry  no help can be drawn from the foreign

concept.
6. 
In our countlt, the noted term has not been  provided  in
the Family  Courts Act,  1964. It is also not defined  in the
General  Clauses Act, 1897,  which is the law applicable  to all

central legislations  and is meant for the interpretation  and
provides  guiding  principles thereof, unless in a speciJic
statute itself the provisions are available  to supply  the
interpretative  guidance  to that  legislation.  It may be pertinent

to mention here  that some Parliaments of the world  do pass

one Act that is meant  to provide  deJinitions that  are to be read

into most other  statutes.  An Act of this nature is known as

Interpretation  Act and our General Clause Act in some ways

resemble  thereto. But as mentioned earlier' the expression

'actionable  claim' is not defined therein, which could  buttress

for sach an interpretation.
7. 
claim"  has been  provided  is the TPA ancl it reads as:

The only statute  in which  the deftnition  of "actionable

"@!@" 
means  a claim to any debt, other
than a debt secured by mortgage of immovable
property or by hypothecation or pledge  of movable
property,  or to any beneftcial interest  in movable
property not in  the possession  either actual or
constructive, of the claimant, which  the Civil Court
recognize as affording grounds for relief, whether
such  debt or beneftcial  interest  be existence,  accruing

conditional or contingent:

It is settled  law that deJinition  clause  or a section in a statute
is meant generally  to declare  what certain words or
expressions used in that statute  shall mean, the obvious
object  of such a clause  is to avoid the necessity  offrequent
repetition in describing all the subject matter to which the
word or expression  so deJined  is intended to apply.  It is o rule

-8-

W.P  No.3896  of 2O75

of interpretation  of laws that when  a word/expression is given

a deJinite meaning in one Act of Parliament  (statute) it does
not mean  that it shall ipso facto have the same meaning .in
another Act of the Parliament,  except  in the cases in which
Parliament  has declared  that two or more Acts be read
together  as one Act, or where on the rule/principle of
legislation  by reference,  a deJinition of any earlier law may

be borrowed  or adopted  as the deJinition  for constructing the
operative  provisions  of the luter law. A  deJinition  thus
appearing in one Act cannot  be used to interpret the same
word appearing  in another  Act, until it is specffically  so
referred  und boruowed  with a clear command of law.
Because,  the context, the purpose, the object and the
requirements  of every  statute may vary from other; the
deJinition of a word from  one statute  can not be safely
imported to another, which tf  so resorted to without
ascertaining  the clear intention of the legislation byfollowing
the rules of interpretation, just as a matter of routine  and

course,  it shall  not only  be hazardous,  rather may distort and

frustrate  the object  of the law and violate the legislative  intent
which is absolutely impermissible in law.
8. 
The definition  of "actionable  claim" in the TPA is
strictly  and exclusively relatable  to the operative  provisions of

Chapter WII of that Act,  which  by virtue of Sections  130 to

137 thereof inter alia, prescribes  the requirements and the

broad  mechanism  for the transfer and  the assignment  of the
"actionable  claims" so deftned in section 3. It  has no
application  beyond the tuct even d any generol  concept
emerges  on account of the expression, it is restricted  to the
law it forms part and cannot  be stretched  to apply  to any
other  law of the land, including  the l-amily  Courts Act, 1964,
thus the interpretation of entry No.9 ibid as provided  by
Muhammad  Akram v. Mst. Ilajra Bibi and 2 others (supra) is
the correct  explication of law, which is hereby  approved.
However adding  thereto, it may be held that if the ratio of
Nasrullah clictum  (supra)  which is entirely and solely
founded  on the noted concept/  cleJinition  is taken to be
correct, than a suit for SpeciJic  Performance,  declaratory
suits of any nature,  or ony other  civil legislation  between  a

-9-

W.P  No.3896  of 2C75

wtfe and husband shall be amenable  to the special
jurisdiction  of the family  Court, which is not intent  of the
law. Because according to the literal approach  of reading a

statute, the statute has to be read  literally by giving the words

used  therein, ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning.

Besides,  the addition  and substraction  of a word  in a statute
is not justffied, except where  for the interpretation  thereof  the
principle of reading  in and reading  down may be pressed into

service  in cefiain cases;  thus when in Entry No.9  'actionable
claim' has not been  provided  by the legislature,  it' shall be

improper  and shall  impinge  upon  the legislative intent  and
the rules of interpretation  to add this expression to the

clause/entry."

In light of the above  judgment of the august Apex Court, the words of the

statute  are to be interpreted  in such  away as not to defeat  the intention  of the

legislature.  The jurisdiction is conferred upon a Family  Court  under Section  5 of

the Family  Courts Act, 1964, read with  Schedule-I  to the Act. Schedule-I  provides

list of the claims,  which  can be agitated before the Family Court. The suit in the

nature of damages  for divorce by the husband,  as was the case in "PLD 2077

SC 260"supra is not envisaged  in the Act of 1964.  The judgments  handed down

by the Family Court  as well as the Appellate  Couft do not suffer from  any error of

law in this behalf.

8

For the above reasons,  the instant petition  is without merit and is

accordingly  dismissed.

Announced  in Open Court this 27s day of November, 2O19.

(AAMER

JUDGE

xM.  ZaheerJanJua*

,UDGE

