Form No: HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       WRIT PETITION NO. 1460 OF 2021 

 Amjad Khan   

VS 

  Learned ASJ West Islamabad, etc. 

PETITIONERS BY:      Mr. Tariq Mehmood Mughal, Advocate.  

RESPONDENTNo.3 BY:  Mr. Mazhar Iqbal, Advocate   

DATE OF HEARING: 

29.11.2021.  

========================================  

BABAR SATTAR, J.- This judgment will decide the instant 

writ petition and W.P No. 3729 of 2021 titled “Mst. Sumbal Shaheen 

VS Additional District Judge, etc.” as the subject matter and parties 

in both petitions are the same.  

2.   

Through  W.P  No.  1460/2021  Amjad  Khan  (hereinafter 

referred  to  as  the  “Petitioner”)  has  impugned  the  judgment  and 

decree  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  (West), 

Islamabad,  dated  05.01.2021  to  the  extent  of  payment  of 

maintenance  to  respondent  No.  3  i.e.  Mst.  Sumbal  Shaheen 

(hereinafter referred to as the “Respondent”). The Respondent has 

filed  W.P  No.  3729/2021  challenging  the  above  said  judgment  and 

decree  to  the  extent  of  dismissal  of  her  claim  for  payment  of 

deferred dower.    

3.   

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  stated  that  the 

learned  Family  Court  had  rightly  found  that  the  Petitioner  had  not   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P No. 1460/2021 

P a g e  | 2 

deserted the Respondent and she was living in her parents’ house of 

her own volition and was therefore  not entitled to maintenance. He 

relied on Mohammad Sajjad and 2 others  VS Neelum Shaheen 

and  another  (2017  YLR  2481  Shariat  Court  AJK)  and  Majid 

Hussian  VS  Farah  Naz  (2019  MLD  1999  High  Court  Azad 

Kashmir)  for  the  proposition  that  a  wife  living  separately  without 

the consent of her husband is not entitled to grant of maintenance.  

4.   

Learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  the 

Respondent was not a disobedient wife and had been forced to leave 

the  house  of  the  Petitioner  due  to  his  abusive  behavior.  He 

submitted that there was no infirmity in the impugned judgment to 

the extent of grant of maintenance  to the Respondent.                                                                  

5.   

The  question  of  right  of  wife  to  maintenance  came  before 

this Court in W.P No. 2355/2015 titled “Shahab Saqib VS Sadaf 

Rasheed”.  This  Court  after  discussing  the  law  laid  down  by  the 

august Supreme Court had held the following:  

35.  On  the  question  of  maintenance  Section  9  of  the  MFLO  is 

unequivocal  and  its  language  does  not  open  the  provision  to 

multiple interpretations with regard to affixing the obligation of a 

husband to maintain his wife. There are no conditions prescribed 

therein  that  need  to  be  satisfied  prior  to  establishing  the 

eligibility  of  the  wife,  who  remains  in  the  bond  of  marriage,  to 

maintenance  and  none  can  be  imported  into  it  on  the  basis  of 

commentaries 

in  various 

treatises  on 

the  principles  of 

Mohammedan Law. Section 9 of the MFLO simply states that, “if 

any husband fails to maintain his wife adequately,” the wife can 

apply  to  Chairman  Arbitration  Council  for  enforcement  of  the  

obligations  or  seeking  any  other  legal  remedy  available  such  as 

before the Family Court etc. 

 
 
 
W.P No. 1460/2021 

P a g e  | 3 

38.  As  already  stated  above,  Section  9  of  the  MFLO  is  not 

ambiguous and consequently conditions for grant of maintenance 

to a wife cannot be read into it by virtue of erstwhile Section 488 

of  Cr.P.C.  or  Section  2  of  the  Muslim  Personal  Law  (Sharia) 

Application  Act,  1937,  or case  law evolved  at  a  time  when such 

statutory provisions were in the field. In this view of the matter, 

the  respondent  is  entitled  to  maintenance  for  the  entire  period 

that she remained married to the petitioner unconditionally, and 

no preconditions can be imposed the satisfaction of which would 

be  a  prerequisite  to  assert  her  entitlement  to  maintenance.  The 

learned  ADJ  therefore  made  no  mistake  in  law  in  granting 

maintenance to the respondent. 

6.   

In view of the law as elucidated above, maintenance cannot 

be  denied  to  a  wife  on  the  basis  of  assertion  that  the  wife  was 

disobedient.  In  view  of  the  above,  writ  petition  No.  1460/2021  is 

dismissed.   

7.  

The  Respondent  has  also  impugned  the  Judgment  and 

decree dated 05.01.2021 to the extent that deferred dower has not 

been  granted  to  the  Respondent.  The  basic  contention  of  the 

learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  was  that  the  Petitioner  had 

remarried  and  consequently  the  deferred  dower  was  payable  in 

view  of  section  6(5)  of  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961 

(“Ordinance”).  The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  on  the 

other  hand,  stated  that  there  was  no  finding  by  the  learned  trial 

court  that  the  Petitioner  had  remarried.  He  submitted  that  the 

Respondent was attempting to mislead this Court as the arbitration 

council has already ruled that the Petitioner had not remarried. 

8.  

 In  view  of  the  fact  that  there  is  no  finding  by  the 

arbitration  council  or  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  that  the 

petitioner  has  remarried  without  seeking  permission  of  the 

 
 
 
W.P No. 1460/2021 

P a g e  | 4 

arbitration council, provision of section 6(5) of the Ordinance is not 

attracted.  

9.  

The law on the due date of payment of deferred dower was 

clarified  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Saadia  Usman  VS 

Muhammad Usman Iqbal Jadoon (2009 SCMR 1458),  wherein 

it was held that: 

“Deferred dower is payable on the time stipulated between 

the parties, but where no time is stipulated, it is payable by 

dissolution of marriage either by death or divorce.” 

10. 

In  view  of  the  above,  given  that  the  impugned  has  held 

that  the  differed  dower  is  not  due  as  the  marriage  between  the 

Petitioner and the Respondent is still subsisting there is no infirmity 

in the impugned order. Consequently Writ Petition No. 3729 of 2021 

is dismissed.   

     (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

   Announced in the open Court on   14.12.2021. 

JUDGE 

Saeed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
