ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.3821 of 2020 

Khurram Shahzad  
VS
Naseem Akhter and others 

Petitioner by:   
Respondents by: 

Mr. Shahid Mehmood Langrial, Advocate. 
Mr. Jameel Hussian Qureshi, Advocate. 

Date of hearing: 

15.03.2021 

GHULAM  AZAM  QAMBRANI, 

J.:-  Through 

this 

consolidated judgment, I intend to decide two writ petitions bearing  

Nos.3821/2020  and  3734/2020,  arising out of  the  same  impugned 

judgment  &  decree  and  involving  common  questions  of  law  and 

facts. 

2.  Through  writ  petition  No.3821/2020,  the  petitioner  has  invoked 

the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 with the following prayer:-  

"It  is,  therefore,  most  respectfully  prayed  before  this 
honourable court that the instant writ petition may kindly 
be  accepted  and  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree 
dated  26.09.2020  passed  by 
learned  District  Judge 
Islamabad-West  and  impugned  order  and  decree  dated 
28.10.2019,  15.10.2019,  03.10.2019  and  03.09.2019 
passed  by  Judge  Family  court  Islamabad  (west)  may 
graciously  be  set  aside  and  the  orders  passed  by  the 
family  judge  may  graciously  be  declared  void  ab  initio, 
against  the  paying  capacity  of  the  petitioner  in  the  best 
interest of justice and the case of petitioner may kindly be 
remanded  back  for  the  true  determination  of  rights  of 
parties, and a reasonable maintenance of the minors may 
kindly be fixed in the best interest of justice.  

Any  other  relief  which  this  Hon'ble  court  deems  fit, 

may also be accorded".  

3.  Whereas,  in  writ  Petition  No.3734  of  2020,  following  prayer 

has been made:-  

"The  impugned  order  and  decree  dated  28.10.2019 
passed by respondent No.2 and impugned judgment and 
decree passed by respondent No.3 may graciously be set 
aside  and/or  modified  to  the  extent  of  enhancement  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

maintenance  allowance  of  the  petitioners  according  to 
the  prayer  of  the  main  suit  filed  by  the  petitioner  in  the 
interest of justice"  

4.  

Briefly  the  facts  giving  rise  to  the  filing  of  these  instant 

petitions are that the petitioner (Khurram Shehzad) and respondent 

No.1  (Naseem  Akhtar)  had  entered  into  marriage  bond  on 

07.03.2008 according to the injunctions of Islam and as a result of 

the marriage, the couple was blessed with two children namely Ali 

Gondal (son) and Zahra Gondal, (daughter) who are in custody of 

the  mother  and  being  brought  up  by 

respondent  No.1. 

Unfortunately,  differences  cropped-up  between  the  couple  and 

according 

to 

the  petitioner's 

version,  he  divorced  his 

wife/respondent No.1 on 03.09.2018. However, she filed  a  suit  for 

recovery of maintenance allowance for herself as well as her minor 

children  at  the  rate  of  Rs.50,000/-  each  per  month  alongwith 

birth/delivery  charges  of  respondents  No.2  and  3  at  the  rate  of 

Rs.1,00,000/- each. 

5. 

The  defendant/  petitioner  submitted  written  statement 

through  Fiaz  Hussain  Gondal  Advocate/Special  Attorney  raising 

therein  a  number  of  preliminary  objections  both  factual  and  legal. 

On merits,  it  was contended that the defendant  has regularly  paid 

the maintenance to the plaintiffs through online and through banks 

and  he  has  never  committed  any  default 

in  payment  of 

maintenance to the plaintiffs: that behavior of the defendant always 

remained  good  with  the  plaintiffs;  that  defendant  always  tried  his 

level best to provide each and every necessity of life to the plaintiffs 

and  he  never  maltreated  her  as  alleged  by  her;  that  monthly 

income  of  the  defendant  is  Rs.50,000/-  and  that  the  maintenance 

being  demanded  by  the  plaintiffs  is  exorbitant;  that  at  the  time  of 

birth of the minors conjugal relations between the couple were quite 

normal and he had paid all the delivery charges.  

6. 

Subsequently, the petitioner/defendant moved an application 

seeking  amendment  in  the  written  statement  as  according  to  him, 

the special attorney was also closely related to the plaintiff/Naseem 

Akhtar who in connivance with the plaintiff, did not state the actual 

 
 
 
 
 
3 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

facts in the written statement; that he did not mention the fact that 

the  defendant  had  already  divorced 

the  plaintiff  No  1  on 

03.09.2018,  hence  she  was  no  longer  his  wife;  that  the  delivery 

charges  at  both  occasions  were  paid  by  the  defendant/petitioner, 

that the plaintiffs were living in the house of the petitioner and that 

throughout  maintenance  was  paid  by  him  to  the  plaintiffs,  hence 

not entitled to claim any sort of maintenance from him. 

7. 

Thereafter,  vide  the  impugned  order  dated  03.09.2019, 

learned  Judge  Family  Court, 

Islamabad, 

fixed 

the 

interim 

maintenance  of  both  the  minors  @  Rs.15,000/-  each  per  month 

and  Rs.20,000/-  per  month  for  plaintiff  No.1/Naseem  Akhtar. 

Thereafter  vide  order  date  03.10.2019,  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court  observed  that  as  the  defendant/petitioner  has  not  paid  the 

maintenance  allowance  as  directed  by  the  Court,  therefore,  while 

stopping  the  proceedings  in  the  application  for  amendment  in  the 

written  statement,  ordered  the  defendant  to  pay  the  interim 

maintenance  and  to  submit  the  receipts  to  the  same  effect  on  the 

next date of  hearing.  Thereafter,  vide order  dated 15.10.2019,  the 

learned Judge Family Court again observed that the defendant has 

not  paid  the  interim  maintenance,  therefore,  his  right  to  defence 

was  struck  of  under  Section  17(A)  of  the  Family  Courts  Act  1964 

and  case  was  fixed  for  orders  for  28.10.2019.  On  said  date  of 

hearing,  when  the  defendant  again  failed  to  pay  the  maintenance 

allowance of the plaintiff, learned Judge Family Court proceeded to 

decree the suit in terms Section 17(A) of the Family Court Act 1964 

to the effect that the defendant is liable to pay the maintenance of 

plaintiff No.1 at the rate of Rs.20,000/- per month and Rs,15,000/- 

per  month  each  for  the  minors/plaintiffs  No.2  and  3  with  10%  per 

annum increase from the date of institution of suit i.e. March 2019 

till attaining the majority by the plaintiffs No.2 and 3 and till plaintiff 

No.1 is wife of the defendant/ petitioner.  

8. 

Being  aggrieved  of 

the  above  said  orders, 

the 

defendant/petitioner  filed  an  appeal  before  the  District  Judge, 

Islamabad  west  The  plaintiffs/respondents  also  filed  an  appeal 

before  the  learned  District  Judge,  praying  therein  that  the  rate  of 

 
 
  
 
4 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

maintenance 

fixed  by 

the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court 

is 

disproportionate to their needs, hence the same may be increased, 

as prayed by them.  

9. 

After  hearing  learned  counsel  for  the  parties,  the  learned 

lower  appellate  Court  vide  the  impugned  consolidated  judgment 

26.09.2020, dismissed both the appeals,  

10.  Feeling  not  satisfied  with  the  same,  both  the  parties  have 

preferred the subject Writ Petitions.  

11.  Learned counsel for the petitioner/ Khurram Shahzad argued 

that  both  the  learned  lower  courts  failed  to  appreciate  that  the 

petitioner  had  divorced  respondent  No.1  on  03.09.2018  and  she 

was no longer in the marriage bond of the petitioner and being so 

he  was  not  obliged  under  the  law  to  maintain  her  but  both  the 

learned courts have not adverted to this material aspect of the case 

and  that  non-consideration  of  this  fact  resulted  into  gross  mis-

carriage of justice; that the order qua grant of monthly maintenance 

at the rate of Rs.20,000/- in favour of respondent No.1 is absolutely 

illegally and highly uncalled for and liable to be brushed aside; that 

the  rate  of  maintenance  fixed  by  the  learned  trial  Court  i.e. 

Rs.15,000,  per  month  per  minor  is  also  disproportionate  to  the 

sources  of 

income  of 

the  petitioner; 

that 

the  quantum  of 

maintenance  was  fixed  relying  on  one  sided  version  of  the 

respondents, which is opposed to the principles of justice, that the 

petitioner is living in Oman and his attorney in connivance with the 

opponent  party  made  ambiguous  written  statement  in  connivance 

with the respondents; that he filed an application for amendment in 

written  statement,  but  learned  trial  Court  did  not  entertain  and 

adjudicate the said application and the same remained undecided; 

that  findings  of  the  learned  courts  below  are  not  based  on  facts, 

hence liable to be set aside. Ultimately, acceptance of the petition 

was prayed for.  

12.  On  the  contrary,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents 

submitted  that  the  petitioner  has  not  mentioned  the  fact  of 

pronouncement of Talaq in his written statement; that the petitioner 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

was living in Oman, therefore, if he has sent divorce from Oman, it 

should  have  been  attested  by  Pakistan  High  Commission  or 

Consulate  General  etc.  at  Oman  but  the  same  is  not  attested  by 

them; that in absence of attestation, the alleged Divorce Deed shall 

be deemed to be issued in violation of the law and is null and void; 

that the quantum of maintenance fixed by the learned trial Court is 

highly  insufficient  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  respondents;  that  the 

petitioner  is  a  man  of  means  and  can  pay  the  maintenance  as 

demanded  in  the  plaint;  that  it  is  primary  duty  of  the  petitioner  to 

maintain  his  wife  and  children,  that  the  decree  passed  by  the 

learned  trial  Court  is  in  accordance  with  statutory  provisions 

contained under section 17-A of the Family Courts Act 1964 as the 

suit  can  be  decreed  if  defendant  makes  default  in  payment  of 

interim  maintenance,  that  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree 

needs  to  be  modified  only  to  the  extent  of  rate  of  maintenance 

which  may  be  increased  as  per  prayer  made  by  the  plaintiffs/ 

respondents. 

13. 

I  have  considered  the  arguments  advanced  from  both  the 

sides and have gone through the record  

14.  At  the  very  out-set,  it  may  be  pertinent  to  mention  that  in 

family  suits  pertaining  to  recovery  of  maintenance  allowance,  if 

defendant, despite orders issued by the Family Court qua payment 

of  interim  maintenance,  defaults  in  making  payment  of  interim 

maintenance,  penal  action  in  terms  of  Section  17-A  of  the  Family 

Court Act 1964 can be taken by the Court concerned. Section 17-A 

ibid provides two separate penal consequences, first striking off the 

right  of  defence  and  second  to  decree  the  suit.  From  collective 

reading  of  the  provisions  of  Sections  17-A  and  17-B  of  the  Act 

Supra. it is clear that by having used the word "May" the legislature 

did  not  intend  to  make  passing  of  decree  mandatory  rather  it  has 

been  left  upon  the  discretion  of  the  learned  trial  Court  to  consider 

the facts and circumstances of each case. It may be advantageous 

to reproduce Section 17-A hereunder:-  

"Section  17-A.  Interim  order  for  maintenance:—  At 
any  stage  of  proceedings  in  a  suit  for  maintenance, 
the  Family  court  may  pass  an  interim  order  for 

 
 
 
 
6 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

maintenance, whereunder the payment shall be made 
by  the  fourteenth  of  each  month,  failing  which  the 
court may strike off the defence of the defendant and 
decree the suit."  

Section  17-B  further  explains  the  circumference  as  well  as  the 

mode of exercising the authority in the shape of making reasonable 

inquiry  of  the  matter  in-question  before  decreeing  the  suit  due  to 

default,  For 

ready 

reference  section  17-B 

is 

reproduced 

hereunder:-  

"Power  of  the  court  to  issue  Commission.  Subject  to 
such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, 
the Court may issue a Commission to- 

(a) Examine any person;  
(b) Make a local investigation; and  
(c) Inspect any property or document  

15.  Coming back to the proposition involved in the instant case. it 

is  evident  from  record  of  proceedings  conducted  by  the  learned 

Family  Court,  that  vide  order  dated  03.09.2019,  learned  Judge 

Family  Court,  Islamabad-west,  fixed  the  interim  maintenance  Of 

both  the  minors  @  Rs.15,000/-  each  per  month  and  Rs.20,000/- 

per month for plaintiff No.1/ Naseem Akhtar. Thereafter, vide order 

date 03.10.2019, the learned Judge Family Court observed that as 

the  defendant/petitioner  has  not  paid  the  maintenance  allowance 

as directed by the court, therefore, while stopping the proceedings 

in the application for amendment in the  written statement, ordered 

the  defendant  to  pay  the  interim  maintenance  and  to  submit  the 

receipts to the same effect on the next date of hearing. Then vide 

order  dated  15.10.2019,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  again 

observed that the defendant has not paid the interim maintenance, 

therefore, his right to defence was struck of under Section 17(A) of 

the  Family  Courts  Act  1964  and  case  was  fixed  for  orders  for 

28.10.2019. On this date of hearing, it was observed that when the 

defendant again  failed to pay  the maintenance allowance,  learned 

Judge  Family  Court  proceeded  to  decree  the  suit  in  terms  of 

Section  17(A)  of  the  Family  Court  Act,  1964  to  the  effect  that  the 

defendant  is  liable  to  pay  the  maintenance  of  plaintiff  No.1  at  the 

rate of Rs.20.000/- per month and Rs,15,000/- per month each for 

the minors/plaintiffs No.2 and 3 with 10% per annum increase vide 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

order  dated  02.02.2012.  This  position  verifies  the  fact  that  there 

has  been  a  clear  cut  default  on  the  part  of  defendant/petitioner  in 

payment  of  interim  maintenance  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  the 

learned  trial  Court  wrongly  invoked  the  provisions  of  Section  17-A 

of Family Court Act, 1964.  

16.  As  reproduced  above,  the  second  penal  consequence 

provided under Section 17-A embraces the expression of "decree" 

which though has not been defined in Family Courts Act 1964, yet 

according  to  settled  law  decree  invariably  refers  to  judicial 

determination  of  a  matter  in  controversy  and  such  determination 

cannot  be  done  without  application  of  mind  in  accordance  with 

evidence and law on the subject, therefore, the impugned judgment 

mechanically  and  technically  upholding  prayer  of  a  suit  cannot  be 

termed  a  decree.  In  this  behalf,  I  am  fortified  in  my  view  from  the 

law laid down in case of Hyderabad Development Authority through 

M.D VS Abdul Maieed etc (PLD 2002 SC 841) and Messrs UBL VS 

Messrs Silver Oil Mills Ltd (2003 SCMR 1161) 

17.  The petitioner/  defendant has moved an application seeking 

amendment in the written statement with the assertion that he was 

abroad and he appointed a Special Attorney who was also closely 

related to the plaintiffs and he in connivance with the plaintiffs failed 

to  mention  the  fact  that  plaintiff  No.1  had  been  divorced  by  the 

defendant  on  03.09.2018  and  thus  she  was  not  entitled  to  claim 

maintenance. Copy of the divorce deed is on record and the same 

is also acknowledged from the fact that plaintiff No1 has filed a suit 

in Civil Court Sargodha challenging the validity of the Divorce deed. 

Since  the  fate  of  claim  of  the  plaintiff  No.1  for  recovery  of 

maintenance  hinges  upon  the  factum  of  her  being  in  the  Nikah  of 

the  defendant  or  not,  therefore,  this  material  fact  should  not  have 

been  ignored  and  the  application  for  amendment  in  the  written 

statement ought to have been decided before passing a decree.  

18. 

It  is  relevant  to  mention  here  that  guidelines  on  the  above 

subject  were  settled  by  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  in  a  case 

reported  as  “Ali  Adnan  Dar  VS  Judge  Family  Judge  and  others” 

(PLD 2016 Lahore 73), which are reproduced hereunder- 

 
 
 
 
 
8 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

i)  Maintenance  allowance  is  indispensible  right  of  the 
mother  and  children,  so  the  order  for  grant  of 
maintenance  allowance  must  be  passed  at  a 
"convenient stage" of the proceedings; 

ii)  Although Section 17-A of the Act ibid, empowers Family 
Court to pass an order for grant of interim maintenance 
allowance  at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings,  in  the 
normality  of  circumstances,  it  must  be  passed  after 
hearing  both  of  the  parties  unless  the  attitude  and 
conduct of the defendant/father is evasive,  

iii)  The  order  for  grant  of  interim  maintenance  is  made  on 
the  basis  of  tentative  assessment  of  material  available 
on  file  and  keeping  in  view  the  social  status  of  the 
parties.  Further  both  the  above  material  available  and 
social  status,  should  be  mentioned  in  the  order  for  the 
grant of interim maintenance.  

iv)   The  quantum  of  interim  maintenance  should  be  "bare 
minimum"  to  meet  the  day  to  day  needs  of  the 
recipients in the narrow context;  

v)   Although  the  family 

laws  have  been  enacted  to 
promote, protect and  advance the rights of woman  and 
children  yet  at  the  interim  stage  the  version  of  the 
respondent/  defendant  be  given  a  sympathetic  or 
some-what  preferable  consideration  because  non-
payment  of  interim  maintenance  allowance  will  cut 
throat  of  his  valuable  rights  i.e.  right  to  defence  and 
inconsequential  effects,  children/women  would  be  the 
losing and deprived parties;  

vi)  Further  if  the  case  is  not  decided  within  the  statutory 
period  as  given  in  Section  12-A  of  the  West  Pakistan 
Family  Courts  Act,  1964  either  party  may  apply  to  the 
High Court for appropriate direction. However, the   order 
for  grant  of  interim  maintenance  shall  hold  the  field 
unless  reviewed  by  the  High  Court  under  Section  l2-A 
or  Family  court 
it  at  any  stage  as 
observed below"  

itself  reviews 

19. 

In  addition  to  above,  in  consequence  of  the  peculiar 

circumstances  of  instant  case  as  well  as  the  huge  amount  of 

maintenance  demanded  by  the  minors  and  their  mother  through 

her  next  friend,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  learned  trial  Court  to 

have  sought  evidence  of  the  parties  in  proof  of  justification 

concerning  the  quantum  of  maintenance  and  financial  position  of 

the  petitioner/defendant.  Similarly,  endorsing  the  quantum  of 

maintenance  fixed  by  the  learned  trial  Court  without  dilating  upon 

the  above  factors  by  the  learned  lower  appellate  Court  is  also 

legally not warranted.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

“W.P Nos.3821 & 3734 of 2020” 
(Khurram Shahzad V. Naseem Akhtar, etc. and  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar V. Khurram Shahzad, etc.) 

20.  For  the  aforesaid  reasons  the  Writ  Petition  No.3821/  2020 

filed  by  Khurram  Shahzad  is  allowed.  Resultantly,  the  impugned 

judgment and decrees passed by the learned trial Court as well as 

learned  lower  appellate  Court  are  set-aside  and  the  case  is 

remanded  to  the  learned  Family  Court,  Islamabad-West  to  decide 

the quantum of maintenance after taking evidence of petitioner viz-

a-viz  financial  status  of  the  petitioner.  Learned  Family  Court  shall 

also  decide  the  application  moved  by  the  petitioner/defendant  for 

seeking  amendment  in  the  written  statement  before  passing  any 

order for maintenance of plaintiff No.1 owing to the plea raised by 

the  defendant/petitioner  that  having  been  divorced  in  year  2018, 

she  is  no  more  wife  of  the  petitioner,  hence  not  entitled  to  claim 

maintenance.  However,  interim  maintenance  shall  also  be  fixed 

after  hearing  both  the  parties  and  considering  the  financial 

competence  of  the  petitioner/  father,  who  shall  regularly  pay  the 

interim maintenance to be fixed by the learned Family Court.  

21.  Learned  trial  Court  is  directed  to  decide  the  suit  within  a 

period  of  three  months  positively,  under  intimation  to  this  Court 

through Additional Registrar (Judicial). 

22.  With the  above  observations, the  writ  petition No.3734/2020 

is disposed of. 

(GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on this 29th day of March, 2021. 

Rana.M.Ift 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
