ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl. Misc. No.109-8/2020 

AWAISKHAN. 

VS

THE STATE, ETC. 

Petitioner by: 

M/s Haroon Rashid  and Aftab  Rashid, Advocates. 

Complainant by: 

Mr.  Razzaq  A.  Mirza, Advocate. 

State by: 

Mr.  Farrukh Shahzad Dall, AAG. 
Mr.  Adnan Khan, A.D, FIA. 

Date of Hearing: 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

09.03.2020. 

LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ;  .1'. 

Through  instant  petition,  Petitioner  namely 

Awais Khan, seeks post arrest  bail  under section 497 Cr.P.C,  in  case FIR No.30, 

dated  22.10.2019,  for  offences  under  section  20,21,24  of  the  Prevention  of 

Electronic Crime Act, 2016 read with  500, 506 &  109/34 PPC,  registered at  Police 

Station Cyber Crimes reporting Centre, Islamabad .. 

2. 

The  facts  in  brief  are  that,  the  FIR against the  petitioner  and  four  other 

accused  was  registered  on  the  complaint  of  Liaqat  Ali  Khan,  for  sending 

immodest and  immoral  pictures of  the  complainant and  his family  members and 

messages with  abusive  language  through  whatsapp  cell  phone  Nos.  0345- 

5975421 and 0349-5401030 and following created/operated  Facebook profiles:- 

(i) 

Imran  Khan  (petitioner's  cousin),  at  Facebook  Profile 
URL: 
Khan 
Khan 
www.facebook.com/profile.php?id= 100016078606930; 

having 

Im ran 

(ii)  Shahbaz Khan, at  Facebook profile  Shahbaz Khan having 

URL: 
www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100015141307153; 

(iii)  Waqas  Ahmed  Khattak  at  Facebook  profile  URL: 

www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=1000025429658699; 

at 

page 

"ChakMansoor 

News'' 

having 

URL: 

https://www.facebook.com/KhaN.Group.ChaKMaNsOoR.786/.  Accused  used  .to 

upload fabricated sexually explicit, superimposed and fabricated  pictures with  the 

en.  :~fisc.109/B of 2020  12 
Awai•  Khan  v.  The State 

intention  to  harass,  defame  the  complainant,  his  wife,  sons  and  daughter 

including a  minor daughter. 

3. 

Learned  Counsel 

for  the  Petitioner/accused  argued  that  he  has  been 

involved  in 

the  case  on  account  of  enmity  between  the  families  as  the 

complainant and the  father  of the  accused  are  real  brother  and  hatred  between 

the  parties  was  developed  when  Tariq  the  son  of  the  complainant  broke 

engagement  with  accused's sister.  Learned counsel  referred  the  following  last 

lines  of the  FIR:- 

"Prima facie a case u/s 20, 21, 24, PECA  2016 tfw  500, 506, 509, 109 & 34 
PPC against i).  Imran  Khan s/o  Juma  Khan, tf o  Village Chak Mansoor, P. O 
Chhab, Tehsil Pindi  Ghab, Attock,  ii).  Shahbaz Khan s/o  Rizwan Ullah Khan 
Khattak,  CNIC  42501-1250572-3,  r/o  Village  Chak  Mansoor,  P.O  Chhab, 
Tehsil, Pindi  Ghab, District,  Attock,  iii).  Waqas Ahmed  s/o  Mesen Khan r/o 
Village Chak  Mansoor,  P. O  Chhab,  Tehsil,  Pindi  Ghab,  District,  Attock  is 
registered after permission from  the competent authority  and the role  of iv). 
Rizwan Ullah Khan Khattak,  V)  Owais khan and others if any  will be trashed 
out during investigation.  Copy of the FIR is being sent to concerned quartet' 

and  submitted  that  accused  has  been  arrested  without  determining  the  role  in 

the  offence,  hence, there  is  no  specific allegation  against the  accused.  Learned 

counsel further  submitted  that  investigation has  been  completed and challan has 

already  been  submitted  before  the  concerned  Court  on  20.01.2020.  Learned 

counsel added  that  the  accused  has  been  nominated  on  the  statement  of  co  

accused,  whereas,  the  case  to  the  extent  of  petitioner  is  of  further  inquiry. 

Learned  counsel lastly contended that  the  alleged offences, however, do  not  fall 

within  the  prohibitory  clause of  section 497  Cr.  P.C;  petitioner  has  no  criminal 

history;  petitioner  is  no more required by the  local  police and is  ready to  furnish 

adequate surety  to  the  satisfaction of  the  court;  therefore,  may  be  released on 

bail. 

4. 

The  Learned  Counsel 

for 

the  complainant  vehemently  opposed  the 

arguments of  learned counsel for  the  accused/petitioner and  objected  the  grant 

of  bail  to  the  accused  while  submitting  that  during  investigation  from  the 

co-accused, it  was found  out  that  he  received the  sexually explicit  pictures from 

the 

accused 

through 

facebook 

account 

having 

URL: 

www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=10008695339445.  Learned  counsel  further 

submitted  that 

in  addition  to  above  registration 

information  provided  by 

Facebook  revealed  IP  logos  and  cell  phone  numbers  0345-2795022  and 

03003646788 registered  in  the  name of  accused  and  found  associated with  his 

oc  r.tisc.109/B  of 2010  13 
Awaid  Khan v.  The State 

email account owaiskhan4145@yahoo.com. Therefore, the  role of  the  accused is 

not  undetermined  as  he  is  directly  involved  in  blackmailing,  defaming  and 

damaging  the  reputation  of  the  complainant  and  his  family  which  include  an 

elderly  lady and also a  minor  daughter.  Learned counsel contended that  though 

the offences do not fall within  the  prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.PC  but the 

offences  are  extremely  immoral  which  involve  question  of  reputation  of  a 

respectable family  and  more  importantly  dignity  and  modesty of  ladies who  are 

school &  college students.  Learned counsel further  contended that  grant  of  bail 

cannot  be  claimed as  of  a  right  and each  and every case  is  to  be dealt  with  on 

the  basis  of  its own  facts and circumstances, therefore,  under the  circumstances 

the accused is  not entitled  for  concession of bail. 

5. 

I  have heard the  learned counsel for the  parties and have also perused the 

relevant record. 

6. 

The  examination  of  the  record  revealed that  the  complainant  and  all  the 

accused  are  relatives  and  allegations  against  all  the  accused  are  the  same 

comprising the  offence of  superimposing, fabricating,  preparing and transmitting 

illicit,  immoral  picture  of  the  family  members of  complainant  through  facebook 

and whatsapp with  the  use  of  abusive, derogatory  and defamatory  language. It 

is  noted that  an  FIR  has  been registered against son  of complainant Tariq  in  FIA, 

Cybercrime Reporting Center, Karachi  invoking the  16,  20,  21  of  PECA  2016 r/w 

419 &  109  PPC,  and the  bail of  accused Tariq  has  been rejected  by the  Hon'ble 

Sindh High Court,  Karachi and the  Criminal Petition No.  1028 of  2019 is  pending 

before Hon'ble Supreme Court. 

7. 

In  the  said  backdrop the  case  of  the  accused has  been  considered  and 

record  perused  which  transpired  that  the  rivals  are  in 

litigation  over  some 

property  dispute,  which  led  to  the  commission  of  alleged  offences  by  the 

accused. The  case  record  produced  by  FIA  shows  that  Imran  Khan,  the  co  

accused  named  accused, during  investigation,  admitted  receiving,  transmitting, 

sharing,  uploading  derogatory  and 

indecorous,  fabricated  photos  of 

the 

complainant and  his family  members for  the  purposes of  defaming  him.  Data of 

facebook  and  whatsapp  from  cell  phones  of  the  accused/petitioner  and  co  

accused  was  retrieved  and  sent  for  forensic  analysis  and  examination.  In 

addition, information  in  respect of facebook URLs  created and operated by all  the 

accused were also obtained by the  facebook authorities. All  the  information/data 

of  conversation  at  whatsapp,  forensic  examination  report  of  the  cells  and 

CrJ.  ·Wisc.109/B  of 2020  14 
AwoifS Khan  v.  The  State 

information  and  verification  of  URL  and  IDs  received from  facebook  authority 

prima 

facie 

constitute 

sufficient 

incriminating  material  against 

the 

accused/petitioner  to  connect  him  with  commission  of  alleged  offence  and 

existence of  reasonable grounds  of  the  accused/petitioner's  involvement  in  the 

alleged  offence,  disentitle  him  for  the  concession of  bail.  Mere  fact  that  the 

offence does not fall  within  the  prohibitory  clause of  Section 497 Cr.PC  does not 

mean that  the  offence  becomes bailable, as  the  law  has  now  been well  settled 

that  the  concession of  bail  is  not  a  right.  The  Hon'ble Sindh High Court  in  case 

titled  Farhan  Kamrani VS The State reported as  (20.1.8  YLR 329 J while 

refusing bail in  a  similar case  has  also held as  under: 

to  humiliate 

''9.  Although,  the  offence  under section 21  of the Act  does not  fall within 
the prohibitory  clause of section 497, Cr.P.C being punishable  up  to  five 
(05)  years,  but in  such  like  cases the grant  of bail  is  not a  right  of the 
accused but  a concession and since the accused is prima  facie involved in 
a  case  of  superimposing  a  photograph  of  the  face  of  a  woman  over 
sexually explicit image, he is not  entitled  to  the  concession of bail simply 
for  the  reason  that  he  is  connected  with  such  offence,  which  seriously 
affect  the  whole society.  The  accused has apparently gone  to grotesque 
lengths 
the  complainant  online,  which  may  cause  a 
detrimental  effect  on  her.  It  may  be  observed  that  the  impact  of 
uploading on internet  the superimposed porn photographs  of a  woman is 
more  than  the shame and shock that  one might  feel  when she discovers 
herself  to  be  the  victim of this  crime.  The  immediate  real  time  effect  is 
the social stigmatization  of the  victim by blaming her for the pictures  and 
questioning her  character.  This may lead to  depression, social alienation 
and  in  some  extreme  cases suicide attempts  by  the  victim  who  cannot 
handle the pressure of dealing with such targeted  vengeance. Under the 
circumstances,  the  accused  is  not  entitled  to  the  concession  of  bail; 
therefore,  this application is dismissed, accordingly'~. 

8. 

For  the  foregoing  reasons, instant  bail  petition  is  Dismissed.  However, 

the  learned trial  Court  is  directed to  conclude the  trial  of  the  case  expeditiously 

preferably  within  the  period  of  four  (4)  months  from  receipt  of  copy  of  this 

judgment. 

9. 

It  is  made clear that  the  observations made hereinabove, being tentative 

in  nature, shall not prejudice the case  of either  party. 

Adnan/~ 

(LUBNA SALEEM PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

