JUDGMENT SHEET. 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P. No. 2250/2019 
Parvaiz Akhter Bhatti VS Federation of Pakistan, etc.  

W.P. No.3512/2019 
Hassan Immad Mohamedi VS Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

W.P. No.1095/2017 
Asad Ahmad Jaspal VS Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

W.P. No.4249/2019 
Muhammad Munawar, etc. VS Federation of Pakistan, etc.  

W.P. No.171/2020 
Rashid Mehmood, etc. VS Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

W.P. No.476/2020 
Sultan Khan Naeem, etc. VS PTVC through its Managing Director, etc. 

W.P. No.533/2020 
Ch. Muhammad Shafi VS P.M. of Pakistan through Principal Secretary, etc.  

W.P. No.1610/2020 
Uzma Naveed Ch. VS Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

W.P. No.1639/2020 
Samina Mir VS Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

Criminal Original No.47-W/2020 
Hassan Immad Mohamedi VS Arshad Khan, Chairman PTVC, Islamabad, etc. 

and 

Objection Case No.7150/2018 
Asad Ahmad Jaspal VS Federation of Pakistan, etc. 

Petitioners by: 

Respondents by: 

M/s  Ali  Nawaz  Kharal,  Danish  Aftab,  Rana 
Rashid  Javed,  Raja  Muqsit  Nawaz,  Hazrat 
Younis,  Muhammad  Waqar  Rana,  Ajmal 
Ghafaar Toor, Afzal Qadeer Satti, Muhammad 
Umair  Baloch,  Saif-ur-Rehman  Shah,  Bukhari, 
Shah Khawar, Barrister Qasim Nawaz Abbasi. 

M/s Ahmad Awais, Shahid Anwar Bajwa, 
Tipu Salman Makhdoom, Syed Ishfaq Hussain 
Naqvi, Moin Ahmad, Faiza Naseer, Qamar 
Inayat Raja, Muhammad Nazir Jawwad, Syed 
Hamid Ali Shah, Arooj Zaib Abbasi, Ch. 
Arshad, Zeeshan Ali Syed, Advocates for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-2 

Board of Directors, PTVC in respective writ 
petitions. 

Mr. Shahid Mehmood Khokhar, Advocate for 
MoIB. 

Ch. Muhammad Nawaz and Ch. Arshad 
Farooq, Advocates for SRBC. 

Mr. Ibrar Saeed, Advocate for SECP. 

Barrister Muhammad Mumtaz Ali, AAG. 

Yasir Shakeel, AD/M-II, S.O. Litigation, MoIB.   
Hussain Wazir, Dy. Director, MoIB. 

Muhammad Javaid, Admin Manager, PBC. 

Dates of Hearing: 

10.07.2020, 21.08.2020, 22.08.2020 & 26.08.2020 

JUDGMENT 

MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI, J: Through this single judgment, I intend 

to decide the captioned writ petitions having  similar questions of law and facts 

along with criminal original and an objection case.  

2. 

The petitioners are mainly aggrieved by the: 

  Appointment of Director/Chairman, Board of Directors, PTVC; 

  Appointment of Managing Director, PTVC; 

  Appointments of the Independent Directors; 

  Appointments made through the head hunting firm; 

  Appointments  of  Amir  Mehmood/Managing  Director  of  PTVC,  Ms. 

Qutrina  Hossain/Chief  News  &  Current  Affairs,  and  Khawar 

Azhar/Head of Content & Marketing PTVC; 

  Appointment of Lt. Col. Hassan Immad Mohamedi as Director Special 

Assignment in PTVC; 

  Decisions  of  Board  of  Directors  as  per  Meeting  whereby  Clauses 

10.20-A  &  10.22-A  of  PTVC  Revised  Leave  Rules,  1984  have  been 

amended,  on  the  basis  of  which  petitioners  have  been  directed  vide 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-3 

impugned  office  order  dated  29.11.2019  to  proceed  on  Leave 

Preparatory to Retirement (LPR); 

  Act of Board of Directors for abolishing the post of Deputy Managing 

Director;  

  Non-maintaining of the seniority list of working Directors;  

  Office  order  of  the  PTVC,  dated  03.06.2020,  whereby  services  of 

petitioners namely Samina Mir, Uzma Naveed, Humera Nasreen Rana 

and  Qaisar  Ahmed  Rana  as  News  Caster/Anchor  Person/Analyst 

have been de-notified; and,  

  Hiring of head hunting firm i.e. M/s Career Pakistan. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioners contended: 

a)  that the very appointment of Arshad Khan as Chairman is in violation 

of  Public  Sector  Companies  (Corporate  Governance)  Rules,  2013, 

whereby  the  Board  of  PTVC  shall  have  at  least  one-third  of  the  total 

number  of  Directors  and  five  (05)  Ex-Officio  Director  and  as  such, 

issuance  of  notification,  dated  03.10.2018,  is  in  violation  of  the 

abovementioned  law  because  the  Federal  Government  could  not 

exercise its discretion and pleasure while appointing Director of Public 

Sector Company as the same has been declared illegal in Atta ul Haq 

Qasmi  case,  as  such  this  appointment  could  be  checked  under  the 

concept  of 

judicial  review  and  relied  upon  2013  SCMR  1159 

(Muhammad  Ashraf  Tiwana  v.  Pakistan,  etc.),  PLD  2012  SC  132 

(Muhammad Yasin VS Federation of Pakistan, etc.), 2010 SCMR  1301 

(Tariq  Aziz  ud  Din  case)  and  PLD  2020  Islamabad  130  (Saira  Rubab 

Nasir VS President of Pakistan, etc.); 

b)  that  Arshad  Khan  after  his  resignation  as  Chairman  could  not  be 

appointed  again  as  Chairman  or  recommended  by  the  Federal 

Government  for  such  position,  especially  when  he  had  already 

received  pay  package  of  Rs.1,760,000/-  and  other  service  benefits, 

which  otherwise  disqualifies  him  under  the  Companies  Act,  2017  as 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-4 

well  as  under  the  Rules  of  2013  because  Federal  Government  has 

directly appointed the Chairman PTVC without adhering to the rule of 

transparency  or  competitiveness  as  also  held  in  2016  CLD  134 

Islamabad  (Babar  Sattar  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan,  etc.)  and  2019 

SCMR 1 (in the matter regarding appointment of Director, PTVC);  

c)  that the Public Sector Companies (Corporate Governance) Rules, 2013 

provide 

complete  mechanism  alongwith 

criteria 

for 

sound 

management  including  the  composition  of  Board  of  Directors  and 

prescribed qualification, whereby a person should be a fit and proper 

one  not  hit  by  disqualification  factors  referred  in  the  Appendix/ 

Annexure  under  Rule  3(7)  of  the  Rules,  2013  and  he  should  have  no 

conflict of interest; 

d)  that  Amir  Manzoor  (Respondent)  cannot  hold  the  public  office  of 

Managing Director, PTVC as he has deliberately concealed the material 

fact  of  holding  dual  nationality  by  his  spouse  and  children,  whereas 

his case for Canadian immigration/nationality is in progress, as such, 

his  appointment  has  been  made  without  completion  of  codal 

formalities  i.e.  without  verification  of  educational  credentials  from 

HEC; 

e)  that Rashid Ali Khan (Respondent) has been appointed as Independent 

Member/Head  of  Audit  Committee,  PTVC  in  violation  of  judgment 

passed by the apex Court in the case of Atta-ul-Haq Qasmi as he is not 

only  overage  but  has  conflict  of  interest  being  the  Chairman  of 

Nayatel,  which  provides  services  to  the  PTVC,  even  otherwise,  his 

appointment  was  made 

in  a  non-transparent  manner  as 

the 

advertisement so published was tailored made for his selection and the 

Selection  Board  was  re-constituted  by  inducting  close  allies  of  the 

Prime Minister;  

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-5 

f)  that  Farmanullah 

Jan 

(Respondent)  has  been  appointed  as 

Independent  Member  of  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  in  violation  of  the 

apex Court‟s judgment passed in the case of Atta-ul-Haq Qasmi as said 

respondent  is  overage  and  is  a  pensioner,  as  such,  his  appointment 

was  made  without  verification  of  educational  credentials  from  the 

HEC;  

g)  that Zohair Khaliq (Respondent) has been inducted as new member of 

Pakistan  Broadcasting  Corporation  (PBC)  and  PTVC  Board  despite 

being overage and associated with telecom industry;  

h)  that  Muhammad  Ali  Bukhari,  Member  Board  of  Directors,  PBC  has 

neither experience of working in any public sector company nor in the 

media; 

i)  that  the  SECP  maintains  a  data  bank  of  persons  eligible  to  be 

appointed  as  Director  in  the  companies,  but  none  of  the  private 

Directors  in  the  Board  of  PTVC/PBC  has  been  selected  from  such 

database maintained by the SECP;  

j)  that according to the principle of equivalence between the Army Ranks 

with appointment in Basic Pay Scale, as notified on 07.02.1984, Lt. Col. 

Hassan Immad Mohamedi (Respondent) was supposed to be inducted 

against Group-8, but he was directly appointed in Group-9 in violation 

of said principle; 

k)  that amendment in Clauses 10.20-A & 10.22-A of PTVC Revised Leave 

Rules, 1984 and Office Order changing the terms and conditions of the 

petitioners‟  services  are  unlawful  and  not  tenable  in  the  eyes  of  law, 

which  otherwise  cannot  be  prospective  in  nature  or  applicable  to  the 

existing employees; 

l)  that  petitioners  were  legitimately  expecting  to  service  till  their  age  of 

superannuation  and  to  receive  all  the  monetary  and  other  benefits, 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-6 

therefore,  such  benefits  cannot  be  denied  as  rights  accrued  cannot  be 

taken  away  in  an  illegal  manner  based  on  principle  of  locus 

poenitentiae; 

m) that  the  Board  approving  the  impugned  amendment  in  Clauses 

10.20-A & 10.22-A of PTVC Revised Leave Rules, 1984 was not legally 

constituted,  therefore,  the  decision  taken  thereof  for  being  illegal  in 

nature is liable to be set-aside and respondents be directed to grant all 

the rights and benefits accrued to the petitioners; 

n)  that  petitioners namely  Samina Mir, Uzma  Naveed, Humera Nasreen 

Rana  and  Qaisar  Ahmed  Rana  have  been  meted  out  with 

discrimination  as  the  PTVC  while  adopting  the  policy  of  pick  and 

choose  has  extended  the  contract  period  of  other  similarly  placed 

employees,  as  such,  impugned  office  order  does  not  contain  any 

reason  for  de-notifying  the  services  of  said  petitioners,  which 

otherwise makes it a non-speaking order, even otherwise, this Court in 

connected  writ  petitions  has  already  passed  status  quo  order,  dated 

06.03.2020,  qua  all  the  employees  of  PTVC,  who  could  potentially  be 

affected  by  the  order  of  PTVC  Board,  but  even  then  impugned  office 

order, dated 03.06.2020, has been issued; 

o)  that  order  of  this  Court,  dated  14.10.2019,  whereby  status  quo  was 

maintained, has been violated by the respondents and Hassan Immad 

Mohamedi  has  been  restrained 

from  performing  his  official 

assignments; and, 

p)  that  CM  has  been  filed  by  Asad  Ahmad  Jaspal  for  withdrawal  of 

earlier CM with permission to file independent writ petition regarding 

compensatory  allowance  and  inquiry  proceedings,  though  office  has 

raised objection on the said C.M. 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-7 

4. 

Conversely, 

learned 

counsel 

for 

respondents 

contended 

that 

respondent/PTVC  is  a  public  limited  company  and  registered  under  the 

Companies  Ordinance,  1984  (Companies  Act,  2017),  owned  and  control  by  the 

Federal  Government  and  falls  within  the  definition  of  public  sector  company 

U/S  2(54)  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  whereas  its  management  lies  with  its 

Board of Directors in terms of Section 183 of the Companies Act, 2017 read with 

Article 89 of the Articles of Associations of the Company; that there are three (03) 

kinds  of  Director 

i.e.  Executive  Director,  Non  Executive  Director  and 

Independent Director, who are recommended or selected in terms of Section 166 

of the Companies Act, 2017; that after resignation of Arshad Khan as Chairman, 

the  Board  of  PTVC  unanimously  elected  him  as  Acting  Managing  Director  on 

temporary  basis,  which  he  had  to  hold  till  appointment  of  a  regular  Managing 

Director,  as  such,  said  acting  charge  was  endorsed  by  the  Federal  Government 

vide office order dated 07.11.2018 and matter of extra remuneration to a Director 

for  providing  services,  in  addition  to  services  of  Director,  had  adequately  been 

dealt with by the law in terms of Section 170 of the Companies Act, 2017, which 

has  been  paid  according  to  Clause  87  of  Articles  of  Associations  as  well  as  in 

terms of Rule 19 of the Public Sector Companies (Corporate Governance) Rules, 

2013, hence there is no violation of law nor there is any ineligibility on the part of 

Respondent No.5; that decision of the Board of Directors falls within the concept 

of policy decision, which cannot be interfered with in writ jurisdiction, as such, 

the  relationship  between  the  respondent  Corporation  and  its  employees  is  of 

master and servant, who are to be governed under the Company rules and same 

cannot  be  enforced  through  the  writ  jurisdiction  in  terms  of  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973;  that  it  has  clearly  been 

held by superior Courts of the country that Board of Directors of PTVC is fully 

competent to amend, alter, modify, supplement or to frame complete new service 

rules for the employees of PTVC, as such, the rules of PTVC are non-statutory in 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-8 

nature;  that  services of  petitioners namely Samina Mir, Uzma Naveed, Humera 

Nasreen  Rana  and  Qaisar  Ahmed  Rana  were  de-notified  vide  impugned  office 

order  keeping  in  view  the  past  performances  of  petitioners  as  well  as  outlook 

requirements  of  screen,  as  such,  PTVC  is  a  company  incorporated  under  the 

provisions  of  Companies  Act,  2017  and  has  non  statutory  rules,  rendering  the 

relationship between the employer and employee as of Master & Servant. 

5. 

Likewise,  learned  Additional  Attorney  General  on  behalf  of  Ministry  of 

Information & Broadcasting and the Federation of Pakistan contended that all the 

statutory  requirements  have  been  considered  before  the  recommendation  of 

Arshad  Khan/Chairman  and  as  such,  no  illegality  has  been  committed  by  the 

Federal  Government  in  recommending  Arshad  Khan  for  the  post  of  Chairman, 

PTVC.  

6. 

In  addition,  the  learned  counsel  for  SECP  (Respondent  No.6)  contended 

that  PTVC  is  a  public  sector  company  defined  in  terms  of  Section  2(54)  of  the 

Companies  Act,  2017,  whereby  the  Government  or  any  agency  of  Government 

has  the  power  to  elect,  nominate  or  appoint  majority  of  its  Directors,  even  can 

recommend for appointment of Chairman or Chief Executive of any public sector 

company, whereas the role of Chairman is different from that of a Director; that 

the appointment of Arshad Khan as Acting Managing Director of PTVC has not 

been reported to the SECP and similarly the Public Sector Companies (Corporate 

Governance)  Rules,  2013  were  effective  from  08.03.2013  and  there  was 

requirement  of  appointment  of  Independent  Director,  which  has  not  been 

adhered  to  from  the  data  bank  maintained  by  the  SECP,  rather  the  Directors 

were  directly  nominated  by  the  Federal  Government;  that  the  PTVC  has  not 

submitted the compliance report till date, therefore, SECP has not yet confirmed 

that  whether  the  PTVC  has  substantially  complied  with  the  Rules,  2013, 

Companies  Act,  2017  or  otherwise,  however  it  has  candidly  been  stated  that 

PTVC has not complied with Rule 3(1) of the Rules, 2013,  even the PTVC has not 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-9 

intimated  regarding  order  of  07.11.2018  for  appointment  of  Arshad  Khan  as 

Acting Managing Director, PTVC. 

7. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioners  have  called  in  question 

multiple and interlinked issues, therefore, for the sake of brevity, same are to be 

thrashed out independently. 

STATUS OF PAKISTAN TELEVISION CORPORATION (PTVC) 

9. 

The  petitioners  have  heavily  relied  upon  the  Public  Sector  Companies 

(Corporate  Governance)  Rules,  2013  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  ―Rules,  2013”)  and 

Companies Act, 2017 with the view that the PTVC being a public sector company 

falls within the definition of Section 2(g), which is as under:  

“Public Sector Company‖ means a company, whether public or private, 
which is directly or indirectly controlled, beneficially owned or not less 
than fifty one percent of the voting securities or voting power of which 
are  held  by  the  Government  or  any  instrumentality  or  agency  of  the 
Government or a statutory body, or in respect of which the Government 
or any instrumentality or agency of the Government or a statutory body, 
has  otherwise  power  to  elect,  nominate  or  appoint  majority  of  its 
directors, and includes a public sector association not for profit, licensed 
under section 42 of the Ordinance.‖ 

10. 

Similarly, it has also been contended that PTVC falls within the definition 

of public sector company as defined in Section 2(54) of the Companies Act, 2017, 

which is as under:  

“―public sector company‖ means a company, whether public or private, 
which is directly or indirectly controlled, beneficially owned or not less 
than fifty-one percent of the voting securities or voting power of which 
are  held  by  the  Government  or  any  agency  of  the  Government  or  a 
statutory body, or in respect of which the Government or any agency of 
the  Government  or  a  statutory  body,  has  otherwise  power  to  elect, 
nominate or appoint majority of its directors and includes a public sector 
association not for profit, licenced under section 42: 

Provided that nomination of directors by the Commission on the 
board of the securities exchange or any other entity or operation 
of any other law shall not make it a public sector company.‖ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-10 

11. 

By  application  of  above  referred  two  definitions  provided  in  different 

laws, there is no cavil to proposition that PTVC is a public sector company falling 

within  the  said  definitions  and  same  was  established  under  the  Companies 

Ordinance,  1984  (now  Companies  Act,  2017),  owned  and  controlled  by  the 

Federal  Government  and  its  management  for  the  purpose  of  business  of 

companies  shall  be  controlled  by  the  Board  in  terms  of  Section  183  of  the 

Companies  Act,  2017  read  with  Article  89  of  the  Articles  of  Associations  of  the 

Company, which lies with its Board of Directors. 

12. 

In  essence,  the  Rules  of  2013  provide  the  following  three  kinds  of 

Directors: 

i) 

Executive  Director,  who  is  an  employee  of  company  in  terms  of 

Rule 2(c) of the Rules, 2013; 

ii) 

Non-Executive  Director,  who  is  not  entrusted  with  duties  of 

administrative  or  managerial  work  in  terms  of  Rule  2(e)  of  the 

Rules, 2013; and, 

iii) 

Independent  Director,  who  is  neither  in  service  of  Pakistan  nor 

financially  related  to  public  sector  companies  concerned,  usually 

nominated and selected amongst the list of Directors maintained by 

the  SECP  in  their  Data  Bank  in  terms  of  Section  166(b)  of  the 

Companies Act, 2017 and Rule 2(b) of the Rules ibid.  

13.  Manifestly, Federal Government has power to appoint Board of Directors 

in the public sector companies in terms of Rule 4(4) of the Rules, 2013, who has 

different  and  distinct  responsibility  from  those  of  Chief  Executive  /  Managing 

Director,  whereas  his  role  being  Chairman  of  the  Board  is  to  ensure  that  the 

Board is properly working and all matters relating to governance of public sector 

companies is based on agenda of the meeting. The Chairman is also responsible 

for  implementation  of  strategies  and  policies  approved  by  the  Board,  making 

appropriate  arrangement  to  ensure  funds  and  the  resources  are  properly 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-11 

safeguarded  and  used  economically,  efficiently  and  effectively  in  accordance 

with all statutory obligations. 

 APPOINTMENT OF ARSHAD KHAN AS CHAIRMAN, PTVC 

14. 

The  appointment  of  Ashraf  Khan  being  Chairman  of  Board  of  Directors, 

PTVC has been challenged on the ground that he was initially appointed through 

notification  dated  03.10.2018  by  the  Ministry  of  Information  &  Broadcasting 

(hereinafter referred to as “MoIB") in terms of powers under Section 165-B of the 

Companies Act, 2017 with direction to the newly constituted Board “to elect Mr. 

Ashraf  Khan,  Chairman  PTVC  in  the  line  with  the  Pakistan  Television  Corporation 

Memorandum  and  Articles  of  Associations  (Article  95)”,  however  he  resigned  from 

his  position  as  Chairman  of  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  on  06.11.2018  to  be 

appointed  as  Acting  Managing  Director  of  PTVC,  whereafter  office  order 

07.11.2018  was  issued  by  the  MoIB.  However,  on  14.06.2019,  the  Federal 

Government  directed  the  Board  of  Directors  to  appoint  Arshad  Khan  as 

Chairman of the PTVC Board in line with the PTVC‟s Memorandum and Articles 

of Associations.  

15. 

Likewise, W.P. No.778/2019 was earlier filed assailing the appointment of 

Arshad  Khan  being  Acting  Managing  Director  of  the  PTVC  along  with  his 

appointment as Director of the Board, vide notification dated 03.10.2018. The said 

writ petition was adjudicated upon and decided through consolidated judgment 

dated 07.05.2019, passed in W.P. No.367/2018 (Malik Shabbir Ahmad VS Federation 

of Pakistan) in which a prayer was made for appointment of Managing Director of 

PTVC  in  accordance  with  law.  Both  the  said  petitions  were  allowed  mainly  on 

the  ground  that  Federal  Government  was  in  process  of  recruitment  against  the 

post  of  Managing  Director,  PTVC,  but  due  to  diverse  issues  at  their  end,  the 

appointment could not be finalized. However, the appointment of Arshad Khan 

being  Acting  Managing  Director  of  PTVC  was  withdrawn  w.e.f.  11.04.2019  by 

MoIB,  therefore,  Federal  Government  was  directed  to  appoint  Managing 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-12 

Director,  PTVC  in  accordance  with  law  within  the  period  of  three  (03)  months. 

As  such,  the  principle  of  res  judicata  is  not  applicable  in  this  case  as  all  other 

issues were not discussed, adjudicated upon or decided, neither any observation 

was  made  regarding  other  issues  except  a  direction  for  appointment  of 

Managing  Director  of  PTVC  to  the  Federal  Government  was  issued,  even 

otherwise,  in  connected  writ  petitions  the  appointments  have  been  assailed 

independently  including  the  appointment  of  Arshad  Khan  being  Chairman  of 

PTVC on some new grounds not earlier available, even the complete record was 

not produced before this Court in previous round of proceedings, therefore, the 

ground of application of res judicata is not available in strict sense in this case. 

16. 

In this round, the appointment of Arshad Khan has again been challenged 

on  the  basis  of  notification  earlier  considered  by  this  Court  in  previous 

proceedings  mentioned  above,  whereby  the  petitioner  has  prayed  that  Arshad 

Khan has been appointed in violation of law and as per annexure of the Rules of 

2013 with the contention that he is not “fit and proper person” for the purpose of 

appointment  as  no  transparency  has  been  adopted  by  the  Federal  Government 

while appointing Arshad Khan as Chairman, PTVC, even the criteria laid down 

in  2019  SCMR  1  (in  the  matter  regarding  appointment  of  Director,  PTVC),  has 

not been adhered to.  

17. 

The  concept  of  “fit  and  proper  person”  in  terms  of  Rule  3(7)  of  the  Rules, 

2013 is defined in the following manner:  

“The  appointing  authorities,  including  the  Government  and  other 
shareholders,  shall  apply  the  fit  and  proper  criteria  given  in  the 
annexure  in  making  nominations  of  the  person  for  election  as  Board 
Members under the provisions of the Ordinance.” 

18.  Whereby,  the  term  “Ordinance”  means  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984 

(now the Companies Act, 2017). The annexure under the said Rules, 2013 defined 

the criteria of determining fit and proper person, which is as under:  

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-13 

(1) For the purpose of determining as to whether a person proposed to be 
appointed  as  director  is  a  ‗fit  and  proper  person‘,  the  appointing 
authorities  shall  take  into  account  any  consideration  as  it  deems  fit, 
including but not limited to the following criteria, namely:- The person 
proposed for the said position – 
(a) 
(b) 

is at least graduate; 
is  a  reputed  businessman  or  a  recognised  professional  with 
relevant sectoral experience; 
has financial integrity; 
has no convictions or civil liabilities; 
is known to have competence; 
has good reputation and character; 
has the traits of efficiency and honesty; 
does  not  suffer  from  any  disqualification  to  act  as  a  director 
stipulated in the Ordinance; 
has  not  been  subject  to  an  order  passed  by  the  Commission 
cancelling  the  certificate  of  registration  granted  to  the  person 
individually  or  collectively  with  others  on  the  ground  of  its 
indulging  in  insider  trading,  fraudulent  and  unfair  trade 
practices  or  market  manipulation,  illegal  banking,  forex  or 
deposit taking business; 
has  not  been  subject  to  an  order  passed  by  the  Commission  or 
any other regulatory authority, withdrawing or refusing to grant 
any license or approval to him which has a bearing on the capital 
market; 
is not a stock broker or agent of a broker; and 
does  not suffer  from a conflict of  interest; this includes political 
office holders whether or not in a legislative role. 

A  director  shall  cease  to  be  considered  as  a  ―fit  and  proper 
following 

incurs  any  of  the 

for  the  purpose, 

if  he 

(2) 
person‖ 
disqualifications, namely:- 
(a) 

he  is  convicted  by  a  court  for  any  offence  involving  moral 
turpitude, economic offence, disregard of securities and company 
laws or fraud; 
an  order  for  winding  up  has  been  passed  against  a  company  of 
which  he  was  the  officer  as  defined  under  section  305  of  the 
Ordinance; 
he  or  his  close  relatives  have  been  engaged  in  a  business 
which is of the same nature as and directly competes with 
the  business  carried  on  by  the  Public  Sector  Company  of 
which he is the director; 
he does not conduct his duties with due diligence and skill; or 
his  association  with  the  Public  Sector  Company  is  likely,  for 
whatever  reason,  to  be  detrimental  to  the  interest  of  the  Public 
Sector Company, or be otherwise undesirable. 

(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
(f) 
(g)  
(h)  

(i)  

(j)  

(k)  
(l)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  
(e) 

 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-14 

19. 

Keeping in view the above criteria, the following factual aspects have been 

raised and noted from record, which deals with appointment of Arshad Khan as 

Chairman, PTVC: 

S. No.  Dates 

Particular  

1.   

03.10.2018 

Arshad  Khan  was  appointed  as  Director,  PTVC  by  the 

Federal  Government  in  terms  of  Section  165B  of  the 

Companies Act, 2017 to be appointed as Chairman of the 

Company. 

2.   

08.10.2018 

217th Meeting of Board of Directors, whereby nomination 

of  Arshad  Khan  for  appointment  as  Chairman  was 

approved for period of three years in terms of Clause 95 

of  the  Articles  of  Associations  of  PTVC  and  share  of 

Rs.100 was also transferred in his name.  

3.   

05.11.2018 

Arshad  Khan  had  resigned  from  his  position  as 

Chairman of PTVC Board.  

4.   

06.11.2018 

219th    Meeting  of  PTVC  Board,  whereby  Arshad  Khan 

was  unanimously  appointed  as  Acting  Managing 

Director  of  PTVC  against  pay  package/salary  of 

Rs.1,760,000  (net  of  taxes)  along  with  chauffeur  driven 

1800CC  car  for  personal/private  use  and  other  service 

benefits.  The  Board 

confirmed 

the  proposed 

appointment and transferred share of Rs.100 in favour of 

Arshad Khan. 

5.   

07.11.2018 

Office  order 

issued  by 

the  MoIB  notifying 

the 

appointment  of  Arshad  Khan  as  Acting  Managing 

Director of PTVC.  

6.   

11.04.2019 

The acting charge of Arshad Khan as Managing Director, 

PTVC, dated 07.11.2018, was withdrawn by MoIB.  

7.   

14.06.2019 

Office  Memorandum  issued  by  the  MoIB,  whereby 

Federal  Government  was  pleased  to  nominate  Arshad 

Khan  as  Chairman,  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC.  Board  is 

also directed to elect Arshad Khan as Chairman, PTVC in 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-15 

terms of Article 95 of the Articles of Associations. 

8.   

17.06.2019 

226th  Meeting  of  Board  of  Directors,  whereby  Arshad 

Khan  has  been  unanimously  elected/appointed  as 

Chairman,  PTVC  for  three  years  and  approved  transfer 

of one share of Rs.100 in his favour.  

20. 

The  abovementioned  resume  of  facts  is  admitted  by  all  the  parties, 

therefore, the only question left for determination by this Court is as to whether 

any person, who has received a pay/salary with other benefits from PTVC, can 

be  appointed  as  a  Director  in  terms  of  Independent  Director,  or Non  Executive 

Director  by  the  Federal  Government  in  terms  of  the  restriction  imposed  in  the 

Rules, 2013 as well as in the Companies Act, 2017 or under the criteria of fit and 

proper person, to be appointed as the Chairman of the Board of Directors, PTVC? 

21. 

The  petitioners brought  attention of this Court towards  Sections 164, 165 

&  166  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  which  deal  with  the  appointment  and 

nomination of different kinds of Directors, whereas it has not been denied by the 

MoIB  that  Arshad  Khan  has  been  nominated  as  Director  to  be  appointed  as 

Chairman,  PTVC  after  his  resignation  in  the  first  round  on  14.06.2019,  whereas 

his initial recommendation by the Federal Government, dated 03.10.2018, reflects 

that  he  has  been  recommended  by  the  Federal  Government  in  terms  of  Section 

165(b)  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  whereby  the  Federal  Government  can 

nominate any person as Director on its behalf and as such, the recommendation 

by  the  Federal  Government  falls  under  the  concept  of  internal  affair  of  the 

Government, whom they can select by their choice or through their own internal 

cabinet  decision,  which  could  not  be 

interfered  with  while  exercising 

constitutional  jurisdiction.  However,  the  only  disqualification  associated  to 

Arshad  Khan  is  the  period  when  he  has  been  appointed  as  Acting  Managing 

Director  in  219th  Meeting  of  Board  of  Directors,  dated  06.11.2018,  which  has 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-16 

further  been  approved  by  the  Federal  Government  through  letter  dated 

07.11.2018 against huge financial package for the period of 05 months. 

22. 

The Federal Government argued that Arshad Khan was a Non Executive 

Director and as such, there is no restriction upon him in terms of Section 166 of 

the  Companies  Act,  2017,  although  he  can  receive  salaries  together  with  other 

benefits and he can be appointed as Director of the Company. For the purpose of 

clarity, Section 166 of the Companies Act, 2017 is reproduced as under:  

166.   Manner  of  selection  of 
independent  directors  and 
maintenance  of  databank  of  independent  directors.—(1)  An 
independent director to be appointed under any law, rules, regulations or 
code, shall be selected from a data bank containing names, addresses and 
qualifications of persons who are eligible and willing to act as independent 
directors,  maintained  by  any  institute,  body  or  association,  as  may  be 
notified by the Commission, having expertise in creation and maintenance 
of  such  data  bank  and  post  on  their  website  for  the  use  by  the  company 
making the appointment of such directors: 

Provided  that  responsibility  of  exercising  due  diligence  before 
selecting a person from the data bank referred to above, as an independent 
director shall lie with the company or the Government, as the case may be, 
making such appointment. 

(2) 

For  the  purpose  of  this  section,  an  independent  director 
means  a  director  who  is  not  connected  or  does  not  have  any  other 
relationship,  whether  pecuniary  or  otherwise,  with  the  company,  its 
associated companies, subsidiaries, holding company or directors; and he 
can be reasonably perceived as being able to exercise independent business 
judgment without being subservient to any form of conflict of interest: 

Provided  that  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  this  sub-
section  no  director  shall  be  considered  independent  if  one  or  more  of  the 
following circumstances exist— 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

he  has  been  an  employee  of  the  company,  any  of  its 
subsidiaries or holding company within the last three 
years; 

he is or has been the chief executive officer of subsidiaries, 
associated  company,  associated  undertaking  or  holding 
company in the last three years; 

he  has,  or  has  had  within  the  last  three  years,  a  material 
business  relationship  with  the  company  either  directly,  or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-17 

indirectly  as  a  partner,  major  shareholder  or  director  of  a 
body that has such a relationship with the company. 

Explanation:  The  major  shareholder  means  a 
person who, individually or in concert with his family or as 
part  of  a  group,  holds  10%  or  more  shares  having  voting 
rights in the paid-up capital of the company; 

(d) 

he  has  received  remuneration  in  the  three  years 
preceding  his/her  appointment  as  a  director  or 
excluding 
receives 
retirement  benefits  from  the  company  apart  from  a 
director„s  fee  or  has  participated  in  the  company„s 
stock option or a performance-related pay scheme; 

remuneration, 

additional 

(e) 

he is a close relative of the company‗s promoters, directors 
or major shareholders: 

Explanation:  ―close  relative‖  means  spouse(s), 

lineal ascendants and descendants and siblings; 

(f) 

(g) 

he  holds  cross-directorships  or  has  significant  links  with 
other directors through involvement in other companies or 
bodies not being the associations licenced under section 42; 

he has served on the board for more than three consecutive 
terms from the date of his first appointment, and for more 
than  two  consecutive  terms  in  case  of  a  public  sector 
company,  provided  that  such  person  shall  be  deemed 
―independent  director‖  after  a 
lapse  of  one  term; 

(h) 

a  person  nominated  as  a  director  under  sections  164  and 
165: 

that 

further 

Provided 

for  determining 

the 
independence of directors for the purpose of sub-clauses (a), 
(b)  and  (c)  in  respect  of public  sector  companies,  the  time 
period shall be taken as  two  years instead of  three  years. 
Further, an independent director in case of a public sector 
company  shall  not  be  in  the  service  of  Pakistan  or  of  any 
statutory  body  or  anybody  or  institution  owned  or 
controlled by the Government. 

(3) 

The  independent  director  of  a  listed  company  shall  be 
elected  in  the  same  manner  as  other  directors  are  elected  in  terms  of 
section 159 and the statement of material facts annexed to the notice of the 
general  meeting  called  for  the  purpose  shall  indicate  the  justification  for 
choosing the appointee for appointment as independent director. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-18 

(4) 

No individual shall be selected for the data bank referred to 

in sub-section (1) without his consent in writing. 

(5) 

The  manner  and  procedure  of  selection  of  independent 
directors  on  the  databank  who  fulfill  the  qualifications  and  other 
requirements shall be specified by the Commission. 

(6) 
(a) 

(b) 

The requirements of sub-section (1)— 
shall  be  deemed  relaxed  till  such  time  a  notification  is 
issued by the Commission; and 

may be relaxed by the Commission on an application made 
by the company supported with the sufficient justification 
or the practical difficulty, as the case may be. 

23. 

Evidently,  Arshad  Khan  being  Acting  Managing  Director  of  PTVC  had 

received salary and other benefits, as such, he could not be appointed as Director 

in  violation  of  Section  166(2)(a)(d)  &  (h)  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  especially 

when  Arshad  Khan  had  not  taken  a  break  for  two  years  after  his  resignation, 

even  otherwise,  while  receiving  salary  as  acting  Managing  Director  he  has 

created an interest in the PTVC, which prohibits the Government not to appoint 

Arshad Khan on any position in PTVC. 

24.  While considering the judgment reported as  2019 SCMR 1 (in the matter 

regarding  appointment  of  Director,  PTVC),  it  is  not  the  case  of  petitioners  that 

Arshad  Khan  was  appointed  without  the  resolution  passed  in  the  meeting  of 

Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  or  in  violation  of  Article  95  of  the  Articles  of 

Associations of PTVC, which reads as under:  

95. 
The  Board  of  Directors  shall  elect  a  Chairman  of  the  Company 
from  amongst  the  Directors  representing  Government  of  Pakistan  to 
preside over their meeting, and determine the period for which is to hold 
office. The office of the Chairman shall be filled up on any vacancy by the 
Directors  in  accordance  with  the  directives  received  by  them  from  the 
Government of Pakistan and subject to the provision of the Ordinance.‖ 

25. 

Besides the above referred position, the matter falls within the domain of 

the  Federal  Government  as  to  how  they  came  to  know  about  the  credentials  of 

Arshad  Khan  before  their  nomination  in  terms  of  Rules  of  Business,  1973, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-19 

although  there  is  no  denial  that  Federal  Government  has  power  to  nominate 

Director  of  the  Board  of  PTVC  and  even  can  issue  direction  to  Board  to  elect  a 

Chairman, PTVC. The relevant rules describe the discretion but the same have to 

be exercised in a reasonable manner as held in PLD 2015 SC 6 (Ghulam Rasool 

VS Federation of Pakistan). 

26. 

The  petitioners  have  vehemently  argued  that  Arshad  Khan  as  well  as 

other  Directors  nominated  by  the  Federal  Government  have  not  been 

selected  through  any  public  advertisement  as  required  in  the  case  reported 

as  2019  SCMR  1  nor  from  the  data  bank  maintained  by  the  SECP  in  terms  of 

Section  166  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  hence  the  initial  onus  has  been  shifted 

upon 

the 

respondents/Federal  Government 

to  demonstrate 

that 

the 

discretionary power exercised by the Federal Government before the nomination 

of Arshad Khan or any other Director has been considered through a structured 

concept, if so, the evidence to that extent has to be brought on record, otherwise 

it  shall  be  considered  that  all  the  Directors  who  have  been  nominated  by  the 

Federal Government are nominated through  an arbitrary manner on the whims 

and caprice of the Federal Government. In this regard, the petitioners have relied 

upon  2016  CLD  134  Islamabad  (Babar  Sattar  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan,  etc.), 

whereby  the  Federal  Government  and  the  State  functionaries  are  under 

obligation  to  observe  highest  standard  of  probity,  transparency  and  process  of 

careful scrutiny. The duty imposed on the Federal Government is, therefore, of a 

nature  which  falls  within  realm  of  fiduciary  duty,  requiring  the  Federal 

Government  to  adopt  due  process  of  scrutiny,  mechanism  and  to  identify  the 

most  suitable  candidates  on  the  touchstone  of  “fit  and  proper  person”.  On  the 

contrary the entire exercise is considered to be arbitrary. The Rules of 2013 have 

to be read with provision of Section 183 of the Companies Act, 2017, whereby the 

Board  has  power  to  deal  with  its  business  in  terms  of  the  Articles  and  power 

conferred  under  the  general  meeting.  It  is  settled  by  now  that  if  law  prescribes 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-20 

doing  of  a  certain  thing  in  a  particular  manner  then  it  has  to  be  done  in  that 

manner alone. Reliance is placed upon PLD 2013 SC 255 (Muhammad Anwar v. 

Mst. Ilyas Begum). 

27. 

The  name  of  the  Independent  Director  has  to  be  selected  from  the  Data 

Bank maintained by  the SECP, whereby  same is to be advertised along  with its 

qualification, which must be with regard to fit and proper criteria referred in the 

Rules.  In  terms  of  Section  166  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017  the  Independent 

Director  appointed  under  any  law,  rules,  regulations  or  code,  shall  be  selected 

from  the  Data  Bank  containing  names,  addresses  and  qualification  of  persons 

eligible  and  willing  to  work  as  Independent  Director,  maintained  by  any 

institute, or body of Corporation, as may be notified by the commission, having 

expertise in creation and maintenance of such Data Bank, thereafter the names of 

those  Directors  have  to  be  posted  on  their  official  website  for  the  use  by  the 

company  making  appointment  of  such  directors.  However,  learned  counsel  for 

the  Federal  Government  as  well  as  PTVC  have  been  confronted  regarding  the 

status of Arshad Khan and other Directors as to whether they have been selected 

from  the  Data  Bank  maintained  by  the  SECP,  whereby  it  has  been  candidly 

conceded  that  all  the  Directors  were  directly  nominated  by  the  Federal 

Government  and  not  selected  from  the  data  bank  of  SECP.  Hence,  it  is  a 

straightforward  violation  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  which  is  not  curable. 

Although, the Federal Government has power to nominate Director with certain 

restriction  which  is  one-third  of  the  members  of  Independent  Directors. 

However,  I  have  confronted  the  representatives  of  the  Federal  Government  to 

enlist those Directors who will be considered as Independent Directors, whereby 

the Secretary, MoIB has submitted a concise statement that  all the Directors are 

Non-Executive  Directors  and  none  of  them  is  Independent  Director  in  terms  of 

law.  Hence, there is no cavil to proposition that concept of Independent Director 

has  been  compromised  and  in  other  words  the  independence  intended  to  be 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-21 

given to a public sector company has been undermined, whereby the interest of 

general  public  who  are  actual  custodian  of  the  wealth  of  Pakistan  has  been 

suppressed  by  the persons who  are running affairs of the Federal Government, 

hence such aspect would be considered as a Government capture in the company 

affairs.  

28. 

I have gone through the structure of the public sector companies referred 

in  Companies  Act,  2017  as  well  as  in  the  Rules  of  2013  and  observed  that  the 

legislative  intent  is  to  ensure  the  managerial/administrative  independence  of 

such  Corporation  so  that  they  operate  through  their  Board  and  not  by  direct 

intervention  of 

the  Federal  Government.  The  concept  of  managerial 

independence  has  been  inculcated  in  the  Rules,  2013,  which  reflects  that  the 

majority of Director of the Board are to be independent Directors to maintain the 

balance  amongst  the  nominee  Directors  of  the  Federal  Government,  who  are 

working  on  the  instructions  or  will  of  the  Federal  Government,  whereas 

Independent Directors have their own views through which the balance has to be 

maintained  amongst  the  Board  for  their  future  business  decisions  to  run  the 

Corporation/public  sector  companies  in  best  of  their  ability.  However,  the 

Federal  Government  through  the  subsequent  amendment  made  in  the  Rules  of 

2013,  vide  SRO  No.275(i)/2017,  dated  21.04.2017,  left  only  one-third  of  the 

members  being  Independent  Directors.  This  shifted  the  control  of  Board  in  the 

hands of Government as they could directly nominate majority of the Board and 

effectively  the  Chairman  of  PTVC.  Similarly,  another  amendment  in  the 

Companies  Act,  2017,  dated  30.04.2020,  allows  the  Federal  Government  to 

appoint all Directors of the Board on its discretion and such nominated Directors 

may also be considered Independent Directors. This amendment has changed the 

entire concept of the Rules, 2013, as a result whereof, the spirit of the Rules has 

become redundant.  

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-22 

29. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  summary  prepared  by  the  MoIB  regarding 

re-constitution of the Board of Directors and as to whether the same has fulfilled 

the test laid down in cases of Tariq Aziz ud Din and Mustafa Impex, which contains 

a legal opinion of legal advisors of PTVC i.e. Mr. Muhammad Nazir Jawwad and 

Mr. Shahid Mehmood Khokhar, Advocates regarding appointment of Rashid Ali 

Khan as Member, Farman Ullah Jan as Member and Arshad Khan as Chairman, 

PTVC,  whereby  the  following  objections  have  been  referred  by  said  legal 

advisors:  

10.  Upon  perusal  of  the  PTV  BODs  composition,  it  has  been 
revealed  that  in  addition  to  the  ineligible/resigned  a  further  THREE 
Member/Directors  of  the  PTV  BOD  have  pecuniary  interest  as 
well  as  conflict  of  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  PTV. 
Observation/reasons of ineligibility are appended below: 

MR. RASHID ALI KHAN 
As per his CV, he is Director of the following companies 
i) 
Chairman/Director of Nayatel Ltd. from 2004 till date 
ii) 
Chairman/Director of Micronet Ltd. from 2004 till date.  
iii)  Director  of  Pakistan  Engineering  Company  Lahore  from  2012 

till date.  

iv)  Member  Board  of  Directors,  NRSP  Miscrofinance  Bank  Ltd., 

v) 
vi) 

Islamabad from 2014 till date 
Director Bank of Khyber Ltd. Peshawar from 2015 till date 
Director, Hayatabad Medical Complex, Peshawar from 2015 till 
date 

vii)  Director  Elementary  Education  Foundation,  Peshawar  from 

2015 till date 

viii)  Director of NAMAL University, Mianwali from 2004 till date 
ix) 

Director  of  SUKHCHAIN  Real  Estate  Development,  Lahore 
from 2004 till date 

the  relevant  provision  of 

Under 
law,  a  person  cannot  be 
nominated/appointed  as  Director  of  more  than  five  companies  – 
WHEREAS  Mr.  Rashid  Ali  Khan  is  sitting  Directors  of  more  than  9 
(Nine) Companies. Therefore, his nominated/appointment as Director of 
PTV BOD is in violation of settled law. Relevant Rule – 3 (4) of the 
“Public Sector Companies (Corporate Governance) Rules, 2013 is 
reproduced as under: 

―(4)  No  person  shall  be  elected  or  nominated  as  a 
Director of more than five Public Sector Companies and listed 
companies simultaneously, except their subsidiaries‖. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-23 

Moreover M/s Nayatell Ltd. is in Business with the PTV since long and 
Mr. Rashid Ali Khan is Chairman/Director of M/s Nayatell Ltd. and the 
said  Company  is  service  provider  to  the  PTV  and  receiving  monthly 
subscription  from  PTV  in  the  said  account.  Relevant  Rule  2  (ii)  of 
Public  Sector  Companies  (Corporate  Governance)  Rules,  2013  is 
reproduced as under: 

―He has, or has had within the last two years, material business 
relationship  with  the  Public  Sector  Company  either  directly  or 
indirectly, or Director of a body that has such a relationship with 
the Public Sector Company‖. 

MR. FARMAN ULLAH JAN 
Mr. Farman Ullah Jan is  former General  Manager,  PTV  – a  Group-9 
retired  officer  of  PTV.  He  is  still  receiving  Pension  as  well  as 
Medical  facilities  from  the  PTV.  Under  the  relevant  provision  of 
―The  Companies  Act,  2017‖  he  cannot  be  treated  as  an  Independent 
Director.  Section  –  166(2)(d)  of  the  “The  Companies  Act,  2017‖  is 
reproduced as under: 

―he  has  received  remuneration  in  the  three  years  preceding 
his/her  appointment  as  a  Director  or  receives  additional 
remuneration,  excluding  retirement  benefits  from  the  company 
apart from a Director‘s fee or has participated in the company‘s 
stock option or a performance-related pay scheme.‖ 

Board of Directors of PTVC has all powers including rule making body 
in  respect  of  employees  of  PTV.  Pension  rules  as  well  as  medical 
facilities related affairs are always remain under discussion in the BOD, 
therefore, Mr. Farman Ullah Jan has pecuniary interest in the affairs of 
PTV and he cannot be nominated/appointed as Member/Director of PTV 
BOD. 

MR. ARSHAD KHAN 
―Mr. Arshad Khan was nominated/appointed as Director of PTV BOD 
from  Private  Sector.  Extract  from  Notification  No.10(23)/2017-TV 
dated  3rd  October,  2018  wherein  new  Directors  of  BOD  were 
nominated is reproduced as under: 

in 

―The Board of Directors is directed to elect Mr. Arshad Khan as 
Chairman,  PTV 
the  Pakistan  Television 
Corporation‘s  Memorandum  &  Article  of  Association  (Article 
95). The Chairman shall unless he resigns earlier, hold office for 
a period of 3 years‖. 

line  with 

Mr. Arshad Khan was elected as Chairman by the BOD of PTV but he 
resigned from the position of Chairman, PTV and was detailed by 
the  BODs  as  Managing  Director  against  a  salary  package  of 
Rs.17,60,000/-  net  of  taxes.  As  Managing  Director  of  PTV  he  has 
created pecuniary interest in the affairs of PTV, therefore,  he does not 
fall in the definition of Independent Director. Relevant provision of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-24 

Public  Sector  Companies  (Corporate  Governance)  Rules,  2013, 
Rule-2 Definition clause (d) in respect of “Independent Director‖ 
is reproduced as under: 

―INDEPENDENT  DIRECTOR‖  means  a  Non-
―(d) 
Executive Director who is not in the service of Pakistan or of any 
statutory body or anybody or institution owned or controlled by 
the  Government  and  who  is  not  connected  or  does  not  have 
any  other  relationship,  whether  pecuniary  or  otherwise,  with 
the  Public  Sector  Company, 
its  associated  companies, 
subsidiaries,  holding  company  or  Directors.  The  test  of 
independence  principally  emanates  from  the  fact  whether  such 
person  can  be  reasonably  perceived  as  being  able  to  exercise 
independent judgment without being subservient to any form of 
conflict of interest.‖ 

―(e)  NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: means a Director of a 
is  not  entrusted  with 
Public  Sector  Company  who 
responsibilities  of  an  administrative  or  managerial 
nature‖. 

Mr.  Arshad  Khan  was  initially  appointed  as  Director  and  later  on 
elected  as  Chairman,  PTV  which  is  a  honorary  position  and  as  per 
Memorandum  &  Article  of  Association  of  PTV,  Chairman  is  not 
entitled to draw any remuneration from PTV. Being Managing Director 
of  PTV,  Mr.  Arshad  Khan  has  received  salary  and  other  benefits  from 
PTV, therefore, he does not fall in the definition of Independent Director 
or  Non-Executive  Director.  In  view  of  the  above,  he  cannot  be 
appointed as a board member for a period of 3 years.  

That in its judgment dated  07-05-2019, the honorable Islamabad High 
Court has not only reproduced the prayer clauses of both the above 
said  petitions  but  also  has  allowed  the  same.  Hence,  we  are  of  the 
considered  opinion  that  for  all  intents  and  purposes  the  Board  of 
Directors notified vide Notification dated 03rd October, 2018 has ceased 
to  exist  as  the  W.P.  887/2019  (Prayer  Clause  2)  against  the 
constitution and nominated of BoDs is allowed. 

In  the  circumstances  and  keeping  in  view  the  above  stated  rule 
position,  there  should  be  only  ―one-third‖  Members/Directors  from 
Private Sector in the BOD of PTV. It is further advised that the matter 
may  be  referred  to  the  Federal  Government  for  re-constitution  of  the 
Board of Directors of PTV as well as appointment of Managing Director 
PTVC  in  accordance  with  relevant  provisions  of  ―Public  Sector 
Companies (Corporate Governance‖ Rules, 2013‖ and ―Companies Act, 
2017‖ as per Court Order to avoid any untoward situation in future.‖ 

30. 

The  above  referred  legal  opinion  clearly  establishes  the  consciousness, 

sensitivity  and  higher  moral  standards  of  the  legal  advisors,  who  have 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-25 

manifestly advised the PTVC not to appoint Arshad Khan, Rashid Ali Khan and 

Farmanullah  Jan,  but  surprisingly  the  Secretary,  MoIB  has  overlooked  such 

important opinion and processed the case of appointment of Board of Directors 

through summary for the Cabinet, even in the Meeting of the Cabinet the legal 

opinion  or  objections  have  not  been  discussed,  rather  information  has  been 

withheld.  In  terms  of  Rules  of  Business,  1973,  it  is  the  role  of  the  Secretary 

concerned  to  assist  the  Federal  Cabinet  before  finalization  of  any  policy  matter 

within the four corners of law. There is no cavil to proposition that only one third 

of  Directors  could  be  appointed  as  Independent  Directors  though  the  said 

appointments should have been made from data bank maintained by the SECP, 

but  no  such  exercise  was  carried  out  in  terms  of  Section  166  of  the  Companies 

Act,  2017 nor the true intent of Independent Director has been achieved, rather 

the Rules of 2013, Companies Act, 2017 and Articles of Association of PTVC have 

been violated in blatant manner. 

31. 

In  view  of  the  above  position,  it  has  been  observed  that  Rashid  Ali 

Khan/Director  is  admittedly  having  its  business  with  PTVC  through  M/s 

Nayatel  Ltd.  and  even  this  fact  has  been  acknowledged  by  MoIB  in  their  para-

wise  comments  in  Para-E(iv),  whereby  it  has  been  referred  as,  “correct  to  that 

extent  that  he  is  service  provider  to  PTV  and  SRBC  as  well  as  he  is  about  70  years  of 

age.”  But  surprisingly,  this  element  was  not  highlighted  to  the Federal  Cabinet, 

rather  these  facts  have  been  concealed  which  itself  is  the  responsibility  of  the 

Secretary  concerned  to  appraise  the  Federal  Government  in  this  regard, 

therefore,  conflict  of  interest  is  apparent  in  this  case  in  terms  of  Rule  2(d)(i)(iii) 

read  with  Rule  2(e)  of  the  Rules,  2013  as  M/s  Nayatel  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  is  in  service 

agreement with PTVC and earning Rs.30/40 million annually, therefore, it is also 

a  violation  of  Rule  18  of  the  Rules,  2013.    Although,  the  concept  of  conflict  of 

interest  has  elaborately  been  discussed  in  Rule  5  of  the  Rules,  2013,  but 

objectively the said concept does not exclude the situation in hand, rather it is a 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-26 

continuous conflict of interest reflected on record which could not be avoided in 

any  manner,  as  person  receiving  financial  benefits  from  public  sector  company 

through  his  other  company  having  its  share  holding,  this  aspect  could  not  be 

segregated in any manner as it could potentially get compromised the interest of 

public  sector  company,  per  se,  such  person  is  a  potential  threat  to  PTVC  and  it 

might harm the future business prospects of PTVC.  

32. 

Farman  Ullah  Jan  is  a  retired  officer  of  Group-9  in  the  PTVC,  receiving 

pension as well as medical facility, hence his case clearly falls within the purview 

of  Section  166(2)(d)  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  who  has  pecuniary  interest  in 

the affairs of PTVC, therefore, his disqualification is apparent.  

33.  Arshad  Khan/Chairman  has  been  receiving  salary  package  from  PTVC 

being Acting Managing Director, and lost his character of Independent Director 

in terms of Rule 2(d) of the Rules, 2013, hence he could not be assigned with any 

responsibility.  

34.  Another  important  aspect  which  has  time  and  again  been  argued  is  the 

upper  age  limit  of  the  Directors,  as  such,  it  has  not  been  denied  by  MoIB  that 

Rashid Ali Khan, Farman Ullah Jan and Zohair Khaliq are more than 65 years of 

age, and in this regard no waiver/relaxation in upper age limit was ever granted 

by the Federal Government. In similar situation, the apex Court in reported case 

2019  SCMR  1  has  dealt  with  the  illegal  appointment  of  Atta-ul-Haq  Qasmi  as 

Chairman PTVC, whereby a special exemption from upper age limit of 65 years 

for the appointment of head of autonomous bodies under the MoIB was referred 

that,  “no  justification  was  provided  for  relaxation  of  upper  age  limit.”  This  aspect 

clearly establishes that a relaxation in upper age limit is mandatory as per Atta ul 

Haq Qasmi case supra, hence, the very appointments of all those Directors, who 

are  more  than  65  years  of  age  without  grant  of  relaxation  by  the  Federal 

Government, are illegal. 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-27 

35. 

The  concept  of  Independent  Director  has  to  be  seen  with  reference  to  their 

appointment from the Data Bank maintained by the SECP, if not, then the principle 

of  best  of  the  best  for  a  transparent  procedure  of  appointment  should  have  been 

considered  in line  with Serial No.141 of the ESTACODE,  which entails publishing 

an advertisement to gauge the talent pool available for such post, filtering and then 

assessing the best candidate for the post in accordance with criteria laid down in the 

Rules,  2013.  Hence,  the  very  appointments  of  all  the  Directors,  PTVC  discussed 

above are ILLEGAL. 

STATUS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

36. 

I have also gone through the judgment heavily relied upon by the petitioner 

side  i.e.  2019  SCMR  1  (in  the  matter  of  HRC  No.3654/2018),  whereby  the  very 

appointment of Ata-ul-Haq Qasmi  was assailed while  considering the criteria and 

the  mode  and  manner  adopted  by  the  respondents  for  appointment  of  the  then 

Managing  Director,  which  was  declared  by  the  apex  Court  as  illegal  on  multiple 

grounds.  It  has  also  been  referred  in  Para-11  of  said  judgment  that  the  then 

Managing Director was appointed in violation of fit and proper criteria referred in 

the Rules, 2013 as well as in violation of procedure laid down at Serial No.141 of the 

ESTA Code, which was not followed. Resultantly, the factors of transparency, merit 

and fairness in the appointment of public functionaries, as required by the law, were 

not  followed.  Hence,  the  appointments  of  Members  of  Board  of  Directors  (non-

executive) are declared ILLEGAL, except ex-officio member of Board.  

RECOVERY  OF  SALARIES,  PERKS  AND  PRIVILEGES  RECEIVED  BY 

MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  

37. 

I  have  also  considered  the  ratio  settled  in  2019  SCMR  1,  whereby  the  apex 

Court has declared the remuneration/salary and other perks and privilege of Ata-

ul-Haq  Qasmi,  the  then  Chairman  PTVC,  as  illegal  and  directed  to  recover  the 

amount in the ratio settled in Para-35 of the said reported judgment. While  going 

through  the  judgment,  the  underline  principle  observed  by  the  apex  Court 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-28 

regarding the appointment of Ata-ul-Haq Qasmi is the Board Resolution, which 

has been discussed in para-18 of the said judgment in the following manner:  

“The argument of his learned counsel that Mr. Qasmi was acting as de 
facto MD and was performing extra services does not save him because 
as  mentioned  above,  as  per  Article  87  of  the  AoA,  if  any  Director  is 
appointed  to  the  office  of  Chairman  or  devotes  special  attention  to  the 
business  of  the  Company  or  otherwise  is  performing  extra  services,  a 
determination  is  to  be  made  by  the  Board  as  to  whether  such  special 
attention or extra services are outside the scope of the ordinary duties of 
a  Director  after  which  the  Board  may  decide  to  pay  the  Director  such 
extra remuneration in the form of salary, fees, allowances, etc. There is 
no Board resolution on record to suggest that the Directors of PTV made 
any such determination with respect to Mr. Qasmi.‖ 

38. 

Keeping in view the above position the judgment of the apex Court is not 

applicable  to  the  extent  of  salary  packages  of  present  Managing  Director  and 

other officials, who have been appointed after due process as their salaries have 

been  validly  discussed  in  the  Board  of  Directors  Meetings  and  given  effect 

through a unanimous decision, even otherwise, the decisions made by the Board 

of Directors have been given protection in terms of Section 168 of the Companies 

Act, 2017. 

39. 

The  apex  Court  has  also  highlighted  the  hefty  salary  packages  on  the 

ground that Rule 17(3) of the Rules, 2013 laid down certain principle to deal with 

the  executive  remuneration  on  the  basis  of  remuneration  policy  of  the  public 

sector company. It has also been observed in said judgment that despite the fact 

that PTVC has suffered colossal losses during the past 7 years, Mr. Qasmi was awarded 

with generous salary and exorbitant perks and privilege. This raises serious concern as 

to whether the “remuneration policy of the Chairman is in line with best practices” The 

details of salary packages and other benefits have been given in Para-19, 20 & 21, 

whereas  Article  87  of  the  Articles  of  Association  permits  the  board  to  determine  the 

remuneration for any extra services performed by the Director including holding of office 

of Chairman we do not think that board can sanction excessive remuneration by way of 

various  benefits/allowance  while  keeping  in  mind  the  spirit  of  rules,  2013.  These 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-29 

principles  settled  in  the  case  of  Atta-ul-Haq  Qasmi  supra  disclose  another 

important  aspect,  which  has  not  been  catered  by  the  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC 

while  appointing  different  officials  on  heavy  packages,  including  Rashid  Ali 

Khan as Managing Director for a short period, which is apparently on exorbitant 

side.  Hence,  it  is  high  time  to  settle  such  kind  of  illegalities  in  public  sector 

companies  committed  by  the  Board  of  Directors  to  give  benefit  to  blue  eyed 

persons against the public interest, therefore, the Federal Government is directed 

to  draft  a  policy  or  law  through  some  legislation  to  deal  with  the  issue  of 

salary/remuneration and other fringe benefits to such kind of officers / directors 

or employees of the public sector companies.  

APPOINTMENT OF AMIR MANZOOR AS MANAGING DIRECTOR 

40.  Amir  Manzoor  was  appointed  as  Managing  Director,  vide  notification 

dated 14.06.2019, by the MoIB in terms of Office Memorandum of Establishment 

Division,  dated  28.03.2019,  which  “deals  with  selection  procedure  of  chief 

executive in key public sector enterprises”, whereby a Selection Committee was 

constituted,  headed  by  Minister  Incharge  Administrative  Division  under  the 

Rules  of  2013  being  Chairman,  Secretary  of  Administrative  Division,  three  (03) 

experts having knowledge of relevant field along with Non-Executive Chairman 

of  Board  of  Directors  or  senior  members.  In  line  with  said  O.M.,  an 

advertisement,  dated  01.02.2019,  was  earlier  published  in  daily  Dawn  by  the 

MoIB for the post of Managing Director, PTVC, against which the Ministry had 

received  41  applications.  The  Selection  Committee  in  its  meeting,  dated 

12.04.2019, shortlisted 12 candidates for said post, however said Committee was 

dissolved,  whereafter  fresh  summary  was  moved  for  constitution  of  Selection 

Committee and Prime Minister of Pakistan approved Ishrat Hussain, Advisor for 

Institutional  Reforms  and  Austerity  of  Pakistan,  as  Chairman  of  the  Selection 

Committee,  who  reviewed  the  applications  of  41  candidates.  The  Selection 

Committee  also  interviewed  the  shortlisted  candidates  on  20.05.2019  and 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-30 

recommended three (03) candidates i.e. (i) Amir Manzoor, (ii) Jamal Akhtar and 

(iii) Yasin Joya, whereafter the matter was submitted before the Prime Minister. 

The  Cabinet  in  its  meeting,  dated  13.06.2019,  approved  the  appointment  of 

Managing  Director  with  the  result  of  issuance  of  notification,  dated  14.06.2019, 

by the MoIB notifying the appointment of Amir Manzoor as Managing Director, 

PTVC,  followed  by  its  approval  by  the  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  in  its  226th 

Meeting, dated 21.06.2019. 

41.  While considering the above referred appointment process the substantial 

compliance  has  been  made  on  the  direction  of  the  apex  Court  referred  in  2019 

SCMR  1  (in  the  matter  regarding  appointment  of  Managing  Director  PTVC), 

wherein  the  apex  Court  has  laid  down  certain  parameters  for  consideration  of 

the  Selection  Committee,  Board  of  Directors  as  well  as  by  the  Government  of 

Pakistan  regarding  appointment  on  the  key  positions,  including  the  post  of 

Managing  Director,  which  has  been  discussed  in  Para-11  of  the  said  reported 

judgment, which is as under:  

―11. 
In light of the above, we find that while the Federal Government 
was empowered under Section 183(b) of the Ordinance read with Article 
83 of the AoA to appoint a Director to the Board of PTV, it had to do so 
by following the procedure prescribed in Clause (iii) of Sl. No.141 of the 
Esta Code, keeping in mind the criteria laid down in Rules 3(1) and (7) 
and  the  Annexure  ('fit  and  proper'  person)  to  the  Rules  of  2013. 
Furthermore,  the  procedure  laid  down  in  Sl.  No.140  of  the  Esta  Code 
had  to  be  followed.  Such  a  process  additionally  ensured  transparency, 
merit and fairness in the appointment of public functionaries as required 
by  the  law  laid  down  by  this  Court.  We  consider  that  disregard  of  the 
aforementioned procedure by the Federal Government in the instant case 
was  meant  to  benefit  a  predetermined  candidate,  Mr.  Qasmi.  His 
appointment  as  a  Director  of  PTV  was  made  in  violation  of  the 
prescribed  legal  criteria  and  procedure.  It  is  hereby  declared  to  be 
illegal.‖ 

42.  While  considering  the  above  position,  it  has  been  observed  that  the 

advertisement  was  published  for  the  post  of  Managing  Director,  against  which 

different  applications  were  received  by  the  Selection  Committee  and  after 

conducting 

interviews  by 

the  Committee, 

three 

(03)  nominees  were 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-31 

recommended  to  the  Federal  Government  for  appointment,  whereafter  Amir 

Manzoor  has  been  appointed  as  Managing  Director,  PTVC  keeping  in  view  his 

eligibility, experience and expertise, as such, the learned counsel for petitioners 

has  not  highlighted  any  defect,  disqualification  or 

ineligibility 

in 

the 

appointment  of  Amir  Manzoor,  Managing  Director,  PTVC,  even  the  Board  of 

Directors, PTVC has approved the appointment in their 226th Meeting.  

43.  Amir Manzoor has also been considered in the light of criteria laid down 

in Rules 3(1) and (7) read with annexure (fit and proper person) of the Rules of 

2013. By scanning said criteria there is nothing available on record to assume that 

the  appointment  of  Managing  Director  has  been  made  in  violation  of  criteria 

referred  in  the  annexure  in  terms  of  Rule  3(7)  of  the  Public  Sectors  Companies 

(Corporate  Governance)  Rules,  2013.  In  such  type  of  writ  petition,  where 

appointments  have  been  assailed,  the  initial  onus  is  upon  the  person  agitating 

the  matter  to  highlight  those  ineligibilities,  disqualification  or  factors  not 

observed or adhered to by the appointing authorities, however when said factors 

have not been highlighted, the Court has to go through the relevant provisions of 

law  as  well  as  summaries  after  seeking  report  from  the  Government  and  the 

incumbent  to  justify  his  appointment  whether  the  criteria  for  determining  a  fit 

and  proper  person  has  been  observed  in  letter  and  spirit or otherwise,  as  such, 

the  disqualification  referred  in  this  criteria  has  thoroughly  been  scanned,  but 

nothing  adverse  to  appointment  of  Amir  Manzoor,  Managing  Director,  PTVC 

has  been  observed  at  this  stage,  therefore,  his  appointment  is  within  the  four 

corners of law and declared as such.  

APPOINTMENT OF MS. QUTRINA HOSSAIN, CHIEF NEWS & CURRENT 

AFFAIRS  

44. 

The  appointment  of  Ms.  Qutrina  Hossain  has  been  assailed  for  having 

been made through a head hunting firm namely M/s Career Pakistan, which was 

hired  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  PTVC  through  non-transparent  and  in 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-32 

clandestine  manner  i.e.  without  any  advertisement  and/or  codal  formalities, 

even  it  has  been  alleged  that  Qutrina  Hossain  is  a  non-matric,  whereas  the 

prescribed qualification of news editor, reporter, researcher is graduation as per 

PTVC Service Rules. 

45.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  PTVC  contented  that  Qutrina 

Hossain  worked  on  different  editorial  post  in  daily  “The  News”  and  daily 

“Dawn” in 1980s and  1990s. She has also  been Chief Reporter of Khaleej Times 

and worked as consultant of PTVC, even she worked as Director Current Affairs 

in Express News from 2006 to 2012. She has done O-Level and A-Level followed 

by  graduation  from  Mount  Holyoake  College  (USA)  i.e.  a  chartered  awarding 

degree institute, which is recognized institute by Higher Education Commission 

(HEC) as reflected from letter dated 16.01.2020, issued in reply to the Controller 

Administration  &  Personnel,  PTVC.  The  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  in  218th 

meeting, dated 22.10.2018, decided to hire Chief News/Current Affairs, whereby 

a job description was  provided to M/s Career Pakistan for provision of CVS of 

best talent in Pakistan, whereafter the said firm has provided 10 candidates, as a 

result whereof, HR Committee conducted interviews and recommended Qutrina 

Hossain  for  said  position,  whereafter  Board  of  Directors  PTVC  in  its  233rd 

meeting held on 21.01.2020 approved the appointment of Qutrina Hossain.  

46. 

In  view  of  above  position,  this  Court  is  not  equipped  with  the  role  to 

scrutinize  the  educational  qualification  vis-a-vis  the  working  experience 

provided in job description for the post of Chief News/Current Affairs, which in 

fact, is the role of the head hunting firm as well as HR Committee of the PTVC, 

however  if  any  such  requirements  were  not  meted  out  or  checked  by  the 

department, they were held liable for their illegalities, hence at this point of time 

the  appointment  of  Qutrina  Hossain  is  declared  to  be  valid  on  the  basis  of 

available record subject to condition that A-Level, O-Level and bachelor degree 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-33 

should be verified from HEC and IBBC by the PTVC HR Department within the 

period of two months.  

APPOINTMENT  OF  KHAWAR  AZHAR,  HEAD  OF  CONTENT  AND 

MARKETING PTVC  

47. 

Khawar Azhar has been hired through the head hunting firm who claims 

to  have  an  experience  of  20  years  in  broadcasting,  sales  and  marketing.  It  was 

argued  by  the  learned  counsel  for  PTVC  that  Khawar  Azhar  remained  as 

Director  Marketing,  PTVC  from  2004  to  2006,  even  he  has  won  two  national 

prestigious awards i.e. PTV Award and Lux Style Award. His appointment has 

been made in line with the decision made in 154th Meeting of Board of Directors, 

dated  23.04.2009,  while  considering  the  market  trend  and  to  compete  with 

private  TV  channels.  The  post  was  advertised  in  daily  Express  Tribune,  dated 

19.09.2019,  by  Controller  Admin  and  Personnel,  PTVC  HQ  Office  along  with 

other positions for their short listing in database under PTVC Service Rules. The 

HR Committee of PTVC has already laid down the procedure in meeting dated 

03.10.2018,  resultantly,  interviews  of  04  shortlisted  candidates  have  been 

concluded  by  the  Committee  and  Khawar  Azhar  was  recommended  for  the 

position  of  Head  of  Marketing  &  Content.  The  recommendation  was  approved 

by Board of Directors in 219th meeting, dated 06.11.2018. The Minutes of Meeting 

have  also  been  perused  and  it  has  been  observed  that  Khawar  Azhar  was 

appointed  on  monthly  package  of  Rs.1,230,000/-  (5th  stage  of  Executive  Special 

Professional Scale).   

48. 

The  available  record  persuaded  this  Court  to  hold  that  appointment  of 

Khawar Azhar has been made in accordance with law pursuant to fulfillment of 

due process of selection by observing the standards of transparency.  

HIRING OF HEAD HUNTING FIRM 

49. 

The head hunting firm i.e. M/s Career Pakistan was selected by the PTVC 

on  the  basis  of  tender  notice,  dated  30.08.2019,  published  in  Pakistan  Observer, 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-34 

Jahan-e-Pakistan,  Khabrain,  Daily  Times  and  Nai  Baat  for  hiring  of  a  head 

hunting  firm  through  two  envelop  procedures  i.e.  technical  and  financial 

proposals.  Resultantly,  M/s  Career  Pakistan  Islamabad,  Abacus  ELS  (Pvt.)  Ltd. 

Lahore,  National  Testing  Services,  Islamabad  and  National  Consultants  for 

Business  &  Management  Solutions  came  on  record,  whereby  the  competent 

authority  after  evaluating  the  technical  and  financial  bids  selected  M/s  Career 

Pakistan,  which  was  declared  qualified,  rest  of  three  companies  have  been 

disqualified  in  comparative  analysis  report  appended  with  this  writ  petition, 

matter has been placed in 229th Meeting of Board of Directors held on 26.10.2019, 

which approved the selection of M/s Career Pakistan, the head hunting firm for 

future  recruitment  on  different  positions,  as  such,  due  process  of  selection  has 

rightly been adhered to and no illegality has been observed. 

AMENDMENT  IN  CLAUSES  10.20-A  &  10.22-A  OF  PTVC  REVISED  LEAVE 

RULES, 1984 AND MAINTAINABILITY OF WRIT PETITIONS 

50. 

This  Court  has  confronted  the  petitioners  regarding  maintainability  of 

their writ petitions as to whether constitutional jurisdiction of this Court could be 

invoked  in  terms  of  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan,  1973,  whereby  it  has  been  contended  that  amendment  in  PTVC 

Employee Service Rules, to exercise the right to proceed on LPR exclusively falls 

within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  employee  concerned  and  respondent  organization 

has no authority to withdraw the same, and as such, the impugned amendment 

is  in  violation  of  their  fundamental  rights  enshrined  in  Article  9  of  the 

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. Even the impugned Rules 

being ex-facie discriminatory are liable to be struck down in view of Article 25 of 

the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973.  The  petitioners  have 

relied  upon  2013  SCMR  1707  (Pakistan  Defence  Officers‟  Housing  Authority  v. 

Lt. Col. Syed Jawaid Ahmed), 2013 SCMR 1383 (Abdul Wahab v. HBL), 1981 PLC  

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-35 

219  (Pakistan  Television  Corporation  v.  Muhammad  Babar  Zaman),  2005  PLC 

(CS)  199  (Syed  Amjad  Ali  Shah  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan)  and  2010  PLC  (CS) 

1023 (Muzammal Ahmed Khan VS Imran Meer). 

51. 

Learned  counsel  for  PTVC  has  taken  a  categorical  stance  that  PTVC  is  a 

State  owned  corporation  having  its  Board  of  Directors,  which  can  amend,  alter 

the rules or adopt any new rules or supplement the same as and when required, 

which  were  coming  subsequently  into  force,  from  time  to  time,  subject  to 

approval  of  the  Board  in  terms  of  Rules  2.05,  2.06  and  2.07.  It  has  further  been 

highlighted  on  the  strength  of  PTVC  Statement  of  Financial  Position  as  on 

30.06.2018, appended with the captioned writ petition, that PTVC after taxation 

has suffered a loss of Rs.476,540/- Million in the year 2018 against the income for 

the  said  year  to  the  tune  of  Rs.1,823,096/-  Million,  whereas  total  operating 

expense,  including  administrative  expense  and  finance  cost,  is  Rs.9,477,304/- 

Million, even otherwise, they are paying salaries of Rs.4,546,367,862/- in the year 

2018,  which  is  apparently  much  more  than  their  receivable  net  income  and  as 

such,  the  entire  Corporation  is  running  into  loss,  therefore,  the  PTVC  Board  in 

order  to  curtail  the  loss  have  taken  the  decision  in  the  major  interest  of  the 

Corporation as well as to save the losses of the public exchequer. Even, as per the 

appointment letters of the petitioners, in terms of Clause 5, they are subject to all 

rules  and  regulations  of  the  Corporation  prevailing  for  the  time  being  or 

subsequently coming into force from time to time. 

52. 

The  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  in  their  meeting  held  on  12.02.2019, 

circulated vide office order dated 30.07.2019, held that “the officers/officials working 

in the establishment of PTVC shall proceed on Leave Preparatory to Retirement (LPR) on 

recommendation  of  their  respective  Head  of  Divisions”.  Pursuant  to  said  direction 

the  petitioners  are  spared  to  proceed  on  LPR  with  immediate  effect  till  the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-36 

date of superannuation. The relevant extract of office order dated 30.07.2019 is as 

under:  

―The  Board  of  Directors  in  its  225th  meeting  held  on  12.02.2019  has 
approved  to  amend  the  Clauses  10.20  A  &  10.22A  of  Revised  Leave 
Rules-1984 in the following manner:- 
Clause 10.20A: 

Leave Preparatory to Retirement 
The  maximum  period  upto  which  an  employee 
may  be  granted  leave  Preparatory  to  retirement 
shall be seven Hundred and Thirty (730) days.  

Clause 10.22A: 

Encashment of Refused Leave Preparatory to 
Retirement.   
If  an  employee  has  Seven  Hundred  and  Thirty 
Days  (730)  days  or  more  period  of  LPR,  on  full 
pay  to  his  credit,  he  can  have  his/her  LPR 
encashed for the actual period of LPR subject to a 
maximum  period  of  three  hundred  and  sixty  five 
(365)  days.  The  employees  will  be  required  to 
apply  for  LPR  27  months  before  the  date  of 
superannuation.  The  encashment  of  LPR  will  be 
allowed  subject  to  refusal  of 
leave  by  the 
competent authority. In case of encashment he/she 
cannot avail any portion of his/her LPR.  

53. 

 The  petitioners  contended  that  in  terms  of  Clause  10.21(A)  of  the  PTVC 

Employees  Service  Rules,  the  LPR  may  be  taken  subject  to  availability  of  leave 

either on full pay or partly on full pay, or partly on half pay, or entirely on half 

pay, at the discretion of the employee concerned, whereas the issuance of office 

order, dated 30.07.2019, has withdrawn the discretion of the employees, who are 

the best judge to request the respondent organization for  their LPR. Besides the 

said amendments, the Board has further enhanced the LPR period from 365 days 

to 730 days and accordingly the employee will be required to proceed on LPR of 

27  months  before  the  date  of  superannuation.  The  said  decision  has  become 

effective  immediately  from  its  approval  by  the  Board.  It  is  trite  law  that  any 

decision passed by the Board in terms of Section 168 of the Companies Act, 2017 

is conclusive in all respects, even though the appointments of the Directors have 

been challenged or declared defective for any disqualification.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-37 

54.  Hassan Immad Mohemmadi (petitioner) has assailed the abolishing of the 

post of Deputy Managing Director in PTVC in his writ petition along with other 

claims which have already been discussed in preceding paragraphs, whereas the 

abolishing or creation of post is the internal affairs of the Board of Directors and 

as  such,  their  actions  have  been  protected  in  terms  of  Section  168  of  the 

Companies  Act,  2017,  therefore,  he  being  employee  of  the  company  is  not  in  a 

position to challenge the same.  

55.  One  of  the  petitioners  i.e.  Asad  Ahmad  Jaspal,  Director  Security,  PTVC 

has prayed for issuance of direction to PTVC to maintain seniority list of working 

Directors and is also aggrieved by the appointment of Hassan Immad Mohemdi 

in  PTVC,  whereas  the  appointment  of  said  Director  on  Special  Assignment  has 

actively been defended by the PTVC. It is the prerogative of employer to transfer 

or  post  out  any  person  against  any  position  as  required  by  the  department 

concerned and as such, no employee can raise objection to that effect. Similarly, 

Rule  4.09  of  PTVC  Employee  Service  Rules  extends  an  authority  to  PTVC  to 

requisition  the  service  of  any  employee  on  deputation  from  Provincial 

Government or Federal Government or any other organization. 

56. 

Samina  Mir,  Uzma  Naveed  Ch.,  Humera  Nasreen  Rana  and  Qaisar 

Ahmad  Rana  have  also  assailed  their  terminations  in  their  respective  writ 

petitions who were admittedly working in PTVC on contract basis, however the 

issue raised to their extent  relates to the terms and conditions of the employees 

under the PTVC Employees Service Rules.  

57.  While considering the above reasons and facts, this Court has to apply the 

functional  test  to  deal  with  the  maintainability  of  the  writ  petition  which  has 

been settled by now that all the Rules of an organization, if not approved by the 

Federal Government, considered for the internal arrangement and functioning of 

such  organization,  are  to  be  called  non-statutory  rules.  Reliance  is  placed  upon 

1992  SCMR  1093  (University  of  the  Punjab,  Lahore  v.  Ch.  Sardar  Ali),  1994 

SCMR 1024 (M.H. Mirza v. Federation of Pakistan), PLD 1975 SC 678 (Manager, 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-38 

Jammu & Kashmir, State Property in Pakistan v. Khuda Yar), 2009 PLC (CS) 565 

(Sohail  Abbas  Bokhari  v.  Secretary  Information  and  Broadcasting/Chairman 

PTVC), 2017 PLC (CS) Note 71 (Muhammad Ramzan v. Federation of Pakistan), 

2017  SCMR  571  (Muhammad  Zaman  v.  Government  of  Pakistan),  2017  SCMR 

2010  (Pakistan  Defence  Housing  Authority  v.  Mrs.  Itrar  Sajjad  Khan),  2013 

SCMR 747 (Muhammad Aslam Khan v. Federation of Pakistan), 2013 SCMR 642 

(ZTBL  v.  Said  Rehman),  2014  SCMR  982  (Syed  Nazir  Gillani  v.  Pakistan  Red 

Crescent  Society),  2013  SCMR  1159  (Muhammad  Ashraf  Tiwana  v.  Pakistan, 

etc.)  and  2016  SCMR  2146  (Muhammad  Rafi  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan).  The 

above referred case law opined that where conditions of service of employees of 

a  statutory  body  are  not  regulated  by  Rules/Regulations  framed  under  the 

Statute,  but only Rules or Instructions issued for its internal uses, any  violation 

thereof cannot normally be enforced through writ jurisdiction and they would be 

governed by the principle of „Master and Servant‟. 

58.  While  applying  these  principles,  it  is  clear  to  hold  that  the  PTVC 

Employees  Service  Rules  are  non-statutory  in  nature  and  the  respondent 

Corporation through their Board of Directors are empowered to amend the terms 

and conditions of their employees, even the employees are governed under the 

principle  of  master  and  servant,  as  such,  this  backdrop  renders  such  writ 

petitions not competent in terms of Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic 

Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  

CONCLUSION 

59. 

Keeping  in  view  the  above  settled  position,  this  Court  comes  to  the 

irresistible  conclusion  that  public  sector  companies  are  not  allowed  to  appoint 

any person without adhering to the criteria of fit and proper person, rather these 

companies have to act independently, transparently, impartially and in unbiased 

manner so as to select best and most suitable candidate strictly on merits due to 

the reason that such persons in the public sector companies are required for their 

responsibility,  planning,  succession,  management  and  policy  decisions  in  the 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-39 

best  interest  of  the  company,  therefore,  the  nomination  made  by  the  Federal 

Government  through  Prime  Minister  has  to  be  exercised  under  a  structured 

formula,  particularly  in  this  case  when  the  summaries  of  MoIB  regarding 

appointment  of  the  Members  of  Board  of  Directors  lacked  the  transparency  as 

required in the case reported as 2019 SCMR 1, nor even the Members of Board of 

Directors have been selected from the data bank maintained by SECP in terms of 

Section  166  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017.  The  discretion  so  exercised  by  the 

Federal  Government  is  against  the  constitutional  mandate  and  the  principles 

settled in cases reported as 2010 SCMR  1301 (Tariq Aziz ud Din case), PLD 2012 

SC  132  (Muhammad  Yasin  VS  Federation  of  Pakistan,  etc.),  2013  SCMR  1159 

(Muhammad  Ashraf  Tiwana  v.  Pakistan,  etc.)  and  PLD  2020  Islamabad  130 

(Saira  Rubab  Nasir  VS  President  of  Pakistan,  etc.),  and  as  such,  the  Federal 

Government  while  nominating  the  members  of  Board  of  Directors  have  not 

learnt anything from the judgment rendered by the apex Court in the case of Ata-

ul-Haq Qasmi supra, neither followed the concept embodied in the case of Mustafa 

Impex and nor even the appointments have been processed in a manner provided 

in the Rules, 2013 or in terms of the Companies Act, 2017. Hence, the sacred duty 

entrusted to the Federal Government to exercise the public authority for selection 

of  Members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  has  been  violated,  whereby  it  is 

mandatorily  required  to  exercise  such  authority  fairly  and  justly  by  the 

functionaries to accomplish the purpose assigned to them by law, as such, it was 

their bounded duty to choose right persons in all manner without any distinction 

by  objectively  selecting  best  of  the  best  from  a  competing  lot.  The  selection 

process  under  the  law  discussed  above  was  rooted  into  the  fundamentals  of 

equal  opportunities,  equal  treatment  and  equal  protection,  which  has  also  been 

referred  in  the  divine  affirmation  referred  in  the  Holy  Quran  in  Surah  Nisa. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  2020  SCMR  568  (Dr.  Shamim  Tariq  VS  IIUI,  etc.). 

Similarly, all public functionaries must exercise public authority, especially while 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-40 

dealing  with  public  property,  funds  or  assets  in  a  fair,  just,  transparent  and 

reasonable  manner,  untainted  by  malafide,  without  discrimination  and  in 

accordance  with  law,  keeping  in  view  the  constitutional  rights  of  people. 

Reliance  is  placed  upon  2020  SCMR  513  (Naimatullah  Khan,  Advocate  VS 

Federation of Pakistan), therefore, there is nothing  left in favour  of the Federal 

Government  or  the  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  as  the  appointments  of  all  the 

Members  of  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  have  directly  been  made  by  the  Federal 

Government  without  any  structured  formula,  advertisement  or  from  any  data 

bank, hence, such approvals are considered to be illegal, which otherwise render 

the appointments of all members of the Board of Directors, PTVC, including the 

Chairman, PTVC, are illegal. 

60. 

In view of above, this Court has come to the following conclusion: 

a) 

Arshad  Khan/Chairman  had  received  pecuniary  benefits  while 

remaining  Managing  Director  of  the  PTVC  for  the  period  of  05 

months  against  salary  of  Rs.1,760,000/-  with  other  fringe  benefits. 

He  subsequently  resigned  from  his  position  and  he  was  again 

appointed  as  Chairman,  PTVC  for  three  years  w.e.f.  17.06.2019  in 

226th Meeting of the Board of Directors without adhering to Section 

166(2)(a)(b)  &  (h)  and  Section  166(4)  &  (5)  of  the  Companies  Act, 

2017 and in violation of Rule 2(d) of the Rules of 2013, whereby he 

was  not  appointed  from  the  data  bank  maintained  by  the  SECP, 

even he has received remuneration and salary in recent past, which 

requires  at  least  three  years  of  gap  to  be  appointed  in  Board  of 

Directors,  PTVC  for  all  members.  Hence,  appointment  of  Arshad 

Khan  as  Chairman,  PTVC 

is  hereby  declared 

ILLEGAL. 

Accordingly, captioned W.P. No.2250/2019, W.P. No.3512/2019, W.P. 

No.533/2020  and  W.P.  No.1610/2020  are  hereby  ALLOWED  to  the 

extent of illegal appointment of Arshad Khan as Chairman, PTVC.  

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-41 

b) 

Appointment of Amir Manzoor/ Managing Director is declared to 

be LEGAL as same has been made in the light of criteria laid down 

in  Rules  3(1)  and  (7)  and  annexure  (fit  and  proper  person)  to  the 

Rules  of  2013,  therefore,  captioned  W.P.  No.533/2020  and  W.P. 

No.1610/2020 is hereby DISMISSED to his extent.  

c) 

Rashid  Ali  Khan,  Director  of  PTVC,  was  appointed  without 

adhering to the Rule 3(4) of the Rules, 2013 where ―no person shall be 

elected or  nominated as  Director of  more  than 5  public sector companies 

and listed companies simultaneously, except their subsidies” whereas the 

said  respondent  is  Director  of  NayaTel  Ltd.,  Microsoft  Ltd., 

Pakistan  Engineering  Company,  NRSP  Micro  Finance  Bank  Ltd., 

Bank  of  Khyber  Ltd.,  Hayatabad  Medical  Complex,  Peshawar, 

Sukhchain  Real  Estate  Development,  Lahore,  NUML  University, 

Mianwali and Elementary Education Foundation, Peshawar, hence, 

Rule 3(4) of the Rules, 2013 has been violated. Similarly, he is in the 

Board of Directors of M/s NayaTel Ltd. who is receiving monthly 

subscription of PTVC in their account and as such, his company has 

direct  substantial  business  relationship  with  PTVC,  which  itself  is 

violation  of  Rule  2(ii)  of  the  Rules,  2013.  Hence,  appointment  of 

Rashid  Ali  Khan  as  Director  PTVC  is  ILLEGAL.  Accordingly, 

captioned  W.P.  No.533/2020  is  hereby  ALLOWED  to  the  extent  of 

appointment of Rashid Ali Khan as Director PTVC. 

d) 

Farman Ullah Jan was former General Manager of PTVC, Group IX 

Officer, who could not be treated as Independent Director in terms 

of  Section  166(2)(d)  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017,  whereby  any 

person who has received remuneration in three years preceding his 

appointment  as  Director  is  disqualified.  Hence,  he  has  pecuniary 

interest  in  the  affairs  of  PTVC,  who  is  receiving  pension  and 

medical benefit from the Corporation, therefore, his appointment is 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-42 

also  declared 

ILLEGAL.  Accordingly, 

the  captioned  W.P. 

No.533/2020,  W.P.  No.3512/2019  and  W.P.  No.1610/2020  are  hereby 

ALLOWED  to  the  extent  of  appointment  of  Farman  Ullah  Jan  as 

Member Board of Directors, PTVC. 

e) 

All  other  Directors  have  not  been  appointed  from  the  data  bank 

maintained  by  the  SECP  for  Independent  Directors  in  terms  of 

Section 166 of the Companies Act, 2017 and who do not fall within 

the  concept  of  Independent  Directors,  therefore,  appointment  of 

Members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  are  declared  illegal,  even  they 

have  not  been  selected  through  an  advertisement  as  required  in 

2019  SCMR  1.  Accordingly,  captioned  W.P.  No.533/2020,  W.P. 

No.3512/2019 and W.P. No.1610/2020 are hereby ALLOWED.  

f) 

All  acts,  orders  and  directions  passed  by  the  Board  of  Directors, 

PTVC,  despite  being  constituted  in  violation  of  law,  shall  be 

considered  valid  in  terms  of  Section  168  of  the  Companies  Act, 

2017, therefore, the orders passed in different Board Meetings have 

been  given  protection to  the  extent of  terms  and  conditions  of  the 

employees  in  the  service  rules  of  PTVC.  Accordingly,  captioned 

W.P. No.3512/2019 is hereby DISMISSED to this extent.  

g) 

The amendments approved by the Board of Directors, PTVC, vide 

meeting  dated  12.02.2019,  regarding  Clauses  10.2-A  and  10.2-B  of 

the PTVC Revised Leave Rules, 1984 are declared to be LEGAL and 

protected as the PTVC Board has an authority to amend its rules by 

majority  of  decision,  even  otherwise,  same  are  non-statutory  in 

nature,  therefore,  writ  to  that  extent  is  not  competent,  therefore, 

captioned  W.P.  No.4249/2019,  W.P.  No.171/2020,  W.P.  No.476/2020 

are hereby DISMISSED.  

h) 

Office  order,  dated  05.06.2020,  whereby  services  of  petitioners 

namely  Samina  Mir,  Uzma  Naveed,  Humera  Nasreen  Rana  and 

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-43 

Qaisar  Ahmed  Rana  as  News  Caster/Anchor  Person/Analyst 

have  been  de-notified,  is  UPHELD  as  W.P.  No.1639/2020  and 

W.P.  No.1610/2020  are  not  maintainable  and  same  are  hereby 

DISMISSED. 

i) 

W.P. No.1095/2017  is not maintainable  as matter relates to internal 

terms  and  conditions  of  employees  service,  therefore,  same  is 

hereby DISMISSED. 

j) 

W.P. No.3512/2019 is DISMISSED to the extent of claim relating to 

abolishing the post of Deputy Managing Director as the writ is not 

competent  to  the  extent  of  said  claim,  however  status  of  Hassan 

Immad  Mohemdi  (petitioner)  is  remained  as  Director  Special 

Assignment,  which  relates  to  terms  and  conditions  of  employees 

under  non-statutory  rules  of  PTVC,  therefore,  his  claim  to  that 

extent is DISMISSED. 

k)  W.P. No.1610/2020 is DISMISSED to the extent of appointments of 

Amir  Manzoor,  Qutrina  Hossain  and  Khawar  Azhar  as  well  as  to 

the extent of hiring of head hunting firm i.e. M/s Career Pakistan. 

l) 

Crl.  Org.  No.47-W/2020  and  Objection  Case  No.7150/2018  are 

hereby DISMISSED having become infructuous.  

61. 

Before parting with this judgment, it has been observed that in majority of 

the  appointments  the  salary  packages  are  on  higher  side  which  requires 

concurrence  of Ministry of Finance on the principle of best practice recorded in 

2019  SCMR  1  (in  the  matter  regarding  appointment  of  Director,  PTVC). 

Furthermore,  the  Federal  Government  is  directed  to  devise  a  policy  for  future 

appointments to be made in all public sectors companies along with the criteria 

of  setting  up  salary,  perks  and  privileges  after  consultation  with  Ministry  of 

Finance and Ministry of Law & Justice.   

 
 
 
W.P. No.2250/2019 and others  

Page-44 

62. 

The  Federal Government is further directed to nominate the Members of 

the  Board  of  Directors,  PTVC  in  accordance  with  law,  within  the  period  of  six 

months,  while  observing  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  of  2013  and  the 

Companies Act, 2017.  

               (MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

   JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on: 17.09.2020. 

Khalid Z. 

   JUDGE 

Uploaded By : Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
