ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal Appeal  No. 88/2018 

Saira  Bibi 
VS

Muhammad  Rashid  & two others 

Appellant by: 

M/S Saad Ali Sheikh & Ali Waqas 
Advocates 

Respondents 1  to 3  by:  Mr. Ali Hussain Bhatti, Advocate 

State by: 

alongwith respondents  1  & 3. 
Mr. Hammad Saeed Dar, State 
Counsel alongwith Fazal SI. 

Date of Hearing: 

25.08.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani,  J.:  This  appeal  has  been  filed 

against  the  impugned judgment  dated  18.04.2018,  passed  by the 

learned Additional  Sessions Judge,  Islamabad- West,  in  case  F.l.R 

75/2015  dated  07.04.2015,  under  Sections  354-A,  452,  506/34 

PPC  registered  at  Police  Station  Secretariat,  Islamabad, whereby 

respondents No.  1  to 3 were acquitted. 

2. 

Briefly  stated 

facts  of 

the  case  as  narrated  by 

the 

complainant, Mst. Saira Bibi daughter of Gui Zareen Shah, are that 

on  07.04.2015  at  about  10:00 AM,  she  was  present  alone  in  a 

room of her house, in  the meanwhile, accused Muhammad  Rashid 

entered  into the  house and tried to  outrage her modesty, also torn 

her  shirt  and  removed  her  dupatta,  while  giving  her  life  threats. 

When  she  started  raising  hue and cry, accused  left the  house.  He 

also  gave  beating  to  her  father.  On  hearing  the  noise,  paternal 

aunt  of  the  complainant  namely  Mst.  Khursheed  Bibi  also  came 

there.  The  occurrence  was  witnessed  by  her  father  and  paternal 

aunt.  Meanwhile,  brothers  of  accused  namely  Basit,  Yasir,  his 

mother  and  sister  namely  Mehwish  came  in  the  street.  They 

alongwith  accused  Rashid  used  filthy  language  and  gave  life 

threats  to her and she, in  order to  save her life,  closed the  door of 

the house.  Hence, the above said F.l.R was lodged. 

2 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 88/2018 

3. 

After  registration  of  F.1.R,  the  investigation  was  completed 

and report under Section 173 Cr.P.C was submitted. Formal charge 

was  framed  against  the  accused/  respondents  to  which  they 

pleaded  not  guilty  and  claimed  trial.  Therefore,  the  prosecution 

evidence was  summoned.  In  order to  prove the  case,  prosecution 

examined the following witnesses:- 

(i) 

(ii) 

PW.1 

PW.4 

(iii) 

PW.5 

(iv) 

PW.6 

(v) 

PW.7 

(vi) 

PW.8 

is  father 

Mst.  Saira  Bibi  daughter  of  Gulzareen,  is 
complainant, 
Khurshid Bibi w/o  Munir Hussain Shah, is  eye 
witness of the occurrence, 
Gui Zareen  Shah  s/o  Ameen  Shah, 
and eye witness of the occurrence. 
Fazal  e  Khaliq  AS.I  had  recorded  formal 
F.l.R,  inspected  the  place  of  occurrence, 
prepared unscaled site map place of 
occurrence.  He  is  also  recovery  witness  of 
case  property  i.e torn  shirt  and  prepared  the 
recovery memos. 
Noor  Ellahi ASI,  second  1.0  of  the  case  got 
issued  the  warrants  of  the  accused  persons 
and subsequently proclamation Under 
Section 87  Cr.P.C was got from the Court and 
submitted  the  challan  Under  Section  512 
Cr.P.C. 
Muhammad  Ali  A.S.I,  1.0  of  the  case,  had 
investigated the case to the extent of accused 
Bas it. 

4. 

Statements  of  the  accused/  respondents  No.  1  to  3  under 

Section 342 Cr.P.C. were recorded. They claimed innocence. They 

did  not opt to  record their  statements on  oath  as envisaged  under 

Section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. 

5. 

After  recording  evidence  and  hearing  arguments  of  the 

learned  counsels  for  the  parties,  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 

Judge, 

Islamabad  (West),  passed  impugned  judgment,  dated 

18.04.2018. Feeling aggrieved, the  appellant/complainant  has filed 

the instant appeal. 

6. 

The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the 

impugned judgment  dated  18.04.2018 passed  by the  learned Trial 

Court  is  manifestly  wrong,  perverse  and  unreasonable; 

that  the 

reasons  given  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  while  acquitting  the 

accused/respondents  1 

to  3  are  result  of  mis-reading  and  non- 

3 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 88/2018 

reading  of  the  evidence  available  on  record;  that  the  findings 

arrived  at  by  the 

learned  Trial  Court  are  artificial  and  not 

sustainable  in  the  eyes  of  law.  Further  contended  that  no  major 

discrepancies  are  in  the statements of witnesses;  that  the  incident 

took  place in  a  broad day light and  F.l.R was  promptly lodged with 

specific  role  attributed  to  the  accused/respondents; 

that  the 

prosecution  has  successfully  proved  its  case  against  the  accused 

beyond any shadow of doubt. Lastly prayed for setting aside of the 

impugned judgment. 

7. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  accused/  respondents 

opposed  the  contentions  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

appellant  contending  that  the  accused  have  been  falsely  involved 

in  this  case; that the  statements of the witnesses  are contradictory 

with  each  other  which  has  made  the  case  highly  doubtful;  that 

witnesses  have  made dishonest  improvements  in  their  statements 

just  to  strengthen  their  case;  that  no  medical  certificate  was 

produced  by  the  prosecution  in  order  to  prove  the  allegation  of 

beatings;  that  there  is 

in-ordinate  and  un-explained  delay  in 

registration of the  F.l.R. Further contended that the witnesses were 

not  proved  to  be  natural;  that  no  case  is  made  out  against  the 

respondents  and  lastly  urged  for  dismissal  of  the  appeal.  The 

learned  State  Counsel  supported  the  judgment  passed  by  the 

learned  Trial  Court  and  requested  for  dismissal  of  the  instant 

appeal. 

8. 

I  have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the parties 

and have perused the material available on record. 

9. 

Perusal  of 

the  record  reveals 

that  on 

the  complaint 

Ex.PW.1/A  of  PW-1  Saira  Bibi,  F.l.R  Ex.PW-1/2  was  lodged  on 

07.04.2015  at  the  Police  Station,  Secretariat,  Islamabad,  with  the 

allegation  that  the  respondent  Muhammad  Rashid  entered  in  the 

room of her house and tried to outrage her modesty by tearing  her 

shirt and also putting off her scarf. After registration of the F.l.R, the 

police  started  investigations,  prepared  site  map.  In  her  statement 

as  PW-1,  during  cross-examination,  the  complainant  has  stated 

that 

the  site  plan  Ex.PW.1/D  was  prepared  on  her  given 

4 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 88/2018 

information.  In  her  statement,  she  has  stated  that  on  the  alleged 

day,  she  was  alone  in  her  room  and  her  father  was  sleeping  in 

another room of their house. The gate of the house was open. The 

accused/respondent  Muhammad  Rashid  entered  into  their  house 

and directly  entered  in  her room and tried to  outrage  her modesty, 

torn  her wearing  shirt.  It  has been further  deposed by her that  she 

raised  hue  and  cry  due  to  which  the  accused  left  the  room  and 

went  in  the  courtyard  of the  house.  It  has also  been  stated  by her 

that  the  accused  started  beating to  her  handicapped father.  It  has 

also  been  recorded  by  her  that  on  hearing  her  cries,  her  aunt 

Khurshid Bibi PW-.4 also came over there. 

10. 

A  careful  perusal  of  the  statement  of  PW-4  Mst.Khurshid 

Bibi depicts that the occurrence started from the 'Galli' when  PW-.1 

Mst.Saira  Bibi  was  fetching  water  to  her  house  and  the  accused 

Rashid had hit on her leg,  she then entered into her house, where 

the  quarrel  started  and  it  is  also  apparent  from  the  statement  of 

PW-.4  that  at  that  time, 

the  family  members  i.e  brothers  and 

mother  of  accused  Muhammad  Rahid  were  also  there  and  a 

quarrel  started  between  both  the  parties,  she  herself  was  not  an 

eye witness of the alleged occurrence. 

11. 

The  police visited  the  place of  occurrence  on the  same  day 

and  statement  of  the  PW .4  was  recorded  on  the  next  day  of 

occurrence.  The  delay  in  recording  of  her  statement  has  raised 

question  on  the  veracity  of  the  statement  of  this  witness  that 

whether  she  was  a  witness  to  the  occurrence  or  not  ? Perusal  of 

Ex.PW.1/D  does  not  suggest  anywhere  the  presence  of  this 

witness,  PW-.4  Mst.Khurshid  Bibi.  During  the  course  of  cross  

examination,  PW-.1 has admitted that  many persons of the  locality 

gathered  on  the  spot  at  the  time  of  incident,  but  no  independent 

private witness was associated by the  Investigation Officer to  know 

the  actual  controversy.  The  wearing  shirt  of  the  complainant  was 

also  not sealed  into  parcel  rather was  kept  in  a  shopper  and  was 

taken  into  possession  through  Ex.PW.1/C  and  witnesses  of  the 

said  seizure  memo  are  only  the  complainant  and  her  father.  It  is 

transpired from the record that while recording her statement under 

5 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 88/2018 

Section  161  Cr.P.C  she  has  narrated  a  different  story  by  stating 

that  accused  had  completely  undressed  /naked  her,  but  this  fact 

has not been mentioned in  the complaint Ex.PW.1/A.  She has also 

admitted the  fact  that  she recorded in  her statement to  police that 

the  accused  had  given  fist  blows to  her father,  but the  same  was 

also  not  mentioned  in  the  complaint  Ex.PW.1/A.  It  is  an  admitted 

fact  that  the  alleged  incident has  been stated  to  have  occurred  at 

10:  00  am while  F.l.R  shows the  time  of  report  as 4:10  pm, while 

the  distance  of  police  station  is  exactly  two  kilometers  away  from 

the  house  of  the  complainant.  It  is  evident  from  the  statement  of 

PW-.4 that  the  incident  had taken  place  in  the  'Galli'  and that  the 

mother,  brothers  of  the  accused  came  into  the  house  of  the 

complainant where a  quarrel had taken  place.  The  in-ordinate and 

un-explained delay in  registration of the F.l.R and nomination of the 

whole  family  members of the  accused, the fact  of  deliberation  and 

consultation  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Further  more,  Ex.PW.1/D  also 

does  not show  the  presence of  accused Yasir,  Basit, their  mother 

and  Mehwish  at  place  of  occurrence.  From  the  entire  scenario, 

even  if it is  presumed that there  may be a  quarrel,  but it  is  hard to 

believe that  the  accused,  in  presence of  his  mother,  brothers  and 

sister, could dare to outrage the modesty of a  lady. It  is  transparent 

from the record that initially Section 354 P.P.C was levelled against 

the  respondents  and  later  on  Section  354-A  P.P.C  was  inserted. 

From the evidence, the  ingredients of Section 354-A  P.P.C are  not 

attracted.  There  is  no allegation of  making the  complainant  naked 

and  exposing  her  to  public.  The  manner  of  alleged  occurrence, 

from 

the  contradictory  and  dishonest 

improvements 

in 

the 

statements of prosecution witnesses, the case of prosecution is  not 

free from doubts. 

12. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  an  appeal  against  acquittal  has 

distinctive  features  and  the  approach  to  deal  with  the  appeal 

against  conviction  is  distinguishable from  appeal  against  acquittal, 

as presumption of double innocence is  attached, in  the  latter case. 

Reliance in  this  regard is  placed upon the case of "lnayatullah  Butt 

v.  Muhammad Javed  and 2 others" [PLO 2003  SC 562].  Until and 

6 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 88/2018 

unless the judgment  of the trial Court is perverse, completely illegal 

and on perusal of evidence, no other decision can be given except 

that the accused is guilty or there has been complete misreading of 

evidence  leading  to  miscarriage  of  justice,  the  Court  will  not 

exercise jurisdiction  under Section 417 Cr.P.C. 

13. 

The  learned counsel for  the  appellant  has failed  to  advance 

any  ground  to  justify  the  setting  aside  of  the  acquittal  judgment. 

There  is  no misreading or non-reading of evidence nor the findings 

of  the  learned  trial  Court  are  patently  illegal.  The  findings  of 

acquittal,  by  no  stretch  of  imagination,  can  be  declared  as 

perverse, shocking, alarming or suffering from  errors of jurisdiction 

and misreading or non-reading of evidence. 

14. 

For what  has been discussed above, there  is  no merit in  the 

instant appeal; therefore, the same is  hereby dismissed. 

161 IHaNi  AZAM QA~NI) 

JUDGE 

Announced  in open Court on this 27th  day of August, 2020. 

JUDGE __... 

S.Akhtar 

