IUDGMENT SHEET.

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD.
TUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

W.P. No. 2995/2019.

Muhammad  Khakan

VS

Secretary  Cooperatives,  Islamabad,  etc

Petitioner by:

Malik Waheed Akhtar, Advocate.

Respondents  by:

Mr. Abdul Wahid  Qureshi,  Sh. ]unaid Nadeem
and Sh. Muhammad  Suleman,  Advocates.
Mr. Naseem  Ahmed  Shah, Advocate.

Date of Decision: 

21,.08.2019.

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI, I:  Through  this Writ Petition, the

petitioner  has assailed the order dated  31..07.2019,  passed by Secretary

Cooperative  and order dated 22.07.2019, passed by Registrar Cooperafive

Societies alongwith order dated 08.07.2019,  passed by Election  Commission  of

Jammu  Kashmir Cooperative Housing Society  (IKCHS), whereby  nomination

papers filed  by respondent No.4 ZiaUllah Shah against  seat of Chairman JKCHS

have  been accepted.

2. 

Learned  counsel for the petitioner  contends that respondent  No.4 is

contractor by profession who was running  business under the name and style of

Scramble  Security Services  (Pvt) Ltd. and he provides  security  services  to the

JKCHS and as such he is permanently  barred to contest  the election against  any

of the post of managing/executive  committee in terms of Rule  3(ii)(a) of the ICT

Cooperative Societies (Managing  Committees Election)  Rules,  201.4; that the

forums below have not considered the rule position in its true perspective and

nomination  papers of respondent  No.4 were rejected in the previous round of

proceedings  and the matter was reported  as

2078 MLD  1_869

Ullah  ShahVS

Muhammad  Khaqan and 6 othersl

if'

W.P. No.2995/2018

2

3.  Conversely,  learned  counsel for respondent  No.4 contends that Election

Commission as well as Registrar Cooperative and Secretary  Cooperative

Societies have already adjudicated  upon the matter  at length and as such the

contract of Scramble  Security  Services (PvQ Ltd. with |KCHS has already  been

expired and at present respondent No.4 is not providing any such services  to the

society, therefore, his case does not fall within  the purview of Rule 3(ii)(a) of the

Election  Rules  201,4; that respondent  No.4  is ready to submit undertaking  that he

and any of his family member,  brothers will not indulge in any kind of business

with the society  directly  or indirectly  or not through any other company, firm in

which  petitioner has any share

4.  Arguments  heard,  record  perused.

5.  Perusal of record reveals  that respondent  No.4 is contesting the election

for the post of Chairman IKCHS in the upcoming  election  of the management

committee  whereby petitioner  has filed petition on the ground  that respondent

No.4  was contractor  and providing services  to the ]KCHS  through his companv

i.e. Scramble Security Services  (Pvt) Ltd. and as such he is not eligible  to contest

the election  in terms  of bar contained  in the Rule 3(ii)(a) of Election Rules 2014

6. 

I have gone through the scrutiny  result of the Election  Commission

whereby  they have considered all these aspects  as well as rules  position which

reveals that case of respondent No.4 was rejected by this Court through reported

case 20L8 MLD 1869 and as such two years time referred  in the byeJaws  of the

society  has already  been over. I have  also gone through  the concurrent  findings

of the forums  below whereas Secretary  Cooperative  has given  comprehensive

decision in the following manner:-

I h"aae heard the arguments of both parties and carefully  perused  the
record,  which shoarc that the petitioner  hns mainly  objected on the

nomination  pnpers  of the Respondenf  NO. 3 on fioo grounds.  Firstly, t'lmt

the Respondent  No. 3 runs  a securi$ cotnpany  uthich had  been inaolued

in tLrc security  business  which  the socieg  arhichaiolates  Rule  53 (2) (C) of

the society and secondly,  the mentbership of the Respondenf  No.3 has not

H

i

W.P. No.2995/2018

3

yet been approaed  by the AGM  which  bars the respondent  to contest  the

election.

A careful  perusal  of the record shotos thnt both  the objections  haae  already

been  answered  in length by the election  commission  and learned  registrar

Rule  3(b)  clearly states  that  any company whichhas  carried  out abusiness

of proft uith the society  is not allozoed to contest  tlu election for 2 years.
HoltteTser, the cancellation  of the agreement  utith the Scramble  Security

Seraices  @aA Ltd dated 3L-05-2017 oalidate the fact thnt the time period
of more than 2 years  has already  been passed,  so this objection  is no longer

tenable.  Secondly,  the Respondent  No 3 became  a member  of the society  on

tLrc 02-06-2017 and mandatory period of 1 year  has already  passed.

Though no AGM  is held since  then, which  is a failure  on account of the
society and under such circumstances, the membership stands

automatically  confirmed  as per Rule 7(1.) of thebye-laws of IKCHS.

The learned  Regtstrar  has rightly  appreciated  the law on the subject  and

hns reached  to a just and right conclusion.  There  is no illegally or material

irregularity in the impugned  order,  which may  warrant  the interference  of

this court in its retsision jurisdiction.

7.  The above  referred  reasons  are self explanatory. Even otherwise, Rule

3(ii)(a) of Election Rules,  201,4 is not clear as to whether the term contractor

means the contractor  of security  services or of any other  business.  l{owever,  in

order to settle this question relevant  rules are reproduced  as under:-

(it  No member  shall be eligtble  to contest  elections to become an office

bearer of the managing  committee uho:
(a) is practicing  the profession of Real Estate  e.g. professional
Property  Dealer,  Contractor, Land /  Proper$  Deoeloper.
@)  acts for society  for any honorarium  or proft or salary  or is a
borrower of the society unless he has cleared  his liability or has
relinquished  the position of for a period at least 2 years
immediately preceding  the schedtile  for the elections.

8. 

The term used in the above  referred rules  is qualified with the provision  of

real estate,  which covers the professional propertv dealers,  contractor,

land/property developers and as such the term  contractor  used in this case is

related to similar type of business  which  deals with the immovable  property,

W.P. No.2995/2018

4

construction  of land whereas respondent  No.4 who was admittedly running a

business  under the name and style of Scramble Security Services (Pvt) Ltd., who

have their previous contract  with JKCHS for provision  of security services,

although  the same  was cancelled  on 3'1,.05.2017  and  as such  period of two years

has already  been  elapsed,  therefore, no question  of interference  is made out in

the instant petition, the orders  passed by the forums below  are in accordance

with law, therefore, the same  stands dismissed  However, respondent No.4  shall

submit an undertaking  as per his own commitment to the Election Commission

as well as to the Secretary  Cooperative  Societies with  assurance  that he as well as

a

ELd  his family members  shall not indulge in any kind of business directly or

indirectly,  even through any other company  or firm in which he or his family

members  have share with IKCHS in future as the same have con-flict of interest

and in case any such illegality  comes  on record, legal action would be taken

against him, if he would  be elected  in the election.

7ahid.

(MoH

AR

ANr)

IUDGE

