       Form No: HCJD/C. 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD 

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Case No: Writ Petition No. 4132 of 2016 

Muhammad Rahan Khan 
VS 

Federal Government and 2 others  

Petitioners by:   M/s.  G.  M.  Chaudhary,  Ali  Hussain 
Bhatti,  Ch.  Muhammad  Faridun, 
Ahmed  Hassan  Cheema,  Ch. 
Muhammad  Atif,  Kamran  Ahmer 
Ali  Hashmat,  Kh.  Manzoor  Ahmed, 
Muhammad  Ahmed  Tariq  Fani, 
Bhatti, 
Muhammad 
Muhammad  Shabbir  Bhutta,  Abdul 
Rehman  Sheikh,  Ch.  Saad  Bin 
Shafiq,  Zulfiqar  Ahmed  Siyal, 
Muhammad  Irshad  Chaudhary  and 
Tahir Mahmud, Advocates. 

Hanif 

Respondents by:  Raja  Khalid  Mahmood,  Deputy 
Attorney-General.  
Hafiz Muhammad Ishaq, Director 
(Coord) FEB & GIF.  
Nazir Ahmed, Deputy Director, 
(Coord).   

Date of Hearing:  17.06.2019 

AAMER  FAROOQ,  J.-  This  judgement  shall  decide 

the instant petition as well as the petitions mentioned in 

the schedule attached herewith as common questions of 

law and facts are involved. 

2. 

The  petitioners  are  retired  employees  of  various 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
2 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

Organizations and have challenged the vires of Section 

19  of  the  Federal  Employees  Benevolent  Fund  and 

Group Insurance Act, 1969 (the “Act of 1969”). In this 

behalf  grievance  of  the  petitioners  is  that  during  the 

course of employment they paid the premium by way of 

contribution  towards  the  compulsory  insurance  as 

provided  under  the  Act  of  1969.  However,  the  sum 

assured  was  to  be  paid  back  only  in  case  they  died 

during  the  course  of  employment.  The  petitioners  feel 

that  they  are  entitled  to  receive  back  the  sum  paid  as 

premium. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  inter  alia  

contended  that  the  petitioners  all  their  lives  have  paid 

sum towards the premium for the compulsory insurance 

and  upon  retirement  they  did  not  receive  back  the 

amount  insured.  It  was  also  contended  that  under 

Section 19 of the Act of 1969 only in case of death of 

the  employee,  during  the  course  of  employment,  his 

family or nominee is to receive benefits but no benefit 

accrues  in  case  of  retirement  of  the  employee.  It  was 

further  submitted  that  this  provision  is  in  violation  of 

the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 

1973  (the  “Constitution”)  and  amounts  to  extortion.  It 

was  also  pointed  out  that  in  other  Provinces  like  KPK 

and  Balochistan  law  has  been  amended  and  now  the 

 
 
 
 
3 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

retired  employees  receive  said  benefit  upon  their 

retirement. 

4. 

Learned  Deputy  Attorney-General  as  well  as 

learned  counsel 

for 

the 

respondents 

inter  alia  

contended that under Section 19 of the Act of 1969 only 

in  case  of  death  of  an  employee  during  the  course  of 

service, his family or nominee can receive benefit of the 

insurance and not on retirement. It was further pointed 

out  that  Section  19  of  the  Act  of  1969  in  its  present 

form does not violate any provision of the Constitution 

and only in case the law is amended the petitioners can 

receive the referred benefit.  

5. 

Arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for 

the  parties  have  been  heard  and  the  documents  placed 

on record perused with their able assistance.  

6. 

The controversy in hand has been explained with 

brevity  in  the  paragraphs  mentioned  hereinabove. 

Before  embarking  upon  the  discussion  of  law  it  is 

appropriate  that the  relevant provisions  be  reproduced. 

The referred provisions are contained in Chapter-IV of 

the Act of 1969 and read as follows: 

“15.  Insurance  of  Employees.—  Subject  to 
the  provisions  of  this  Act  and  the  rules,  in 
the  event  of  the  death  of  an  employee, 
occurring  by  whatsoever  cause,  during  the 
continuance  of  his  employment,  the  Board 
shall  pay  to  the  family  of  the  deceased 
employee a sum as may be prescribed.  

 
 
 
 
 
4 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

with 

Arrangements 

16. 
Insurance 
Company,  etc.—  The  Board  may  from  time 
to time arrange for the insurance of the life 
of  the  employees  in  sums  as  may  be 
prescribed with such insurance company or 
other  insurer  and  for  such  period  as  it 
deems fit, and where any such arrangement 
subsists, 
the  said 
specified  sums  shall  directly  devolve  upon 
the insurance company or other insurer. 

liability 

to  pay 

the 

17.  Federal  Employees Insurance  Fund.— 
(1)  There  shall  be  established  a  fund  to  be 
called  the  Federal  Employees  Insurance 
Fund  which  shall  vest  in  and  be  held  and 
administered by the Board.  

(2)  All  sums  received 

the 
employees  as  premia 
the  group 
insurance of the employees and any interest 
or profit accruing thereon shall be credited 
to the Insurance Fund. 

from 

for 

 (3)  The  moneys  credited 

the 
Insurance  Fund  shall  be  kept  in  such  bank 
as may be prescribed. 

to 

into  by 

(4)  All  payments  made  under  section 
the  expenses  on  any  arrangement 
15, 
entered 
the  Board  with  any 
insurance  company  or  other  insurer  as 
provided  for  in  section  16  and  all  expenses 
on the administration of the Insurance Fund 
shall be defrayed from the Insurance Fund.  
the 
(5)  Any  sums  remaining 
Insurance Fund after defraying the expenses 
referred to in sub-section (4) may be utilized 
for such purposes connected with the benefit 
of 
retired 
employees,  and  their  families  as  the  Board 
may direct.  

employees 

including 

the 

in 

18.  Payment  of  premia.— 
(1)  Every 
employee  shall  be  liable  to  pay  to  the 
Insurance  Fund  such  sum  of  money as  may 
be prescribed as premium for the insurance 
of  his  life  as  provided  for  in  this  Chapter 
and the amount of such premium shall as far 
as  possible  be  deducted  at  the  source  from 
his  pay  and  credited  or  remitted  to  the 
insurance Fund.  

(2)  Where  the  amount  of  premium 
cannot for any reason be deducted from the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

pay  of  the  employee,  the  employee  shall 
remit  to  the  prescribed  officer  the  sum  of 
premium  payable  by  him  and  any  premia 
remaining  unpaid  due  to  inadvertence  or 
negligence  of  the  employee  or  otherwise 
shall  be  recoverable  from  him  in  such  a 
manner as may be prescribed. 

 (3) Default in the payment of premia 
either  for  the  reason  that  the  pay  of  the 
employee  was  not  drawn  or  due  to  his 
negligence  or  fault  or  for  any  other  reason 
whatsoever  shall  not  affect  the  right  of  his 
family  to  receive  the  sum  assured  in  the 
event  of  the  death  of  the  employee,  but  the 
premium remaining unpaid at the time of his 
death  may  be  recovered  from  the  assured 
amount.  

19.  Payment  of  the  sum  assured.—  (1)  On 
the  death  of  an  employee,  the  sum  assured 
shall be paid to such member or members of 
his  family  as  he  might  have  nominated  in 
accordance  with  the  rules  in  full  or  in  the 
shares  specified  by  him  at  the  time  of 
making the nomination.” 

7. 

The petitioners are only aggrieved of Section 19 

ibid  as  it  provides  that  sum  assured  shall  be  paid  to  the 

member  of  the  deceased  employee’s  family  or  nominee 

as  the  case  may  be.  The  scheme  of  Federal  Employees 

Benevolent  and  Group  Insurance  Funds  was  launched 

through  the  promulgation  of  the  Act  of  1969.  It  is  a 

compulsory  contribution  scheme  recouped  by  nominal 

subscriptions of the employees. Under Section 2(4) of the 

Act of 1969, the scheme covers employees of the Federal 

Government, the Parliament,  the Hon’ble Supreme Court 

of  Pakistan  and  the  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan. 

Moreover,  employees  of  autonomous  bodies    can  also 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

join the  scheme  in pursuance of Section 2(4) of the Act 

of 1969. The fund is governed by a Board of Trustees as 

defined under Section 4 of the Act ibid. 

8. 

The basic character given in the preamble of the 

Act  of  1969  is  to  provide  monthly  Benevolent  Grant 

ranging  from  Rs.4,000/-  to  Rs.10,100/-  in  case  of  death 

during service or after retirement and invalidation during 

service and Sum Assured/Lump Sum Grant ranging from 

Rs.350,000/-  to  Rs.1,000,000/-  and  Rs.150,000/-  to 

Rs.390,000/-  respectively  in  case  of  death/invalidation 

during  service  of  an  employee.  Every  Federal  civil 

servant is bound to be  a member of the funds as per his 

terms and conditions of service under Civil Servants Act, 

1973 (the “Act of 1973”). However, in addition to these 

core  functions,  the  Federal  Employees  Benevolent  and 

Group  Insurance  Fund  is  also  paying  seven  additional 

benefits under the provisions of the Act of 1969 and the 

Federal  Employees  Benevolent  Fund  and  Group 

Insurance  Rules, 1972 (the “Rules”). 

9. 

Section 21 of the Act of 1973 provides that every 

employee  shall  be  entitled  for  Benevolent  and  Group 

Insurance Funds. The Act of 1969 provides for a monthly 

benevolent  grant  to  the  family  of  a  deceased  employee 

who dies during service or after retirement in pursuance 

of Section 13(3) of the Act of 1969 which reads as under: 

 
 
 
 
7 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

“13(3)  Where,  on  or  after  the  first  day  of 
December, 2003, an employee is declared by 
the  prescribed  medical  authority  to  have 
been completely  incapacitated physically or 
mentally  to  discharge  the  duties  of  his 
employment and for that reason is retired or 
removed from service, he shall be entitled to 
receive  for  life  such  benevolent  grant  from 
the  Benevolent Fund as may be prescribed; 
or  where  the  employee  dies  during  the 
continuance  of  his  employment,  or  during 
retirement  before  attaining 
the  age  of 
seventy years, his spouse shall be entitled to 
receive  for  life  such  benevolent  grant  from 
the Benevolent Fund as may be prescribed.” 

10. 

Under Section 15 of the Act of 1969 sum assured 

is also paid to the family of an employee who dies during 

continuance of his service, which reads as under” 

“15.  Insurance  of  Employees.—  Subject  to 
the  provisions  of  this  Act  and  the  rules,  in 
the  event  of  the  death  of  an  employee, 
occurring  by  whatsoever  cause,  during  the 
continuance  of  his  employment,  the  Board 
shall  pay  to  the  family  of  the  deceased 
employee a sum as may be prescribed.”  

11. 

The  preamble  to  the  Act  of  1969  and  the 

provisions  thereof  make  it  abundantly  clear  that  no 

provision  exists  for  payment  of  the  sum  assured  in  case 

of  retirement  of  a  civil  servant/Government  employee. 

The petitioners claim discrimination and extortion and in 

this  behalf  reference  was  made  to  the  judgment  of  the 

Hon’ble Peshawar High Court passed in case titled Fida 

Muhammad  Durrani  and  others  v.  the  Government  of 

KPK  through  Chief  Secretary,  Peshawar  and  others 

(W.P. No.1355-P of 2013). The bare perusal of the above 

 
 
 
 
   
 
8 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

judgment  shows  that  the  matter  was  disposed  of  by  the 

Division Bench of the Hon’ble Peshawar High Court on 

the basis that the Government of KPK amended the law 

and  enacted  the  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Civil  Servants 

Retirement Benefits and Death Compensation Act, 2014 

(the “Act of 2014”) alongwith the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 

Civil  Servants  Retirement  Benefits 

and  Death 

Compensation  (Amendment)  Act,  2016  which  provides 

for  payment  of  the  benefits  in  case  of  retirement  of  the 

civil  servant  under  certain  conditions.  The  judgment 

handed down by  the  Hon’ble  Peshawar  High  Court  was 

affirmed  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in 

case 

titled  Government  of  KPK 

through  Chief 

Secretary,  Peshawar  and  others  v.  Fida  Muhammad 

Durrani  and  others  (C.P.  No.11-P  of  2017).  As  noted 

above  the  sole  basis  for  passing  of  the  judgment  by  the 

Hon’ble Peshawar High Court was the amendment made 

in the law.   

12. 

The bare reading of Section 19 and other related 

provisions  of  the  Act  of  1969  show  that  it  does  not 

amount  to  any  extortion.  Insurance  policy  is  for  the 

benefit  of  the  civil  servants/Government  employees  and 

the sum assured shall be paid only in case of their death. 

The sum assured is greater to the contribution made and 

same  is  paid  even  if  the  entire  contribution  is  not  made 

 
 
 
 
9 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

during  the  course  of  employment  and  in  case  of  early 

death of the civil servant/Government employee same is 

still  paid  to  the  family  of  the  deceased.  Likewise,  no 

discrimination  can  be  claimed  by 

the  petitioners 

inasmuch as it is only under the law that the Provinces of 

KPK and Balochistan has amended the laws and there is 

no harmony of the law across Pakistan. Learned counsel 

for  the  petitioners  failed  to  point  out  any  precise 

provision of the  Constitution on the basis of which they 

attack the vires of Section 19 ibid and only a vague attack 

was  made  under  Articles  8,  9  &  25  of  the  Constitution. 

The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  titled 

Lahore Development Authority through DG and others 

v.  Ms.  Imrana  Tiwana  and  others  (2015  SCMR  1739) 

laid  down  principles  for  striking  down  any  provision  of 

law  if  the  same  is  found  against  the  Constitution.  The 

said principles read as follows: 

“I.  There  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of 
constitutionality  and  a  law  must  not  be 
declared  unconstitutional  unless  the  statute 
is  placed  next  to  the  Constitution  and  no 
way can be found in reconciling the two; 

II.  Where  more  than  one  interpretation  is 
possible,  one  of  which  would  make  the  law 
valid  and  the  other  void,  the  Court  must 
prefer 
favours 
validity;  

interpretation  which 

the 

III.  A  statute  must  never  be  declared 
is 
unconstitutional  unless 

invalidity 

its 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

beyond  reasonable  doubt.  A  reasonable 
doubt  must  be  resolved  in  favour  of  the 
statute being valid;  

IV.  If  a  case  can  be  decided  on  other  or 
narrower  grounds,  the  Court  will  abstain 
from deciding the constitutional question;  

V.  The  Court  will  not  decide  a  larger 
constitutional question than is necessary for 
the determination of the case; 

the  ground 

VI.  The  Court  will  not  declare  a  statute 
unconstitutional  on 
it 
violates the spirit of the Constitution unless 
it also violates the letter of the Constitution;  
VII.  The  Court  is  not  concerned  with  the 
wisdom  or  prudence  of  the  legislation  but 
only with its constitutionality;  

that 

VIII. The Court will not strike down statutes 
on  principles  of  republican  or  democratic 
government  unless 
those  principles  are 
placed  beyond  legislative  encroachment  by 
the Constitution;  

IX.  Mala  fides  will  not  be  attributed  to  the 
Legislature.”      

13. 

The  principles  mentioned  hereinabove  are  not 

attracted  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  instant 

case;  hence,  no  justification  exists  for  striking  down 

Section  19  of  the  Act  of  1969.  However,  it  is  expected 

that  the  Federal  Government  shall  consider  the  plea 

raised  in  the  instant  petition  as  well  as  the  connected 

petitions  sympathetically  so  as  to  bring  the  law  in 

harmony  with  the  ones  in  other  Provinces  and  also 

provide  same  benefits  for  the  contribution  made  by  the 

retired Government servant/employee. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
11 

Writ Petition No.4132 of 2016  

14. 

For  the  reasons  mentioned  hereinabove,  the 

instant petition as well as the petitions  mentioned in the 

schedule  attached  with  this  judgment  are  without  merit 

and are accordingly dismissed.  

(AAMER FAROO) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on the 13th  day of September 2019 

           JUDGE 

*M.Naveed* 

 
 
 
 
 
                                   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
            
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
