Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

1 

ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 
Naveed Hayat Malik etc. 
VS 

The State and Another 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 

Date of  
order/ 

Order with signature of Judge and that 
of parties or counsel where necessary.  

Proceedings 

01.03.2021  M/s  Sardar  Muhammad  Latif  Khosa,  Sardar 
Shahbaz  Ali  Khan  Khosa,  Raja  Rizwan 
Abbasi,  Muhammad  Shoaib  Shaheen,  Syed 
Khawar  Ameer  Bukhar,  Mr.  Sohail  Akbar 
Chaudhry,  Ch.  Muhammad  Haseeb,  Mr. 
Fareed  Hussain  Kaif,  Raja  Muhammad  Saad, 
Mr.  Talha  Ahmad,  Mr.  Zulfiqar  Ali  Abbasi, 
Advocate,  Raja  Aleem  Khan  Abbasi,  Syed 
Qamar Hussain Sabzwari, Qazi Adil Aziz, Mr. 
Javed Iqbal Wains,  Sh. Ahsan ud Din, Hafiz 
Muhammad  Asif  Hamdani,  Mr.  Javed  Salim 
Sorish  and  Syed  Shajjar  Abbas  Hamdani, 
Advocates for the petitioners.  
Ms.  Khadija  Ali  and  Mr.  Majid  Rashid,  State 
Counsel. 
Mr. Khalid Mehmood Awan, SDPO 
Mr. Abdul Jabbar Khan, Inspector/IO. 

     AAMER  FAROOQ  J.  Through 

the 

instant  petition,  petitioners  No.1  &  3  namely 

Naveed  Hayat  Malik  s/o  Muhammad  Hayat 

Malik and Nazia Bibi w/o Ghulam Nabi seek                  

bail 

after 

arrest 

in 

case                                     

FIR  No.99  dated  08.02.2021  under  sections 

395/228/506/440/341/342/353/186/147/1

49 PPC and 7 ATA registered at P.S. Ramna, 

Islamabad.  

2. 

The case of the prosecution, against the 

petitioners, is that on 08.02.2021 at about 9:30 

a.m.,  a  number  of  lawyers  left  F-8  Katchery, 

 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

2 

Islamabad towards Islamabad High Court and 

at about 10:05 a.m., about 250 to 300 lawyers, 

including 

inter  alia 

the 

aforementioned 

petitioners,  blocked  the  Main  Road  of  the 

High  Court  and 

forcibly  entered 

the 

compound; they went towards Chief Justice’s 

Block and on their way, broke the windows of 

said  Block  and  destroyed  the  plants;  they 

encircled  the  Chief  Justice  Block,  uttered 

unacceptable  words,  pelted  the  doors  and 

building  with  stones  and  after  entering  the 

corridor,  entered 

into 

the  Chambers  of 

Hon’ble  Chief  Justice  and  took  him  hostage; 

they  also  beat  up  representative  of  ARY 

Channel and forcibly tried to snatch weapons 

of  police  officials  performing  security  duties; 

they  threatened  the  staff,  broke  the  windows 

and  also  endangered  the  lives  of  staff  by 

throwing 

gas 

cylinder 

used 

as 

fire 

extinguisher.  The  Judges  of  the  High  Court 

came  for  help  of  the  Chief  Justice  of  the 

Court but only succeeded to rescue him after 

a  considerable  period  of  time,  during  which, 

the  Hon’ble  Chief  Justice  remained  hostage. 

The  motive,  for  doing  so,  was  demolition  of 

the 

lawyers  chambers  situated  near  F-8 

Courts.  

3. 

The  petitioners  applied  for  bail  after 

arrest 

before  Anti-Terrorism  Court-I, 

Islamabad,  which  was  dismissed  vide  order 

dated 12.02.2021, hence the petition.  

4. 

Sardar  Muhammad Latif Khosa, Senior 

Advocate  Supreme  Court,  appearing  on 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

3 

behalf  of  petitioners,  inter alia  contended  that 

petitioner  No.3  is  in  the  family  way,  hence 

concession  of  bail,  be  granted  to  her.  It  was 

contended  that  petitioner  No.1  was  not 

present  at  the  scene  of  occurrence  but  came 

in later; that he is a senior Member of the Bar; 

that he has remained the President of District 

Bar  Association,  Islamabad;  that  under  the 

facts  and  circumstances,  section  395  PPC  is 

not  attracted  and  even  provisions  of  Anti 

Terrorism  Act,  1997  are  not  attracted 

inasmuch as in the FIR or in the statements, it 

is not mentioned that any weapon of offence 

was  used.  Learned  counsel  contended  that  in 

light of recent judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 

Court  of  Pakistan  as  well  as  this  Court, 

petitioner  No.1  is  entitled  to  concession  of 

bail. Reliance was placed on cases reported as 

‘Khawaja  Salman  Rafique  and  another  VS 

National  Accountability  Bureau 

through 

Chairman  and  others’  (PLD  2020  Supreme 

Court  456),  ‘Ghulam  Hussain  and  others  VS 

The  State  and  others’  (PLD  2020  Supreme 

Court  61),  ‘Manzoor  and  4-others  VS  The 

State’ (PLD 1972 Supreme Court 81) and case 

titled  ‘Amjad  Mustafa  Malik  VS  D.G.  NAB 

etc.’ (W.P. No.769-2019). 

5. 

Raja  Rizwan  Abbasi,  Advocate  also 

appearing  on  behalf  of  petitioner  No.1  inter 

alia  contended  that  in  light  of  guidelines 

issued  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 

Pakistan in case reported as ‘Ghulam Hussain 

and  others  VS  The  State  and  others’  (PLD 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

4 

2020 Supreme Court 61), Anti Terrorism Act 

is not attracted; that even section 395 PPC is 

not applicable, whereas other offences do not 

fall  in  Prohibitory  Clause,  hence  petitioners 

are entitled to concession of bail. 

6. 

Sardar  Muhammad Latif Khosa, Senior 

Advocate  Supreme  Court  further  contended 

that no words can condemn the incident of 8th 

February,  2021,  however  Bar  and  the  Bench 

are  the  two  wheels  of  chariot  and  it  is 

inconceivable 

that  any  practicing 

lawyer 

would  commit  such  a  gruesome  act.  It  was 

further  contended  that  it  is  only  the  rogue 

elements 

in  the  society,  which  may  be 

involved 

in 

incident  against 

the 

legal 

fraternity.  It  was  further  contended  that 

lawyers 

in  Islamabad  were  aggrieved  of 

demolition  of  their  chambers  constructed 

around  F-8  Katchehry  and  they  approached 

the  Chambers  of  Hon’ble  Chief  Justice  to 

lodge  their  protest  for  appropriate  action 

against  the  culprits.  It  was  further  submitted 

that 

it  was  never  the 

intention  of  any 

practicing  lawyer  to  commit  any  offence  as 

has been alleged in the FIR.  

7. 

Learned  State  Counsel 

inter 

alia 

contended  that  it  is  trite  law  that  even  if  a 

person  is  not  nominated  in  the  FIR,  he  can 

still  be  responsible,  if  he  has  been  found 

involved in the commission of offence. It was 

contended  that  as  far  as  petitioner  No.3  is 

concerned,  since  she  is  a  woman  and  in  the 

family  way,  hence  State  does  not  contest  her 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

5 

bail application. It was further submitted that 

in  light  of  section  6(1)  and  6(2)  of  Anti 

Terrorism  Act,  1997,  action  of  the  persons 

involved, attracts the provisions of the Act of 

1997.  In  so  far  as  petitioner  No.1 

is 

concerned,  learned  State  Counsel  submitted 

that  his  Call  Data  Record  shows  that  initially 

at  about  10:00  a.m,  he  was  at  F-8  Katchehry 

and  later  on  in  the  day,  he  was  within  the 

vicinity  of  G-10  Markaz,  Islamabad.  It  was 

also  contended  that 

in  accordance  with 

statements  under  section  161  Cr.P.C.  of  the 

security personnel at the Chief Justice’s Block 

namely  Safdar  Zaman,  Constable,  Tauqeer 

Abbas,  Constable,  Sajjad  Ahmad,  Constable 

as  well  as  Muhammad  Fayyaz,  Constable, 

petitioner  No.1  was  leading  the  procession, 

who made charge at the Chambers of Hon’ble 

Chief  Justice  and  took  him  hostage  for  a 

number  of  hours.  Learned  State  Counsel 

further  contended  that  since  Constitutional 

Court remained dysfunctional for about entire 

day  on  08.02.2021  and  the  Hon’ble  Chief 

Justice along with other Judges were hostage, 

as  they  were  not  being  allowed  to  leave  the 

Chambers,  this  act  amounts  to  the  act  of 

‘terrorism’ within the meaning of the word as 

provided  in  section  6(1)  read  with  6(2)(m)(n) 

of  1997  Act.  In  support  of  contentions, 

learned  counsel  placed  reliance  on  cases 

reported  as  ‘Muhammad  Shareef  VS  The 

State  and  Others’  (2001  YLR  900),  ‘Rana 

Muhammad  Arshad  VS  Muhammad  Rafique 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

6 

and Another’ (PLD 2009 Supreme Court 427) 

and ‘Gen. (R) Pervez Musharraf VS The State 

and Another’ (PLD 2013 Islamabad 66). 

8. 

Arguments 

advanced 

by 

learned 

counsel  for  the  parties  have  been  heard  and 

the  documents,  placed  on  record,  examined 

with their able assistance.  

9. 

Since  petitioner  No.3  is  in  the  family 

way  and  her  bail  application  is  not  contested 

by  the  State,  hence  her  bail  application  was 

allowed through short order dated 01.03.2021.  

10. 

In  so 

far  as  petitioner  No.1 

is 

concerned,  he  is  implicated  for  the  offences 

mentioned hereinabove.  

11.  The thrust of the arguments by learned 

counsel 

for  petitioner  No.1  was 

that 

provisions  of  Anti  Terrorism  Act,  1997  (the 

Act)  are  not  attracted 

in  the  facts  and 

circumstances. 

In 

somewhat 

similar 

circumstances  in  2007,  when  the  Hon’ble 

Judges  of  the  Superior  Court  were  restricted 

from  performing  their  duties  by  the  then 

President/Chief  Martial  Law  Administrator 

namely  General  (R)  Pervez  Musharraf  and 

subsequently, he applied for bail before arrest, 

this  Court  in  judgment  reported  as  ‘Gen.  (R) 

Pervez Musharraf VS The State and Another’ 

(PLD  2013  Islamabad  66),  observed  as 

follows:- 

“7. 
Bare  perusal  of  the  F.I.R.  clearly  suggests  that 
local police did not insert the sections which are made out, 
from  the  contents  of  F.I.R.  Confining  Hon'ble  Judges  of 
superior  courts  and  to  stop  them  from  the  performance  of 
their  duties  is  not  an  ordinary  act,  rather  it  is  an  act  of 
"Terrorism" as defined by sections 6(1)(b) and 6(2)(b)(g) 
(i)  (m)  of  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997.  For  convenience 
above provisions are reproduced herein below:-- 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

7 

"6.  (1)(b).---The  use  or  threat  is  designed  to 
coerce and intimidate or overawe the Government 
or  the  public  or  a  section  of  the  public  or 
community  or  sect  or  create  a  sense  of  fear  or 
insecurity in society; or  

6.  (2)(b).---  involves  grievous  violence  against  a 
person  or  grievous  bodily  injury  or  harm  to  a 
person; 

(g) involves taking the law in own hand, award of 
any punishment by an organization, individual or 
group whatsoever, not recognized by the law, with 
a  view  to  coerce,  intimidate  or  terrorize  public, 
individuals,  groups,  communities,  Government 
including  Law 
institutions, 
officials 
Enforcement  Agencies  beyond  the  purview  of  the 
law of the land. 

and 

(i) 
creates  a  serious  risk  to  safety  of  public 
or a section of the public, or is designed to frighten 
the general public and thereby prevent them from 
coming out and carrying on their lawful trade and 
daily business, and disrupts civil life". 

From the above definition and contents of F.I.R., 
prima facie, offence under section 7 of Anti-Terrorism Act, 
1997  is  attracted,  for  which  punishment  may  extend  to 
imprisonment for life. Local police is bound under the law 
to insert the section which contents of F.I.R. suggest. 

On  court question, the I.O.  of the case informed 
that  petitioner  did  not  join  the  investigation,  rather  a 
telephonic  message  was  conveyed  that  material  shall  be 
provided before the court. This act of petitioner is defiance 
of the court order and misuse of the concession of bail”. 

12.  Even-otherwise,  the  scheme  of  law  as 

provided  in  the  Anti  Terrorism  Act,  was 

recently  revisited  by  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 

of  Pakistan  in  case  reported  as  ‘Ghulam 

Hussain and others VS The State and others’ 

(PLD  2020  Supreme Court  61). The Hon’ble 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  after  discussing 

the  entire  case  law  on  the  subject  as  to  the 

definition  and  scope  of  the  word  ‘terrorism’, 

observed as follows: - 

 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

8 

“16.   For  what  has  been  discussed  above  it  is 
concluded  and  declared  that  for  an  action  or  threat  of 
action to be accepted as terrorism within the meanings of 
section  6  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997  the  action 
must  fall in  subsection  (2)  of  section  6  of  the  said Act 
and the use or threat of such action must be designed to 
achieve  any  of  the  objectives  specified  in  clause  (b)  of 
subsection  (1)  of  section  6  of  that  Act  or  the  use  or 
threat  of  such  action  must  be  to  achieve  any  of  the 
purposes  mentioned  in  clause  (c)  of  subsection  (1)  of 
section  6  of  that  Act.  It  is  clarified  that  any  action 
constituting  an  offence,  howsoever  grave,  shocking, 
brutal,  gruesome  or  horrifying,  does  not  qualify  to  be 
termed as terrorism if it is not committed with the design 
or purpose specified or mentioned in clauses (b) or (c) of 
subsection (1) of section 6 of the said Act. It is further 
clarified  that  the  actions  specified  in  subsection  (2)  of 
section  6  of  that  Act  do  not  qualify  to  be  labeled  or 
characterized  as  terrorism  if  such  actions  are  taken  in 
furtherance of personal enmity or private vendetta. 

17. 
Before  parting  with  this  judgment  we  may 
observe  that  the  definition  of  'terrorism'  contained  in 
section 6 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 as it stands 
at  present  is  too  wide  and  the  same  includes  so  many 
actions, designs and purposes which have no nexus with 
the  generally  recognized  concept  of  what  terrorism  is. 
Apart from that including some other heinous offences in 
the  Preamble  and  the  Third  Schedule  to  that  Act  for 
trial of such offences by an Anti-Terrorism Court when 
such  other  offences  do  not  qualify  to  be  included  in  the 
definition  of  terrorism  puts  an  extra  and  unnecessary 
burden on such courts and causes delay in trial of actual 
cases of terrorism. It is, therefore, recommended that the 
the  present 
Parliament  may 
definition  of  'terrorism'  by  a  more  succinct  definition 
bringing it in  line  with  the international perspectives  of 
that  offence  and  focusing  on  violent  activities  aimed  at 
achieving political, ideological or religious objectives. We 
further  recommend  that  the  Parliament  may  also 
consider suitably amending the Preamble to the Act and 
removing  all  those  offences  from  the  Third  Schedule  to 
the Act which offences have no nexus with the offence of 
terrorism” 

consider  substituting 

13.  The instant case probably is the case of 

‘first  impression’,  where  members  of  legal 

profession have been implicated in an incident 

of  attacking  the  High  Court  building  and 

taking the Chief Justice  of the High Court  as 

hostage by confining him in his Chambers for 

a  considerable  number  of  hours  and 

effectively  making  the  constitutional  body 

 
 
 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

9 

namely  Islamabad  High  Court  dysfunctional 

for  the  entire  day.  Whether  such  act  of  the 

persons,  responsible  for  above  acts,  falls  in 

the  definition  of  ‘terrorism’,  needs  to  be 

examined  through  the  provisions  of  Anti 

Terrorism Act, 1997. The relevant provisions, 

for  the  purposes  of  present  controversy,  are 

section  6  of  the  Act  ibid.  For  ease  of 

convenience, section 6 is reproduced below: - 

“6. Terrorism.- 
means the use or threat of action where:-  

(1)  In  this  Act,  “terrorism” 

(a)  the action falls within the meaning of sub-section (2); 

and 

(b)  the use or threat is designed to coerce and intimidate or 
overawe the Government or the public or a section  of 
the public or community or sect or a foreign government 
or  population  or  an  international  organization  or 
create a sense of fear or insecurity in society; or  

(c)  the use or threat is made for the purpose of advancing 
a  religious,  sectarian  or  ethnic  cause  or  intimidating 
and  terrorizing  the  public,  social  sectors,  media 
persons, business community or attacking the civilians, 
including  damaging  property  by  ransacking,  looting, 
arson  or  by  any  other  means,  government  officials, 
installations,  security 
law  enforcement 
agencies: Provided that nothing herein contained shall 
apply to a democratic and religious rally or a peaceful 
demonstration in accordance with law.  

forces  or 

(2)  An  “action”  shall  fall  within  the  meaning  of  sub-
section (1), if it:-  

(a)  involves the doing of anything that causes death;  

(b)  involves  grievous  violence  against  a  person  or  grievous 

bodily injury or harm to a person;  

(d)  involves  grievous  damage 

to  property 

including 
government  premises,  official  installations,  schools, 
hospitals, offices or any other public or private property 
including damaging property by ransacking, looting or 
arson or by any others means;  

(e)  involves  the  doing  of  anything  that  is  likely  to  cause 

death or endangers person’s life;  

(f)  involves  kidnapping  for  ransom,  hostage-taking  or 

hijacking;  

(ee) involves use of explosive by any device including bomb 
blast  or  having  any  explosive  substance  without  any 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

10 

justification  or  having  been  unlawfully 

lawful 
concerned with such explosive;  

(g)  incites  hatred  and  contempt  on  religious,  sectarian  or 
ethnic  basis  to  strip  up  violence  or  cause  internal 
disturbance;  

(h)  involves  taking  the  law  in  own  hand,  award  of  any 
punishment  by  an  organization,  individual  or  group 
whatsoever, not recognized by the law, with a view to 
coerce,  intimidate  or  terrorize  public,  individuals, 
groups, 
officials  and 
institutions, including law enforcement agencies beyond 
the purview of the law of the land;  

communities, 

government 

(i)  involves  firing  on  religious  congregation,  mosques, 
imambargahs, churches, temples and all other places or 
worship, or random firing to spread panic, or involves 
any  forcible  takeover  of  mosques  or  other  places  of 
worship;  

(j)  creates a serious risk to safety of the public or a section 
of  the  public,  or  is  designed  to  frighten  the  general 
public and thereby prevent them from coming out and 
carrying on their lawful trade and daily business, and 
disrupts civic life;  

(k)  involves  the  burning  of  vehicles  or  any  other  serious 

form of arson;  

(l)  involves extortion of money (“bhatta”) or property;  

(I) 

is  designed  to  seriously  interfere  with  or  seriously 
disrupt  a  communication  system  or  public  utility 
service;  

(m)  involves  serious  coercion  or  intimidation  of  a  public 
servant in order to force him to discharge or to refrain 
from discharging his lawful duties;  

(n)  involves serious violence against a member of the police 
force,  armed  forces,  civil  armed  forces,  or  a  public 
servant;  

(o)  involves in acts as part of armed resistance by groups or 
individuals against law enforcement agencies; or  

(p)  involves  in  dissemination,  preaching  ideas,  teachings 
and beliefs as per own interpretation on FM stations 
or through any other means of communication without 
explicit  approval  of  the  government  or  its  concerned 
departments.  

(3)  The  use  or  threat  of  use  of  any  action  falling  within 
sub-section (2) which involves the use of firearms, explosive 
or any other weapon is terrorism, whether or not sub-section 
(1) (c) is satisfied.  

(3A)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section 
(1), an action in violation of  a convention specified in the 
Fifth Schedule shall be an act of terrorism under this Act.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

11 

(4)  In  this  section  “action”  includes  an  act  or  a  series  of 
acts.  
(5)  In  this  Act,  terrorism  includes  any  act  done  for  the 
benefit of a proscribed organization. 

(6) A person who commits an offence under this section or 
any other provision of this Act, shall be guilty of an act of 
terrorism.  

(7) In this Act, a “terrorist” means:-  

(a)  an  individual  who  has  committed  an  offence  of 
terrorism under this Act, and is or has been concerned 
in the commission, preparation, facilitation, funding or 
instigation of acts of terrorism;  

(b)  an  individual  who  is  or  has  been,  whether  before  or 
after the coming into force of this Act, concerned in the 
funding  or 
commission,  preparation, 
instigation of acts of terrorism, shall also be included in 
the meaning given in clause (a) above”.     

facilitation, 

The bare reading of section 6(1)(c) shows that 

under  section  6(1)(a),  “terrorism”  means  the 

use  or  threat  of  action  where  the  action  falls 

within 

the  meaning  of  sub-section 

(2); 

subsection  (2)  provides  that  an  action  falls 

within the meaning of subsection (1), if it inter 

alia  involves  serious  coercion  or  intimidation 

of  a  public  servant  in  order  to  force  him  to 

discharge  or  to  refrain  from  discharging  his 

lawful duties or involves serious violence against 

a member of the police force, armed forces, civil 

armed  forces,  or  a  public  servant.  The  words 

‘public  servant’  has  been  defined  in  section  2  of 

the  Act and has  the  same meaning as in Section 

21  of  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860.  The  words 

"public  servant"  denotes  a  person  falling 

under  any  of  the  descriptions  herein  after 

following;  namely  ‘every  judge’.  Section  19 

defines the word "Judge" denotes not only every 

person who is officially designated as a Judge, but 

also  every  person  who  is  empowered  by  law  to 

give,  in  any  legal  proceeding,  civil  or  criminal,  a 

 
 
 
 
 
              
 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

12 

definitive  judgment  or  a  judgment  which,  if  not 

appealed  against,  would  be  definitive,  or  a 

judgment  which,  if  confirmed  by  some  other 

authority, would be definitive, or who is one of a 

body  of  persons,  which  body  of  persons  is 

empowered  by  law  to  give  such  judgment.  The 

definition  of 

the  word 

‘public  servant’  as 

provided 

in  PPC  and  applicable 

to  Anti 

Terrorism Act, 1997  includes  a ‘judge’ as ‘public 

servant’.  Sections  6(1)  and  6(2)  of  the  Act  read 

with  the  definition  of  the  word  ‘public  servant’ 

makes  it  clear  that  coercing  or  intimidating  of  a 

‘judge’  from  performing  his  duties,  would 

tantamount to an act of ‘terrorism’.  

14.  As noted above, on 08.02.2021, the  Chief 

Justice of Islamabad High Court was confined to 

his  Chambers  by  a  group  of  lawyers  and  not 

allowed either to leave the referred room or even 

pass  any  order.  The  other  Judges  of  the 

Islamabad  High  Court  remained  with  him  for 

quite  a  while  and  even  Branches  of  the  Court 

were  closed  down  due  to  threat  of  intimidation 

and  violence.  Effectively,  on  08.02.2021,  which 

was  a  normal  working  day  for  a  High  Court, 

turned  out  to  be  a  ‘black  spot’  in  the  history  of 

judiciary  for  Pakistan,  as  the  Hon’ble  Chief 

Justice  and  the  Judges  of  the  Islamabad  High 

Court  remained  hostage  and  the  Registry  and 

Branches  of  the  High  Court  were  shut  down 

from 11:30 onwards, hence a constitutional body 

remained dysfunctional and its administrative and 

judicial  work  held  in  abeyance.  Due  to  act  of 

lawyers,  the  litigants  and  the  members  of  the 

public,  for  whom,  this  institution  has  been 

created for Islamabad Capital Territory to resolve 

 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

13 

disputes  and  adjudicate  the  matters,  suffered  at 

the hands  of few persons  of  legal  profession. In 

such  facts  and  circumstances,  argument  of 

learned counsel for the petitioners that provisions 

of Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 are not applicable, is 

not tenable.   

15. 

Petitioner  No.1  is  seeking  bail  after  arrest 

in  the  aforementioned  FIR.  The  provision  for 

bail after arrest in the Act of 1997 is section 21-

D.  The  referred  provision  starts  with  non-

obstante  clause  by  excluding  sections  439,  491, 

496,  497,  498,  498-A  and  561  Cr.P.C.  The  only 

courts,  which  have  the  jurisdiction  to  grant  bail, 

are  Anti-Terrorism  Courts,  High  Courts  or  the 

Supreme Court of Pakistan. Under subsection (2) 

of  section  21-B  of  the  Act,  all  offences  under 

1997  Act,  which  are  punishable  with  death  or 

imprisonment  exceeding  three  years,  are  non-

bailable.    

16. 

In  light  of  above  discussion  of  law  and 

facts, since act of lawyers tantamount to an act of 

‘terrorism’  in  light  of  section  6(2)(m)(n),  the 

relevant  punishment  prescribed  under  section  7 

of  Anti  Terrorism  Act,  1997,  for  such  an  act,  is 

imprisonment  for  a  period  not  less  than  five 

years but may extend to imprisonment of life and 

with fine [(section 7(1)(h) of the Act)], hence the 

provision  attracted  for  the  purposes  of  instant 

case,  is  punishment  not  less  than  five  years  and 

the offence is non-bailable.  

17.  The  parameters,  for  grant  of  bail,  are 

provided in section 21-D of the Act. Subsection 

(4),  which  includes  the  nature  and  seriousness 

of  the  offence,  with  which,  the  person  is 

charged; 

the 

character, 

antecedents, 

 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

14 

associations  and  community 

ties  of 

the 

person; the time which the person has already 

spent  in  custody  and  the  time  which  he  is 

likely to spend in custody if he is not admitted 

to bail; and the strength of the evidence of his 

having committed the offence.  

18.  According  to  the  record,  petitioner 

No.1  initially  was  at  F-8  Katchehry  and  then 

came to the High Court, which is duly shown 

in the Call Data Record. Moreover, the police 

officials,  designated  for  the  security  of  the 

Chief  Justice  Block,  categorically  stated  in 

their  statements  under  section  161  Cr.P.C. 

that petitioner No.1 led the charge. However, 

the  petitioner 

is 

in 

judicial  custody,  as 

investigation  to  his  extent,  stands  concluded; 

moreover,  he  is  a  senior  Member  of  the  Bar 

and was a candidate for election as President, 

Islamabad  High  Court  Bar  Association. 

Nothing  is  to  be  recovered  from  petitioner 

and his continued incarceration shall not serve 

any purpose.  

19.  The  bail  is  a  discretionary  matter  and 

the  said  discretion  is  to  be  exercised  with 

caution  and  in  accordance  with  law.  The 

observations  made  in  the  cases  in  case  titled 

‘Amjad  Mustafa  Malik  VS  D.G.  NAB  etc.’ 

(W.P.  No.769-2019)  as  well  as 

‘Khawaja 

Salman  Rafique  and  another  VS  National 

Accountability Bureau through Chairman and 

others’  (PLD  2020  Supreme  Court  456)  are 

pertinent,  as  right  to  life  and  liberty  is  a 

fundamental  right  and  arbitrary  arrest  or 

Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

15 

threat  to  arrest  can  seriously  hamper  said 

fundamental  right.  Likewise,  observations  of 

august Apex Court in the celebrated judgment 

reported  as  ‘Manzoor  and  4-others  VS  The 

State’ (PLD 1972 Supreme Court 81), are apt 

and  applicable  even  today.  The  Hon’ble 

Supreme Court observed as follows:- 

that 

reasonable 

the  allegation 

“It is important to remember that bail is not to 
be withheld as s punishment. There is no legal 
or  moral  compulsion  to  keep  people  in  jail 
merely  on 
they  have 
committed  offences  punishable  with  death  or 
transportation,  unless 
grounds 
appear to exist to disclose their complicity. The 
ultimate conviction and incarceration of a guilty 
person  can  repair  the  wrong  caused  by  a 
mistaken relief of interim bail granted to him, 
but no satisfactory reparation can be offered to 
an 
for  his  unjustified 
incarceration at any stage of the case albeit his 
acquittal in the long run”. 

innocent  man 

20. 

In  view  of  above,  instant  application  is 

allowed  and  petitioner  No.1  namely  Naveed 

Hayat Malik is enlarged on bail after arrest in 

the aforementioned case, subject to furnishing 

bail  bond  in  the  sum  of  Rs.50,000/-  within 

one  surety 

in 

the 

like  amount 

to 

the 

satisfaction of learned trial court. 

21.  The  above  are  the  reasons  for  short 

order dated 01.03.2021 allowing concession of 

bail to petitioner No.3.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI)   

(AAMER FAROOQ)   

  JUDGE 

Announced in Open Court on ____________ 

  JUDGE 

Approved for Reporting  

Zawar 

JUDGE 

JUDGE 

 
   
   
    
                   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
Crl. Misc. No.129-B-2021 

16 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
