Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No. 2668 of 2021 

Mst. Rozina, etc. 
VS 
Judge Family Court, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  
06) 

Date of order/ 
proceedings  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary. 

14-12-2021.  M/s  Ali  Nawaz  Kharal  and  Malik  Qamar  Abbas 

Advocates, for the petitioners.  
Ch.  Shahid  Mehmood  and  Rao  Abdur  Raheem 
Advocates, for the respondents.  

Through  this  petition,  the  petitioner  has  assailed 

order, dated 17.07.2021. It is the case of the petitioner that 

the learned Judge Family Court/Guardian Judge was required 

to  proceed  under  section  17-A  of  the  Family  Courts  Act, 

1964[hereinafter referred to as the “Act of 1964”]. 

2. 

Report  has  been  submitted  by  the  learned  Judge 

Family  Court/Guardian  Judge.  It  appears  from  the  record 

that  the  total  amount  of  maintenance  has,  prima-facie,  not 

been  paid  to  the  petitioner  nor  deposited  in  the  court.  In 

matters relating to maintenance, the conduct of the parties is 

of paramount importance.  

3. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  has  stated 

that the order regarding custody was recalled by the learned 

Guardian  Judge.  However,  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
petitioner  has  stated  that  the  order  has  been  suspended  by 

this Court in W.P. No. 4025/2021. 

4. 

In  the  light  of  the  above,  it  is  obvious  that  the 

respondent  is  required  to  comply  with  the  directions 

regarding payment of maintenance. Whether or not the total 

amount of maintenance has been paid and if not, then what 

would  be  the  consequences  is  required  to  be  considered  by 

the  learned  Judge  Family  Court.  The  matter  is,  therefore, 

remanded  to  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court/Guardian 

Judge.  The 

latter 

is  expected  to  proceed  strictly 

in 

accordance  with  law.  In  case  the  total  amount  of  arrears  of 

maintenance  has  not  been  paid  by  the  respondent,  then  in 

such an eventuality, the learned court would be expected to 

consider  proceeding  in  accordance  with  the  mandatory 

provisions prescribed under section 17-A of the Act of 1964. 

5. 

The  instant  petition  stands  disposed  of  in  the  above 

terms.  

Tanveer  Ahmed/* 

         (CHIEF JUSTICE) 

 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
