IS

JUDGMENT  SHEET.
I

JUDICIAL D ARTMENT.

W.P No.607/2019.

Murad Ali Afridi and others

VS

Federation  of Pakistan
and  others.

Petitioners  by

Mhza Waqas  Qayyum,  Advocate.

Respondent  No.l by:

Barrister Mumtaz  Ali, AAG.

Respondents  No.2 to 4 by:

Syed Naeem Bokhari  and Mr. Kashif
Nawaz Siddiqi,  Advocates.

Date of Decision: 

04.11.2019.

:- Through  this writ petition, the

petitioners  have  prayed  for following  relief:-

"In view of above-mentioned  facts and circumstances,  it is
respectfully  prayed  that  the instant  writ petition  may graciously
be accepted  and the impugned orders dated  17-12-2018,  1l-
0t-2019,  I0-12-2018,  ll-01-2019, Il-12-2018,  l7-12-2018
and l1-12-2018  may kindly be set aside  and consequently,  the
petitioners may kindly be reinstated in service  with all
consequential  back bene/its, and  respondent  No.3  may kindly
be called  upon  that under  what authority of law, they  are
passing the termination orders  of the employees and  running
the affairs of the Gun and Country Club without any
authorization  and without  lawful authority,  in the interest of
justice.

It is further  prayed  that during the pendency  of the writ
petition,  the impugned termination orders dated l7-12-2018,
I I-0t-2019,  l0-12-2018,  I 1-01-2019,  I l-l 2-2018, 17-l  2-2018
and 11-12-2018 may kindly be suspended and the petitioners
may kindly be allowed to continue  performing  their duties  in
the Gun and  Country Club in the interest  ofjustice.

Any other relief, which  this Hon'ble Court  deems  fit and

appropriate,  moy also  be awarded."

2.  Brief facts  referred  in the instant  writ petition  are that the petitioners  are

former employees  of Gun and Country  Club, who were  appointed  by the said Club

under  contract on different positions as Assistant Secretary, Secretary, Manager

Administration, Manager Finance,  Assistant Manager  Maintenance,  Manager  Food

& Beverages and Manager  on duty,  whereas  Suo Moto action  was initiated  by Apex

Court  with reference  to allotment  of the land to the Club through  Suo Moto Case

No.14l2011  and  subsequently  the Club  was handed over to Pakistan  Sports  Board,

W.P No.607/2019.

2

whereby the Management Committee  was  also notified  to run affairs of the Club,

report  was requisitioned  from the Committee and the same was submitted on

27.08.2018, whereby  it has been referred  in para-9(b)  that "all the employees of

Club be retained"  but despite that fact all the petitioners  have been given

termination  letters by un-authorized  persons  and even without any legal authority.

3. 

Learned  corursel for the petitioners  contends that the petitioner  have

lawfully been appointed by the Club after due process of law and the respondents

have  no authority  to terminate services of the petitioners  without due  course  of law,

although  rules  of the Club are non-statutory  but it is settled that if any fundamental

right is violated  in such eventuality writ petition  is competent.  In this regard learned

counsel for the petitioner  has relied upon  2013 SCMR 1707 (Pakistan Defence

Officers'  Housing Authority  VS Lt. CoL Syed  Jawaid Ahmed) and  2016 SCMR 2146

(Muhammad  Rafi  VS Federation  of Pakistan).  Leaned counsel for the petitioners

further  contends that the respondents,  who are presently holding  office of

management of the Club  are not authorized by law as Apex Court  has not

acknowledged  their status and even they have not been notified,  therefore,  all

actions  taken by the respondents  unauthorized  committee are illegal  especially

when the Apex  Court in the order dated 28.08.2018  disposed of the matter by

handing over the management of the Club to the Ministry of Inter Provincial

Coordination;  that the present  management  committee  has no legal authority  nor the

same  has been recognized under the law as such the petitioners  are claiming their

rights on the basis of judgment  passed by Apex Court in terms  of Article  187(2) of

the Constitution  of Islamic  Republic of Pakistan  , 1973  .

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for respondents No.2 & 3 contends  that Apex

Court appointed  and notified  new management  committee vide order dated

13.11.2018  through CMA No.942112018  in Suo Moto  Case No.14l20ll  and the

same was further directed to continue its working till 3l .12.2019  vide order dated

15.01.2019  passed in CMA  No.11230/2018  and as such the Committee  is

authorized to pass  any order,  which is in best interest  of the Club; that present

petitioners have  no legal status to file the instant writ petition  as their relationship

with the Club is governed  under the contract,  which itself is based upon  master and

W.P No.607/2019.

servant relationship and instant writ petition is not maintainable  and if the

petitioners  have  any grievance they can  agltate the same before the Court of plenary

3

jurisdiction.

5. 

Leamed  AAG  contends  that Pakistan Sports  Board  has filed  separate

comments,  in which it has been  acknowledged  that new Committee has been

constituted by the Apex Court  and the termination  orders have  been passed by the

said Committee in the better interest of the Club,  which have  been based  upon

performance  evaluation  review;  that decision has been made by the majority

members of the Committee and as such the writ is not competent.

6. 

7. 

I have  heard  the arguments and perused  the record.

Perusal of the record reveals  that the petitioners  are mainly  aggrieved  with

their termination  letters  issued  by the respondents  No.3 &4, whereby services of the

petitioners  from  the Club on different positions  i.e. Assistant Secretary,  Secretary,

Manager Administration,  Manager Finance,  Assistant Manager Maintenance,

Manager Food & Beverages  and Manager  on duty  have been  terminated,  which

were otherwise  extended to the petitioners  on the basis of their  contracts.

8. 

The respondents  side  has agitated  ground of maintainability of instant writ

petition,  therefore, it is necessary  to address the question  of maintainability at first

instance,  whereby contract of employment  executed between the petitioners and the

Club has been considered with able assistance  of learned counsel for the parties.

The contract  is of standard  pattem executed  between  the parties, which contains

contract  period as well as termination  clause and there is no denial to the

proposition that  all the petitioners  are contract  employees of specific term,  however,

certain reaffrrmation  of terms of employment  contract have also been referred on

record, which  contains clause 6 with  different stance  that if a specific  term is not

provided  the termination of the contract  shall be in accordance  with rules  of the

Club till the age  of 60 years.

9. 

I have  also  gone through the manual  and the standard employment  contract

of the Club, which  contains  termination  clause  in the following  maruler:-

"6. All employment  contracts shall remain in effect until such
time; a) if a specffic  term is provided  therein upon the expiry of
such term, b) if a specific term is either provided  or not
provided therein upon termination  in accordance  with the rules

W.P No.60712019.

4

of the GCC  and specifically the policies,  rules and  terms and
conditions  as applicable  to employment  contracts  of GCC
employees,  ond c) when you attain  the age of 60 years at which
time at the sole  discretion of the GCC your employment
contract  moy be extended  for a fixed term not exceeding a
period of one year and limited to a maximum  of five such
extension.  "

10.  The  above referred  position  leaves  no room  to conclude  that the relationship

of the petitioners with the Club  is governed  under  contract,  in which any party can

terminate contract by giving  one month notice and even  otherwise the entire

scenario discloses  relationship of master  and  servant,  even writ petition  is not

competent in contractual  matters although  learned counsel for the petitioners  has

relied upon 2013 SCMR 1707 (Pah

Lt. CoL Sved JawaidAhmedt,  wherein  it has  been held that:-

"----Art. 199---Constitutional  petition  before High  Court  by an
employee of a  statutory body--Maintainability---Service
matter---Violation  of service  rules or regulations  framed  by
statutory bodies under  the powers  derived from statutes  in
absence  of any adequate or eficacious remedy  could  be
enforced through  constitutional  jurisdiction---Where
conditions  of service  of employees  of a statutory  body were  not
regulated  by rules/regulations  framed  under  the statute  but
only by rules  or instructions issued for its internal use,  any
violation  thereof could not normally be enforced  through
constitutional jurisdiction  and they would be governed  by
principle  of "Master  and Servant."

Learnedcounselforthepetitionershasalsorelied,Jpon2W

(Muhammad  RaliVS  Federation  of Pakistanl, wherein  it has  been held that:-

"----Art. 199---Non-statutory  service regulations/rules---
Constitutional petition before the  High Court---
Maintainability---Aggrieved  person could invoke  the
constitutional  jurisdiction  of the High  Court against  a public
outhority if he satisfied  that the act of the authority  was
violative of the service regulations  even if they were non-
statutory.  "

I 1.  Besides the above  referred  position  another  important  aspect,  which has

been time and again argued before  this Court is authorization  of present

Management Committee  of the Club.  ln order to resolve the issue, I have  gone

through various  orders  of the Apex Court  as well as report  produced  by IWo Inter

Provincial  Coordination,  whereby  it has been  observed  that Suo Moto Case

W.P No.60712019.

5

No.l4l2011  was taken up by the Apex Court regarding  illegal allotment  of the land

worth billions  of rupees  by CDA to the Club at throwaway price.

12.  During  the course of hearing of the Apex Court, Committee  was notified

vide notification  dated 18.07.2018  by the M/o Inter Provincial  Coordination

comprising of eight members, whereby  the Secretary, IWo  IPC has been notified as

Chairman  of the said Committee, who  has been  called by the Apex Court to veriff

different working  and management of the Club and  submit  report. [n response  to the

said  direction  a report was prepared in the light of orders  dated 09.07.2018  on

27.08.2018  and  submitted  before the Apex  Court with way forward  in the following

manner:-

,,9.IryAYFOW
a) The Gun  and Country  Club may  be run as non commercial
entity  and as a not-for-profit  organization  to be registered
as company under Section  42 of the Companies  Act  2017.
The income and  the profits generated by the club may be
utilized for promoting  rts charitable/useful  objectives,
development  worlrs and  the payments  of any profit, income,
dividends or proceed to its members  may be prohibited.
The working  of the company  is subject to SECP rules,
regulations and public disclosure  requirements.
Accountability  and oversight mechanism con be used
ffictively to ensure  transparency  and fficient working.

b) The Club is providing  employnent to 170 employees
meaning  thereby  almost  1020 family  members  are being
financially dependent  upon  the Club. There is also scope
for further  generation  of employments  for the needy  and
qualified  persons. The Management  Committee  of the Club
was of the view that all the employees  of the Club be
retained.  However, there is a need to carry out  the
performance  audit  in order to increase  the productivity  and
to reduce the administrative  cost.

c) Under the concept  of Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR)  the net income of the Club  may be utilized  to:-

i)

ii)

Sustain shooting  ranges and  to promote sports

Provide  medicines/financial support to the poor
patients  attending the  Polyclinic  Hospital,
Islamabad.

d) No funds  will  be required from the Government  of Pakistan
as the Club envisaged to be self sustained from its own
resources.

e) As per international  practices,  the sportsmen  are provided
all the facilities  i.e. dining hall, swimming  pools,  fi,tness
centre under  one roof and the Club caters  for the said
needs.

W.P No.607/2019.

6

l)  It may be mentioned  that primarily  shooting ranges  for
SAF Games  were  built in 2001 and subsequent  structure  of
Gun & Country  Club  viz Health Club and dining area was
built to facilitate  the sportsmen in line with such
international  facilities. There are 6 shooting  ranges (3
indoor and 3 outdoor) are part of the Gun and Country
Club. Indoor facilities comprise of llM, 25M & 50M
shooting  ranges while open  ranges  comprise of Big Bore
Range,  Steak Range  Ground and Trap  Ground  which
mainly covers a wide open area of the Club. The
Restaurant,  ffices and health club hardly covers 4-5 Acres
of total  area of 3j.273 Acres of Gun and Country  Club.

g) The  Honourable  Supreme Court  of Pakistan  is prayed that
the CDA management  may be directed to regularize  the
additional land over and above 145 acres leased out to
PSB through its competentforum."

13.  After  submission  of the report, the matter  was disposed of by the Apex

Court  vide order  dated  28.08.2018  in the following  manner:-

"Pursuant to our previous order,  we have  been  apprised
that as per the report  submitted on behalf of the
Management  Committee  of the Ministry  of Inter-Provincial
Coordination, the possession  ond  management  of the Gun
& Country Club (Club) has been taken over by the
concerned  Ministry  and a Committee  has been constituted
to run and manage  the affairs  of the Club. In view of the
above,  this matter  has borne fruit and is accordingly
disposed of, However, if Pakistan  Sports  Board  requires
some further land for its activities,  it may apply  to Capital
Development  Authority for the same which request shall be
considered  on its own merit."

14.  The respondents (New  Management  Committee) of the Club filed C.M

No.942ll20l8  in Suo Moto Case No.14120t1, whereby details of Management

Committee  have  been  submitted  to the following  effect:-

S.No

Name  of the Management Committee

Designation

I

)

J

4.

5

6.

7

8.

9

10.

ll

Mr.  Khaqab Babar
Director General  (PSB)
Mr.  Naeem  Bokhari
Advocate  Supreme  Court
Mr.  Mansoor Khan
Dy.  Director General  (PSB)
Syed Nayyar  Abbass  Rizvi
Additional  Attorney General
The  Chairman,
Capital  Development  Authoritv  (CDA)
Mr.  Naseem Ahmed

Mr. Asif Jah

Mrs.  Aliya Agha

Chairman

Co-Chairman

Convener

Member  Coordination

Member  Coordination

Member  Maintenance

Member  Finance

Member  Admn

Col  (R) Haroon  Islam

Member  Shooting Area

Dr. Umair Famrkh  Raja

Capt.  (R) Babar  Bemard Massey

&

Member  Food
Beverages
Secretary  of  Gun &
Country  Club.  Islamabad.

W.P No.607/2019.

15.  The above  referred  application  was allowed  by the Apex  Court vide order

7

dated l3.l1.2018 in the following  manner:-

"Having  considered  the contents  of the application, the
background of the matter and the earlier  order  dated
28.08.2018,  we opprove the proposed  Committee
mentioned  at page l-A of the instant application.  The
matter  stands  disposed  of,,"

16.  Similarly,  another  CMA No.11230/2018 in Suo  Moto  Case No.l412011  has

been filed  for extension  of time of the working of the Committee and  the  sztme  was

allowed vide order  dated  15.01.2019 with following  order:-

" Having considered  the contents of the application and
qlso the best interest  of the club,  the term of the committee
constituted  by us is extended till  3i,.12.2019. The
application is accordingly  disposed  of,"

17.  The  above referred orders of the Apex Court  clearly spell  out that after

submission  of the report by the Secretary, IWo Inter Provincial Coordination  dated

27.08.2018,  the matter has been regulated  through  orders of Apex Court,  in which

earlier  order  was passed by Chief  Justice  of Pakistan on 09.07.2018, whereby it was

directed to Pakistan  Sports Board  to run affairs of the Club, which  requires  approval

of the Court  as such  the present  regime  discussed  above  has prepared the long term

plan, which  is regularly to be submitted before Apex Court  before the cut of date

and all the orders  of the Apex Court dated 28.08.2018, l3.l1.2018  and  15.01  .2019

are in continuation of the directions of the Supreme Court, who left no other

meanings except  that the present  management committee referred in para-i4  above

is authorized committee  to deal with the affairs of the Club. Even  otherwise, this

Court under Article 199 of the Constitution  of Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 1973

cannot  enter  into mandate  of Apex Court  especially when Apex  Court  has passed

direction in Suo Moto Case  No.14l20ll.

18.  At last it has also been observed  from the record that the petitioners  have

agitated similar matter in Civil Review Petition through CMA No.1588/2019,  in

which they have raised objections  on the Committee  constituted  through CMA

No.l123012018  and  explanation  thereof  but the said petition failed although  the

same was filed  on 14.02.2019  and the instant writ petition  was filed  on 06.02.2019,

hence, there is an active concealment on part of the petitioners, who have  not

W.P No.607l2019.

8

disclosed  before the Apex  Court  that they have  agitated  similar matter before this

Court  through instant writ petition,  hence, there is clear concealment  on their part.

19.  It is settled  law that after insertion of section  2-A in Service  Tribunals  Act,

1973, the concept of master and servant  has become  alive and the employees  of

statutory corporation,  whose  terms and conditions  are regulated by statutory  rules

fall within  domain of section 2-A of the Act, however,  any organization, department

controlled  by Federal Government  having non-statutory  rules of conditions  of

service  of their  employees  would not fall under section 2-A of the Act rather such

persons  have remedy  before Civil Court or if these  employees  fall within definition

of worker  and workman they have recourse  to Labour Court. Reliance  is placed

upon PLD 2006 Suoreme  Court  602 (Muhammad  Mubeen-us-Salam VS

Federation  of Pakistan  and othersl.

20.  Similar  view has also been highlighted in reported  judgment 2013 SCMR

1383 (Abdil  lAahab  and others  VS HBL and othersl  in the following  manner:-

(b)  Now attending  to the other  condition of the Article
184(3) (supra) with reference  to the violation  of the
fundamental  rights (f any) of the petitioners;  there
seems no room to disagree  with the plea/legal
position  that the right to lfe of a person/citizen
shall include  the right to livelihood and right to
livelihood,  therefore cannot  hang on to the fancies
of individuals  in authority;  the employment  is not a
bounty  from them  (individuals  in authority) nor can
its survival be at their mercy'.  But at the same  time
it cannot be ignored  and elided if a person,  who is
once  taken into an employment  by the State or any
State Controlled institution,  or even a private
institution/individual  has (such  employee/person)  a
right in perpetuity  (throughout  his life time) to
remain in service,  and his services  can never be
dispensed  with by his employer,  even  though it is so
permissible  tn terms of the service rules (where
statutory) by which  he is governed,  despite of his
infficiency,  incapacity, misconduct etc. and
compulsory  retirement and more-so,  where the
employment  is of contractual  nature and with a
private entity. Because  such  an action  (termination
etc.)  shall be an infringement of right to life as
envisaged by Article 9 of the Constitution.  Upon
analysis of the said Article,  which stipulates  "No
person  shall be deprived of lfe and liberty  save  in
accordance with law" and when it is resorted to in
respect  of the issues hwing nexus to service matter
it  shall unmistakably  be permissible  that the
employment  of an employee can be brought (come)
to an end, but obviously in accordance  with the law
(emphasis supplied),  when  there is some law
regulating  such an employment/service.  Therefore,

W.P No.607/2019

9

if the services of an employee  are dispensed with by
the employer, either by removaL dismissal,
termination or compulsory retirement  or any other
adverse  action  is taken against him in connection
with his service  rights, other than in accordance
with law, the employee  shall have a right  to take
recourse  to the remedies available  to him  and
provided  by or under the relevant law, before  the
forum  of competent jurisdiction. (note: May it be
the termination  etc. of  one employee  of
State/Government/institution or the group  or bulk of
such employees).  However, in those  cases  where  the
employment/service(s)  is not regulated  by any la'vtt,
as in the present case it is admitted position  that
Rules l98l ore non-statutory  (emphasis  supplied),
and thus  not a lm,v, rather contractual  stipulations,
and no specific forum ls designated for  the
resolution  of such  service issues, therefore an
infrinsement of anv condition  of such a contract
shall  at the most entitle  and clothe the emolovee to
avail his ordinarv  remcdv for the breach of the
contract  and on account of wrongful  action
asainst  him. before the court of  plenarv
iurisdiction.  In such a situation. it cannot  be ursed
that the fundamental  rieht of the emplovee  has
unon him a risht to
been violated
enforce  the same fin terms  of Article 199 and/orl
under Article 184(8t 6upral.  Despite  the above, we
hereby proceed  to examine,  whether any alleged
fundamental right(s)  of the petitioners  has/have  at
all been violated  or not; From Rules 15 and 17(a)
(reproduced  above), it is quite  obvious  that the bank
has the due authority to bring to an end to the
its  employees by  way  of
services of 
t erminat  i on/ e ar ly r e t ir e me nt, I i kew i s e, t he  e mpl oy e e
also has the option to give up the employment  of the
Bank.

(Underlining  and  emphasizing is mine)

21.  At last this Court  has also  settled the question of maintainability  of writ

petition in case  reported  as P

Club VS Mrs. B. Avisha  Mustafal in the following  manner:-

15.  The working  of Islamabad  Club is governed  under
the by-laws  and the Rules.  Under  Rule 3, there are
classes  of membership  including  service  members.  The
eligibility of the service member  is provided  in Rule
3.2.A whereby  those in grade-L7 or above  in the service
of government of Pakistan,  commissioned  fficers of
defence forces  etc. are eligible for membership  of club.
In so far as the transfer of membership is concerned,  the
same is governed in by-laws  No.3, clause-3  of the same
provides  that the membership  can be transferred in the
name  of the spouse only on the death of a member. If the
spouse  is not interested it shall  stand cancelled.  Under
Section I0  of  the Islamabad  Club Administration
Ordinance,  1978, the federal  government may make

W.P No.607/2019.

10

Rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance.
The Rules of the Club cannot be termed  as statutory in
light of the judgment reported  as "Pakistan  Defence
Officers Houstng Authority  v. Itrat Sajjad Khan and
others"  (2017 SCMR 2010). In the referred  judgment  the
august Apex Court observed  that Rules in dealing with
instruction for  internal  control are treated as non
statutory while  those  whose area of efficacy is broader
and/or complementary  to the parent  statute  in the matter
of crucial  importance are stotutory.  Similar views were
expressed  by the august  apex Court in cases reported  as
"The Principal, Cadet College, Kohat and another  v.
Muhammad  Shoab  Qureshi"  (PLD 1984 SC 170)  and
"Muhammad  Zaman and others v.  Government  of
Pakistan through  Secretary, Finance Division
(Regulation Wing),  Islamabad  and others (2017 SCMR
571). On the touchstone of the law laid down by the
august  Apex Court the Rules and byJaws of  the
Islamabad  Club are for  internal  management  and
control, hence  non-statutory.  It is trite law that a petitton
under Article 199  of the Constitution  is not maintainable
for enforcement of non-statutary  Rules  or for civil rights,
if  any. Even otherwise, the essence of a club is to
regulate tts membership  and/or  govern its internal
functioning  and no interference  can be made  to such
regulations and affairs by the Courts  would defeat  the
concept  of the Club.  The decisions  taken to oust the
member  and/or  to refuse  membership  are the sole
prerogative  of the Administration  of the Club and  such
decisions  or administrative  matters  are not justiciable  in
a petition  under  Article  199 of the Constitution.  "

22

In view of above  background,  the petitioners  are govemed  under master and

servant  principle as such  they have  no personal right  to agitate the matter  before  this

Court under Article 199 of the Constitution  of Islamic  Republic  of Pakistan,1973

and  their termination  cannot  be settled through instant  writ petition rather they may

approach  the Court of plenary jurisdiction, if so advised. Even  otherwise,  the instant

writ petition is not competent  as the Committee  of the CIub has been  notified

through  CMA  No.942112018  in Suo Moto Case No.1412011, which has further been

authorized and  allowed  to work till 3l .12.2019  through  another  order of the Apex

Court  dated  15.01.2019 passed in CMA  No.l1230/2018,  therefore, instant writ

petition is dismissed.  The Committee notified by the Apex Court  shall continue  to

work  in accordance  with  the mandate  extended  to them.

R Anjam

JUDGE

