Form No: HCJD/C-121 

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

PSLA No.04/2017 

Dilshad Bibi 

VS

The State & 2 others 

Petitioner by 

Respondents by 

: 

: 

Mr Ali Hussain Bhatti, Advocate. 

Mr Owais Ul Islam, Advocate. 

Mr Rabi Bin Tariq, State Counsel. 

Date of Hearing 

: 

19-02-2019 

ATHAR MINALLAH, C.J.- 

Through  this  petition  the 

petitioner,  namely  Dilshad  Bibi,  daughter  of  Muhammad  Rafique 

Sheikh  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘petitioner’),  has  assailed 

judgment,  dated  27-05-2017,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions Judge, Islamabad (West), whereby the  appeal filed by Liaqat 

Ali  Meer,  son  of  Muzaffar  Mir  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘respondent’), was allowed and consequently his conviction was set 

aside  on  the  sole  ground  that  the  trial  court  was  not  competent  to 

exercise jurisdiction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-2- 

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are  that  the  petitioner  and  the 

respondent  entered  into  a  marriage  contract  on  15-05-2011,  which 

was  duly  registered  in  Islamabad  under  the  Muslim  Family  Laws 

Ordinance, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Ordinance of 1961’). 

For  some  time  the  couple  lived  in  Islamabad  and  later  moved  to 

Muzaffarabad,  Azad  Jammu  and  Kashmir.  Due  to  matrimonial 

differences,  the  petitioner  returned  to  Islamabad  on  08-01-2013.  It 

appears that the respondent contracted a second marriage without the 

consent of the petitioner, which led to filing of a complaint by the latter 

seeking initiation of proceedings under sub section (5) of section 6 of 

the  Ordinance  of  1961.  The  complaint  was  considered  by  the 

Arbitration  Council  and  the  latter  referred  to  the  competent  forum 

contemplated  under  Rule  21  of  the  West  Pakistan  Rules  under  the 

Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance,  1961  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the 

‘Rules of 1961’). It was alleged by the petitioner that the respondent 

had  contracted  another  marriage  without  her  permission,  which  is 

required under sub section (1) of section 6 of the Ordinance of 1961. 

The  learned  Magistrate,  vide  order  dated  15-04-2014,  framed  the 

charge to which the respondent did not plead guilty. Three witnesses 

entered the witness box on behalf of the petitioner. The respondent on 

the  other  hand  preferred  not  to  be  examined  under  oath  and, 

therefore,  his  statement  under  section  342  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 

Procedure,  1898  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Cr.P.C.’)  was 

recorded.  The  learned  Magistrate,  after  recording  of  evidence  and 

affording  an  opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  parties,  convicted  the 

 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-3- 

respondent under sub section (5) of section 6 of the Ordinance of 1961 

and sentenced him to undergo simple imprisonment for a term of one 

month and in addition imposed a fine amounting to Rs.5,000/- and, in 

the  event  of  default,  to  undergo  a  further  period  of  simple 

imprisonment  of  fifteen  days.  The  respondent  preferred  an  appeal 

which  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  appellate  Court  vide  judgment, 

dated 16-06-2016. The said order was assailed by the petitioner before 

this Court through Criminal Revision No.58 of 2016, which was allowed, 

and  the  matter  was  remanded  to  the  learned  appellate  Court  vide 

judgment  dated 10-02-2017.  The  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad (West) allowed the appeal vide order dated 27-05-2016, on 

the  sole  ground  that  since  the  respondent  was  a  resident  of  Azad 

Jammu  and  Kashmir,  therefore,  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of 

1961 were not applicable or attracted in his case. The petitioner has, 

therefore,  challenged  judgment,  dated  17-05-2017,  through  the 

instant petition. 

3. 

The learned Counsel for the petitioner has contended that; 

the  learned  appellate  Court  has  misconstrued  the  provisions  of  the 

Ordinance  of  1961;  no  objection  was  taken  by  or  on  behalf  of  the 

respondent  regarding  the  jurisdiction  of  the  learned  trial  Court;  the 

respondent  holds  a  National  Identity  Card  issued  under  the  National 

Database  and  Registration  Authority  Ordinance,  2000  (hereinafter 

referred to as the ‘Ordinance of 2000’) and, therefore, he is a citizen 

of Pakistan and thus covered under sub section (2) of section 1 of the 

 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-4- 

Ordinance  of  1961;  the  marriage  contract  between  the  parties  was 

registered  under  the  Ordinance  of  1961  in  Islamabad  and  the 

respondent resides within the jurisdiction of the Union Council where 

she had filed her complaint; reliance has been placed on the cases of 

‘Muhammad Zaman v. Uzma Bib and 4 others’ [2012 CLC 24] and ‘Mst. 

Naseem  Akhtar  v.  Director  General  Immigration  and  Passport  and 

others’ [PLD 2006 Lahore 465]. 

4. 

The learned Counsel for the respondent, on the other 

hand,  has  argued  that;  the  latter  is  not  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and, 

therefore,  sub  section  (2)  of  section  1  is  not  attracted  in  his  case; 

holding of National Identity Card issued under the Ordinance of 2000 

is  not  a  conclusive  test  for  declaring  or  treating  the  respondent  as  a 

citizen  of  Pakistan;  the  learned  appellate  Court  has  correctly 

interpreted  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961  and,  therefore, 

interference is not required while exercising revisional powers; reliance 

has  been  placed  on  the  cases  of  ‘Akbar  Ali  and  4  others  v.  District 

Judge, Faisalabad and 4 others’ [PLD 2006 Lahore 600], ‘Muhammad 

Zaman  v.  Uzma  Bibi  and  4  others’  [2012  CLC  24],  ‘Majid  Hussain  v. 

Farrah Naz and others’ [2017 YLR 84], ‘Rehmat Ullah v. Mst. Shamim 

Akhtar and another’ [1997 CLC 16].  

5. 

The  learned  Counsels  have  been  heard  and  the  record 

perused with their able assistance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-5- 

6. 

The  admitted  facts  are  that  the  petitioner  and  the 

respondent  had  entered  into  a  marriage  contract  in  2011  which  was 

duly registered in Islamabad. The petitioner holds a National Identity 

Card issued under section 14 of the Ordinance of 2000 and enjoys all 

the  privileges  there  under  as  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  Pursuant  to  a 

complaint  filed  by  the  petitioner  in  the  context  of  sub  section  (5)  of 

section 6 of the Ordinance of 1961, proceedings were initiated and on 

conclusion of the trial the respondent was found guilty and, therefore, 

convicted  and  sentenced  for  contracting  a  second  marriage  without 

obtaining  prior  permission  in  the  manner  prescribed  under  the 

Ordinance of 1961 read with the Rules of 1961. The appeal preferred 

by  the  respondent  was  allowed  vide  the  impugned  judgment,  dated 

27-05-2017,  rendered  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad (West). The learned appellate Court had allowed the appeal 

on the sole ground of lack of jurisdiction on the part of the learned trial 

Court  because  the  respondent  could  not  be  treated  as  a  citizen  of 

Pakistan and, therefore, was excluded from the purview of sub section 

(2)  of  section  1  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961.  In  order  to  answer  the 

question  regarding  the  applicability  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961  in  the 

case of the respondent, it would be beneficial to examine the provisions 

thereof. 

7. 

The Ordinance of 1961 was promulgated and notified in the 

official  gazette  on  02-03-1961  with  the  object  of  giving  effect  to  the 

recommendations  of  the  Commission  on  Marriage  and  Family  Laws. 

 
 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-6- 

Section 1 describes the extent of the application and commencement 

of  the  Ordinance  of  1961.  Sub  section  (2)  of  section  1  explicitly 

provides  that  it  extends  to  the  whole  of  Pakistan  and  applies  to  all 

'Muslim  citizens  of  Pakistan'  wherever  they  may  be.  The  expressions 

“Arbitration Council” and “prescribed” have been defined in clauses (a) 

and (d) of section 2 respectively. Section 3 gives an overriding effect 

to  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961  over  any  law,  custom  or 

usage  and  registration  of  Muslim  marriages.  Section  5  describes  the 

procedure for registration of marriages. Section 6 deals with polygamy. 

Sub  section  (1)  of  section  6  is  couched  in  negative  language  and 

provides that during the subsistence of an existing marriage, no man 

shall contract another marriage except with the previous permission in 

writing  of  the  Arbitration  Council.  Sub  section  (2)  provides  that  an 

application seeking permission shall be submitted to the Chairman in 

the prescribed manner together with the prescribed fee and shall state 

the reasons for the proposed marriage and whether the consent of the 

existing  wife  or  wives  has  been  obtained  thereto.  Sub  section  (3) 

empowers  the  Chairman  to  grant  permission  if  satisfied  that  the 

proposed  marriage  is  necessary  and  just.  Sub  section  (4)  further 

describes the manner in which the  application has to be dealt with by 

the Arbitration Council. Sub section (5) provides the consequences in 

the  event  of  contracting  another  marriage  without  the  permission  of 

the  Arbitration  Council.  Clause  (a)  provides  that  a  person  who  has 

contracted  a  marriage  without  the  permission  shall  immediately  pay 

the entire amount of  dower, whether prompt or deferred, which may 

 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-7- 

be  due  to  the  existing  wife  or  wives,  and  if  not  so  paid,  it  shall  be 

recoverable as arrears of land revenue. Clause (b) further provides that 

on conviction upon complaint, in addition to the payment of dower, the 

person would be punished with simple imprisonment which may extend 

to one year and/or a fine of five thousand rupees. In exercise of powers 

conferred under section 11 of the Ordinance of 1961, the competent 

authority has made the Rules of 1961. Rule 3 describes the jurisdiction 

of a Union Council. Clause (a) of Rule 3 describes the manner in which 

an application seeking permission to contract another marriage has to 

be  dealt  with.  Rule  14  elaborates  the  guidelines  for  the  purposes  of 

determination  required  to  be  made  by  the  Arbitration  Council  while 

considering what is just and necessary for an order to give permission 

for contracting a second marriage and in this regard some factors have 

also been described. Rule 15 is in respect of requirements for making 

an application under sub section (1) of the Ordinance of 1961. Rule 21 

is couched in negative language and provides that no Court shall take 

cognizance of any offence under the Ordinance of 1961 or the Rules of 

1961 save on a complaint in writing by the Union Council stating the 

facts constituting the offence.  

8. 

The  above  provisions  and  the  validity  thereof  were 

challenged through several petitions before the learned Federal Shariat 

Court.  Section  6  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961  was  also  examined.  The 

learned  Federal  Shariat  Court  rendered  an  exhaustive  judgment 

reported  as  ‘Allah  Rakha  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and 

 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-8- 

others’ [PLD 2000 FSC 1], wherein the provisions of section 6 of the 

Ordinance  of  1961  were  declared  to  be  valid  and  intra  vires.  It  was 

eloquently  observed  that  it  did  not  have  the  effect  of  declaring  the  

subsequent  marriage  as  illegal  but  has  merely  prescribed  the 

conditions  required  to  be  fulfilled  before  doing  so,  failing  which  the  

non-observance 

thereof  would  expose 

the  husband 

to 

the 

consequences explicitly described therein. It was further observed that 

the spirit of the provisions was reformative and that it has prescribed 

a  corrective  measure  for  the  prevention  of  injustice  to  the  existing 

wife/wives.  In  the  case  titled  ‘Syed  Ali  Nazwaz  Gardezi  v.  Lt.  Col. 

Muhammad Yusuf’ [PLD 1963 SC 51] the apex Court has held that the 

Ordinance  of  1961  only  penalises  the  person  who  contracts  another 

marriage  in  contravention  of  the  provisions  thereof  by  making  him 

liable  to  imprisonment  or  a  fine  or  both  but  does  not  invalidate  the 

marriage itself.     

9. 

In  the  context  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  relating  to 

the instant petition, it would be pertinent to refer to two other statutes 

i.e. the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the 

‘Act of 1951’) and the Ordinance of 2000.  

10. 

The Act of 1951 was promulgated and notified in the official 

gazette  on  13-04-1951  to  make  provisions  for  the  citizenship  of 

Pakistan.  Section  2  defines  various  expressions  including  'Alien', 

"Commonwealth  citizen"  and  "British  protected  person".  Section  3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-9- 

extended  protection  to  every  person  falling  under  the  categories 

mentioned therein at the commencement of the Act of 1951. Sections 

4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13 and 14-B describe different categories of persons who 

are entitled to claim and be considered for the granting of  citizenship 

of Pakistan. Section 14-B provides that a person, being a subject of the 

State of Jammu and Kashmir, who has migrated to Pakistan with the 

intention of residing therein until such time as the relationship between 

Pakistan and that State is finally determined shall, without prejudice to 

his  status  as  such  subject,  be  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  Thus  the  former 

has  been  declared  as  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and  has  to  be  treated  as 

such.   

11. 

The  Ordinance  of  2000  was  promulgated  and  notified  on 

10-03-2000 with the object and purpose of, inter alia, providing for the 

registration of all persons and establishing the National Database and 

Registration  Authority  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Authority’). 

Section  2  defines  various  expressions  including  “Alien  Registration 

Card”,  “Overseas  Identity  Card”,  “Pakistan  Origin  Card”,  etc.  The 

Authority has been established under section 3 and its purpose, object, 

functions and powers are enumerated under section 5 ibid. Section 10 

provides that the Authority shall issue or renew, or cause to be issued 

or renewed in such manner and terms and conditions, subject to every 

citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years and has got himself 

registered under section 9, a card to be called a National Identity Card. 

Likewise, other categories of cards  i.e Pakistan Origin Card, Overseas 

 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-10- 

Identity Card and Alien Registration Card have been  described under 

sections 11, 12 and 13 respectively. A plain reading of these provisions 

unambiguously  shows  that  a  National  Identity  Card  is  issued  to  a 

person under section 10 of the Ordinance of 2000 who is a citizen of 

Pakistan. A National Identity Card is, therefore, an acknowledgement 

or a certification by the State of Pakistan that the person to whom it is 

issued is a citizen of Pakistan and has to be treated as such unless his 

or her citizenship is revoked or acknowledged under the Ordinance of 

1951 by the competent authority and in the manner prescribed therein. 

It is noted that the question whether or not a person holding a National 

Identity Card is a citizen of Pakistan can only be dealt with under the 

Ordinance of 1951 because the Ordinance of 2000 does not empower 

the Authority to decide such a status.     

12. 

A  plain  reading  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961  read  with  the 

Rules  of  1961  unambiguously  shows  that  it  extends  to  the  whole  of 

Pakistan  and  applies  to  all  Muslim  citizens  of  Pakistan.  A  man  who 

intends  to  contract  another  marriage  during  the  subsistence  of  an 

existing  marriage  has  to  observe  the  procedure  and  fulfill  the 

conditions prescribed by the legislature otherwise the consequences of 

imprisonment or fine or both could ensue. The factors required to be 

taken  into  consideration  by  the  Arbitration  Council  in  granting  

permission  for  contracting  a  subsequent  marriage  have  been 

prescribed in sub sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 6 of the Ordinance 

of  1961.  The  consequence  for  contracting  another  marriage  in 

 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-11- 

contravention  are  prescribed  under  sub  section  (5)  of  section  6. The 

Arbitration Council cannot act mechanically while granting permission 

because  the  statute  has  declared  that  before  doing  so  it  has  to  be 

satisfied that such permission would be just and necessary. A husband 

who  contracts  another  marriage  during  the  subsistence  of  an  earlier 

one  in  contravention  of  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of  1961 

definitely exposes himself of the risk of being imprisoned or fined or to 

both.     

13. 

In the facts and circumstances of the case in hand, it is an 

admitted  position  that  the  respondent,  regardless  of  his  place  of 

residence, holds a National Identity Card issued to him by the Authority 

under  the  Ordinance  of  2000.  As  long  as  the  National  Identity  Card 

remains  valid  and  subsisting,  the  respondent  cannot  claim  to  be  a 

person who is not a citizen of Pakistan. The marriage was contracted 

between the parties and duly registered in Islamabad and, therefore, 

to  the  extent  of  the  petitioner  the  cause  of  action  in  the  context  of 

section 6 of the Ordinance of 1961 has arisen in Islamabad. The case 

law  relied  upon  by  the  learned  Counsel  for  the  respondent  is 

distinguishable  in  so  far  as  the  instant  petition  is  concerned.  The 

appellate  Court  had  definitely  not  taken  into  consideration  the  legal 

provisions of various statutes discussed hereinabove.  

14. 

For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  instant  petition 

seeking special leave to appeal is converted into an appeal and allowed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PSLA No.04/2017 

-12- 

by  setting  aside  the  impugned  judgment,  dated  27-05-2017.  The 

appeal  preferred  by  the  respondent  would  be  deemed  to be  pending 

and entrusted to a competent Court for decision afresh on merits after 

affording an opportunity of hearing to the parties. This Court expects 

that the appeal would be decided at the earliest.   

(CHIEF JUSTICE) 

Luqman Khan/* 

Approved for reporting.  

 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
