ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD.
IUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Writ Petition  No.167l2020
Saeeda Yasmin
VS
Learned  ]ustice of Peace/ASJ  (West),Islamabad,  etc.

S. No. of
oille{
proceedings

Order  with signature  of Judge  and  that  of parties  or counsel
where  necessary.

Date of
orde{
Proceedings
29.06.2020  Petitionerin-person.

Through  the instant writ petition,  the petitioner  has

called  in question  order  of the Justice  of Peace/AS|  (West),

Islamabad, dated  79.03.2020.  whereby application filed by
the petitioner under Section  22-A Cr.P.C.  has been

dismissed.
2.  Brief facts referred in the instant writ petition are that
petitioner  filed an application to S.H.O., P.S. Margalla

Islamabad for registration  of FIR but said  official  together
with other relevant  officers had failed to perform  their

duties in accordance  with law and did not register  the case

as required under Section 154 Cr.P.C.  Feeling  aggrieved

thereof, the petitioner filed application  under Section 22-A
Cr.P.C., which was dismissed by learned |ustice of
Peace/ASJ (West), Islamabad,  Islamabad  vide  impugned

order dated 19.03.2020  with the findings that the dispute

between the parties is of civil nature. Hence,  the instant writ

petition.
3.  Learned counsel for petitioner  contends that the
impugned  order  has been  passed in violation  of relevant

provisions of law and without  considering  the facts of the

case; that the learned trial Court  failed  to consider that

both civil and criminal proceedings  can be carried out

simultaneously;  that as per the dictum laid down by the

superior  Courts no authority is vested  with an officer

Incharge of Police  Station  to hold any inquiry into the

correctness  or otherwise of the information  conveyed  to

the S.H.O. for registration of an FI& that bare reading of
the complaint filed by the petitioner  discloses the

W.P.No.1,677/2020

l2l

commission of cognizabLe  offence but the S.H.O. remained

adamant  not to register FIR against  the culprits,  even

otherwise,  the learned trial Court has misapplied  the law

while passing the impugned  order,  which  is liable  to be

set-aside.
4.  Arguments  heard, record perused.
5.  Perusal  of record reveals  that the petitioner is mainly
aggrieved  with order dated  19.03.2020,  whereby  her

petition U/S 22-A, Cr.P.C  has been dismissed. The  record
reflects that the petitioner has filed application  for
registration  of criminal case with the allegations  that her

husband  namely Muhammad  Sohail  Aftab has concealed

his previous  marriage in the Nikahnama and as such an

offence  has been  committed by her husband, who later on

left the petitioner  without any information.
6.  I  have gone through the record as well as law,
whereas Section  6 of the Muslim  Family  Law Ordinance,

7961. provides the prosecution  mechanism  for polygamy,

whereby  any man  contracting  another marriage without

permission  of Arbitration Council shall be punished with

Simple  Imprisonment,  which  may extend to one year or

with fine or both on the complaint filed by the aggrieved

Person.
7.  While considering  the above background,  the
petitioner has alternate remedy  of filing complaint  to
deal with such kind of propositiorU  therefore,  instant
writ petition is not maintainable  and the sarne  is
hereby DISMISSED  in limine.  However, the petitioner

may approach the competent forum under the law for

redressal of her grievance

(M

IUDGE

Khdidz.

