Form No: HCJD/C-121.

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISI.AMABAD  HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

W.P. No. 2821 of 20L7

Mst. Fatima Ali and another
VS
Mst. Rubina Ehtesham  and 4 others

DATE oF HEARING:  O4'L2-20L7.

PETITIONERS BY:  Mr Muhammad  Waqas Malik Advocate.

RESPONDENTS  BY:

Barrister Afzal  Hussain" and Arslan
Binyamin Bhatti Advocate.

ATHAR MINALLAH,  J.- The petitioner has invoked

the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the
Constitution of the Islamic Republic  of Pakistan,  L973
(hereinafter  referred to as the "Constitution")  assailing

order,  dated 26-07-20L7,  passed by the learned Guardian

Judge, Islamabad  (West).

2

The facts, in brief, are that Mst. Fatima Ali and Syed

Ali Ehtesham  had entered  into a marriage contact  out of

W.P. No. 2821 of 20L7.

2

which Syed Muhammad Mustafa Ali was born on 09-03-2013.

The father of the minor namely,  Syed Ali Ehtesham  passed

away on 10-01-2014.  Pursuant  to a petition  filed by Syed

Ehtesham Zamtr,  who was paternal  grandfather of the minor,

the learned  Guardian  Judge/Senior  Civil Judge,  Islamabad

(East)  vide order, dated 29-04-2014 had appointed  the latter

as guardian of the person and property of the minor.  The

paternal grandfather also passed away and thereafter Mst.

Fatima  Ali, mother of the minor, filed a petition  under  section

25 of the Guardian  and Wards Act, 1890. Likewise,  two

separate petitions  were filed by Mst. Robina Ehtesham,  who  is

the paternal grandmother  of the minor. The petitions were

consolidated vide order, dated 26-07-20L7,  passed by the

learned Guardian Judge, Islamabad (West). Through the

same order, the learned Court fixed an interim schedule  of

visitation  in respect of the paternal grandmother namely,  Mst.

Robina Ehtesham  and the same is as follows:

of  the minor to  the petitioner (Rubina
Ehtesham)  on first & last Saturday  of each
month during 11:00 am in the morning of
Saturday  till 12:00 noon of the following  day
i,e, Sunday.

petitioner/ paternal  grandmothens  allowed

W.P. No. 2821 of 20L7.

3

visitation  rights during  special  occasions of Eid-
ul-Fitr & Eid-ul-Azha. The respondent shall  be
bound to hand over custody  of the minor to
the petitioner on 2'd day of each Eid at 12:00
noon till evening of the 3'd day of each Eid i.e.
till 06:00 pm,

the petitioner  (Robina Ehtesham)  shall be
extended right of  participation  in  the
ceremony.

petitioner  shall take effect from 01-08-2017,
subject  to furnishing solvent surety  bond by
the petitioner in the sum of Rs.50,00,000/-
(Rupees  FiW Lakh only) with one local surety
to the satisfaction  of this court. The visit of
minor shall  take place at the residence  of the
petitioner  situated at House No. 343-8,  Street
No. 15-A,  Phase III, Bahria Town, Islamabad.

The petitioner  has, therefore,  assailed order, dated 26-07-

20L7, whereby an interim arrangement has been made in

respect of schedule  of visitation  in relation to the paternal

grandmother.

3

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of Mst.

Fatima Ali (hereinafter referred to as the "petr'tioner")  has

contended  that: the learned  Guardian Judge,  Islamabad was

not vested  with jurisdiction  to pass order,  dated 26-07'20L7;

W.P. No. 2821 of 20t7.

4

the impugned order  has been passed without application of

mind and taking into consideration  the relevant  matters; the

learned Guardian Judge has failed to protect the interests of

the minor; the address given by Mst. Robina  Ehtesham

(hereinafter referred to as the "respondent No. 7") i.e.

House  No. 343-8, Street No. 15-A, Phase III, Bahria  Town,

Islamabad  does not fall within the territoria! jurisdiction  of the

learned Guardian  Judge,  Islamabad;  the respondent  No. t has

now shifted to a house which is situated  in Defense Housing

Authority, Islamabad;  no maintenance is paid by the paternal

grandmother  and, therefore, she is not entitled to have

vlsitation rights; the respondent  No. 1 normally  resides  in

Dubai  and, therefore, there is an apprehension that the minor

would be taken  out of the jurisdiction  of the Guardian Judge,

Islamabad.

4. 
The learned  counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent No. t  has argued that; the impugned order has

been passed and an interim arrangement  has been ordered  in

respect of visitation of the minor in respect of her paterna!
grandmother;  the order is reasonable; it is an admitted

position that the respondent No. 1 resides in Defense  Housing

Authority,  Islamabad and, therefore,  jurisdiction vests in the

learned Guardian  Judge, Islamabad;  the impugned order does

W.P. No. 2821 of 20L7.

5

not suffer from any legal infirmity so as to  require

intefference.

5

The learned counsels have been heard and the

record perused  with their able assistance.

6. 

The learned Guardian  Judge,  Islamabad has

prescribed  a schedule of visitation in respect  of the paternal
grandmother  namely, Mst. Robina Ehtesham i.e. the

respondent  No. 1. Three separate  petitions are pending.  It is

also an admitted  position that the parties live in the same

area. The respondent No. 1 is the paternal  grandmother  of

the minor. Her son and father  of the minor, namely, Syed Ali
Ehtesham  had passed away on 10-01-2014. It is obviously

not fair to deprive  the respondent  No. 1 from spending some

time with her grandchild,  while the custody remains  with the

petitioner. It also appears  from the impugned  order that a

suggestion  was made on behalf of the petitioner  that the

respondent No. 1 may be given opportunity of visitation
within the court premises. The learned counsel  for the

petitioner had also raised  concerns  regarding the possibility  of

the minor being taken  out from the jurisdiction of the court.
The impugned order is well reasoned  and appropriate
directions have been given in accordance  with law. The

W.P. No. 2821 of 20L7.

6

apprehensions,  therefore, are misplaced. Moreover, it is an

admitted  position that the respondent No. 1 now resides  in

Defense  Housing Authority,  Islamabad and, therefore, the

impugned  order  does not suffer from jurisdictional  error. The

learned  Guardian Judge  while taking  the welfare of the minor

into consideration  has rightly declined  the suggestion to allow

visitation within  the court premises. The court premises  is

indeed not an appropriate place for visitation nor is it

appropriate  to expose a child to its environment.  There  ls

nothing on record to show that the learned Guardian  Judge

has exercised discretion  contrary to the welfare of the minor.
No legal infirmity has been found so as to  warrant

interference while exercising jurisdiction under Article 199 of

the Constitution. Even otherwise,  it is settled law that this

Court  cannot substitute the decision  or opinion  formed by the

learned Guardian  Judge unless it can be explicitly shown  to be
arbitrary or fanciful. This Court had afforded  several

opportunities  to the parties to amicably resolve the dispute.

When the case was taken up today, the learned counsels

informed that the parties could not reach an amicable

settlement.

7

For what has been discussed above,  the impugned

order does not suffer from jurisdictional  error nor the interim

W.P. No. 2821 of 20L7.

7

arrangement  relating to visitation of the minor in relation to

his paternal  grandmother  has been found to be arbitrary or

unreasonable.  The petition,  therefore,  is without  merit and

accordino lv d i sm i ssed .

(ATHAR  MINALLAH)
JUDGE

Announced  in open couft, 

"" l#:." m

JU

E

Tanvcer  Ahmed.

