ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

Mst. Safa Arshad 

VS
The learned Additional Sessions Judge (East), Islamabad, etc. 

       Date of Hearing: 
Petitioner by:  
Respondent No.2 by: 

    17.10.2016 

                Mr. Ali Raza Kayani, Advocate,          

     Mr. Sajid Abbas Khan, Advocate. 
______________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-Through  the  instant 

writ  petition,  the  petitioner,  Mst.  Safa  Arshad,  impugns  the 

Order  dated  14.01.2016,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  respondent 

No.2's  appeal  against 

the 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

30.10.2015, passed by the learned Judge Family Court, was set 

aside,  and  the  matter  was  remanded  to  the  learned  Judge 

Family Court with the direction to frame issues in the light of the 

pleadings  of  the  contesting  parties,  especially  respondent 

No.2’s  counter-claim.  Vide 

judgment  and  decree  dated 

30.10.2015,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  had  decreed  the 

petitioner’s  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance,  dower,  dowry 

articles and personal belongings against respondent No.2. 

2. 

The record shows that the petitioner and respondent No.2 

got  married  on  02.11.2013.  As  per  the  pleadings  in  the  plaint, 

four tolas  of  gold  ornaments  were  settled  as  dower.  It  is  also 

pleaded  that  in  addition  to  the  said  dower,  three tolas  of  gold, 

which were gifted by the petitioner's parents to her, were taken 

from  the  petitioner  by  respondent  No.2  and  his  mother. 

Subsequently,  the  relations  between  the  couple  turned  sour, 

causing  the  petitioner  to  leave  her  matrimonial  abode  on 

30.03.2014.  On  02.05.2014,  the  petitioner  instituted  a  suit  for 

the  recovery  of  maintenance,  dower,  dowry  articles  and 

personal  belongings  against  respondent  No.2  before  the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Islamabad.  Respondent  No.2 

contested  this  suit  by  filing  a  written  statement.  In  the  prayer-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

clause  of  the  written  statement,  respondent  No.2  prayed  for  a 

decree for the restitution of conjugal rights, and for a direction 

to the petitioner to rejoin respondent No.2 and bring along with 

her the gold ornaments, which she is alleged to have taken with 

her. From the divergent pleadings of the contesting parties, the 

learned  Judge  Family  Court  framed  the  following  issues  on 

29.10.2014:- 

"1. Whether  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  for  the  recovery  of 
maintenance from defendant, if yes, at what rate and from 
which period? OPP 

2.  Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recover dower amount and 

personal belongings from defendant or not? OPP 

3.  Whether this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain 

the suit? OPD 

4.  Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the   instant 

suit? OPD 

5.  Whether the plaintiff has come to this court with unclean 

hands? OPD 

6.  Relief." 

3. 

Thereafter,  during  the  trial,  the  petitioner  entered  the 

witness  box  as  P.W.1.  Additionally,  four  more  witnesses 

tendered their evidence in the petitioner's support. Respondent 

No.2 entered the witness box as D.W.1. It was not controverted 

that  the  petitioner  left  her  matrimonial  abode  on  30.03.2014. 

The first notice of Talaq was issued to her on 21.04.2014. After 

the  institution  of  the  suit  on  02.05.2014,  efforts  to  bring  about 

reconciliation  between  the  warring  couple  did  not  bear  any 

fruit.  The  learned  Judge  Family  Court  held  that  since  after  the 

issuance of the said notice of Talaq, no effort for "Rajjuh" were 

made, the Talaq was confirmed three months after the issuance 

of the said notice. Vide judgment and decree dated 30.10.2015, 

the  petitioner’s  suit  was  partially  decreed.  The  learned  Judge 

Family  Court  held  that  the  petitioner  was  entitled  to  the 

recovery  of  maintenance  at  the  rate  of  Rs.3,000/-  per  month 

from 30.03.2014 till the completion of Iddat period. She was also 

held entitled to the recovery of gold ornaments weighing seven 

tolas  and  certain  dowry  articles  and  personal  belongings  or  in 

the  alternative,  their  price  with  30%  deduction.  The  said 

judgment  and  decree  was  assailed  by  respondent  No.2  before 

the learned Appellate Court.  

 
 
 
 
 
3 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

4. 

Vide  judgment  dated  14.01.2016,  the  learned  Appellate 

Court  allowed  respondent  No.2’s  appeal  and  remanded  the 

matter to the learned Judge, Family Court with the direction to 

frame  issues  in  the  light  of  the  pleadings  of  the  contesting 

parties  and  considering  the  counter-claim  of  respondent  No.2. 

The said judgment dated 14.01.2016, has been impugned by the 

petitioner in the instant writ petition.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  the 

judgment and decree dated 30.10.2015, passed by the learned 

Judge  Family  Court,  was  well  reasoned  and  strictly 

in 

accordance with the facts and the law; that issues were framed 

as  far  back  as  29.10.2014,  and  respondent  No.2  did  not  seek 

framing  of  any  additional  issue;  that  evidence  was  adduced  by 

the  parties  bearing  in  mind  the  issues  framed  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court;  and  that  respondent  No.2  was  estopped 

from  seeking  the  re-framing  of  issues  after  the  learned  Judge, 

Family Court passed a judgment and decree against him.  

6. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2 

submitted  that  since  respondent  No.2  in  his  written  statement 

had  prayed  for  the  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  as  well  as  the 

return  of  the  gold  ornaments  taken  away  by  the  petitioner,  it 

was  obligatory  upon  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  to  have 

framed  an 

issue  on  these  matters.  Learned  counsel  for 

respondent No.2 defended the judgment of the appellate Court, 

and prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.  

7. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

contesting  parties,  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  writ  petition 

have  been  set  out  in  sufficient  detail  in  paragraphs  2  to  4 

hereinabove and need not be recapitulated.  

8. 

Now, 

the  core 

issue 

to  be  determined 

in 

these 

proceedings  whether  it  was  lawful  for  the  learned  Appellate 

Court  to  have  set  aside  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 

30.10.2015,  passed  by  the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court  and 

remand the matter with the direction to frame additional issues. 

When the learned counsel for respondent No.2 was confronted 

 
4 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

with  the  fact  that  issues  had  been  framed  as  far  back  as 

29.10.2014, and that it had been recorded by the learned Judge 

Family Court that "no other issue was pressed by either party", 

he  had  no  explanation  to  advance.  In  the  event,  respondent 

No.2  was  not  content  with  the  issues  framed  by  the  learned 

Judge,  Family  Court,  there  was  nothing  preventing  him  from 

filing  an  application  under  the  principles  of  Order  XIV,  Rule  5 

C.P.C.  for  the  framing  of  additional  issues  or  reframing  issues. 

Even  though,  the  provisions  of  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908, 

are not applicable to the proceedings before the learned Judge, 

Family  Court,  but  the  principles  enshrined  therein  may  be 

invoked  for  the  just  and  proper  adjudication  of  the  case.  The 

record  is  silent  as  to  whether  respondent  No.2  agitated  the 

framing  of  additional  issues  before  the  learned  Judge  Family 

Court,  at  any  stage.  Respondent  No.1  is,  therefore,  estopped 

form  seeking  an  issue  to be  framed  after  the  conclusion  of  the 

trial.  Reference  to  the  following  case  law  on  the subject  would 

be appropriate:-  

(i)  

In  the  case  of  Mst.  Sughra  Bibi  VS  Asghar  Khan  (1988 

SCMR 4), it was held that it was the duty of the parties to 

get  proper  issues  framed  if  they  had  any  objection  or 

suggestion regarding the framing of issues. Furthermore, 

the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  did  not  agree  with  the 

contention that failure to frame an issue at the trial stage 

would have the effect of nullifying the trial.  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Eada  Khan  VS  Mst.  Ghanwar  (2004  SCMR 

1524), it has been held as follows:-  

“4. … It is a settled principle of law that if once the 
parties are alive to the contentions raised and when 
once  evidence  is  adduced  in  support  of  such 
contentions, the framing or non-framing of issues loses 
significance.” 

(iii)  Recently,  in  the  case  of  Noor  VS  Mst.  Sattan  (PLD  2013 

Lahore  30),  it  has  been  held  by  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High 

Court that where a party does not claim an issue or does 

not  make  any  effort  to  get  an  issue  framed  then  his  plea 

stands abandoned. 

 
 
 
5 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Mehmood  Ahmad  VS  Malik  Abdul  Ghafoor 

(PLD 2011 Lahore 522), the Division Bench of the Hon'ble 

Lahore High Court has inter alia held as follows:-  

 “15. …It is also interesting to note that the appellants 
did not, at any stage, raise any objection or moved any 
application for framing of additional issue. We have 
specifically  asked  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
appellant whether any  objection was  taken  in  this 
regard. He has candidly conceded that no objection 
was even raised or application moved with regard to 
framing of additional issues. 

17. From a perusal of the record, we also notice that 
both  parties  had  ample  opportunity  to  adduce 
evidence in support of their respective pleas. It is not 
the case of the appellants that they were in any manner 
prevented from producing evidence, which could have 
helped their case. It is settled law that non-framing of 
issues where both parties had opportunities to adduce 
evidence  is  not  material  and  does  not  constitute 
a ground for reversing the decree. Reference in this 
regard may also be made to "Muhammad and 9 others 
v. Hasham Ali" (PLD 2003 SC 271), "Mr. M. Akram and 
Raja  v.  Muhammad  Ishaqe"  (2004  SCMR  1130),                           
"Eada Khan VS   Mst. 
Ghanwar and others," 
(2004 SCMR 1524),"Laloo and another v. Ghulaman" 
(2000 SCMR 1058), "Malik Safdar Ali Khan v. Public at 
Large" (2004 SCMR 1219) and "Fazal M. Bhatti another 
v. Mst. SaeedaAkhtar and others" (1993 SCMR 2018).” 

(v)  

In  the  case  of  Charagh  Begum  VS  Raj  Muhammad  (2004 

YLR 1421), it has been held as follows:- 

"This  brings  me  to  the  arguments  of  the  learned 
Advocates for the appellants that the issues have not 
been properly framed, in my opinion, the contention is 
devoid of any force. The suit remained pending for pretty 
long period and the plaintiffs never, requested for proper 
framing of the issues, they are, therefore, not entitled to 
raise  the  objection  in  second  appeal.  In  Khadim 
Hussain's case (PLD 1981 SC (AJ&K) 40), it has been 
opined that if a party omits to claim any issue no capital 
can be made out of such omission and such issue shall 
be deemed to have been abandoned." 

(vi) 

In the case of Karam Dad VS Mst. Barkat Jan (2004 CLC 

910),  it  has  been  held  that  a  party  cannot  be  allowed  to 

raise the question of framing of any issue at an appellate 

stage, because it was the duty of the Court as well as the 

Advocates of the parties to ensure that necessary issues 

arising  out  of  the  pleadings  of  the  parties  are  framed. 

Furthermore,  it  was  held  that  where  a  counsel  never 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Trial  Court  any  omission  or 

incorrectness  of  any  issue  framed  by  it,  such  a  point 

could not be raised in an appeal.  

(vii) 

In  the  case  of  Capital  Development  Authority  VS  Shaikh 

Muhammad  Hanif 

(2003  CLC  1684),  no  objection 

whatsoever  was  taken  by  any  party  during  the  trial 

regarding  non-framing  of  an 

issue.  Even 

in 

the 

memorandum  of  appeal  no  ground  was  taken  as  to  the 

non-framing of an issue. Hence,  the Hon'ble Lahore  High 

Court  rejected  the  contention  of  the  petitioner  that 

correct issues had not been framed from the pleadings of 

the parties. 

9. 

In the case at hand, respondent No.2 in his appeal, did not 

even  take  the  ground  as  to  the  non-framing  of  any  issue.  The 

learned  Appellate  Court  ought  to  have  appreciated  that 

respondent  No.2's  prayer  for  a  decree  for  a  restitution  of 

conjugal  rights  could  not  have  been  granted,  because  the 

notice of Talaq dated 21.04.2014 had got confirmed after three 

months  of  its  issuance,  since  there  had  been  no  efforts  for  a 

"Rajjuh".  In  the  case  of  Abdul  Baqi  VS  Abdul  BaseerQureshi 

(NLR  1982  Civil  18),  it  has  been  held  that  a  decree  for  the 

restitution of conjugal rights is not warranted in the presence of 

evidence  showing  that  the  husband  had  given  an  un-revoked 

notice of Talaq.  

10.  As  regards  the  non-framing  of  an 

issue  regarding 

respondent No.2's claim for the recovery of the gold ornaments 

allegedly taken away by the petitioner, had respondent No.2 felt 

strongly about this, he would not have remained silent all along 

the trial, but would have insisted on framing of an issue on this 

matter. As respondent No.2 did not press any other issue, when 

the  issues  were  framed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  on 

29.10.2014, he could not, after the conclusion of a trial, seek to 

turn  back  the  clock  and  seek  the  framing  of  an  issue.  As 

mentioned  above,  the  non-framing  of  an  issue  by  the  learned 

Judge Family Court, was not even a ground taken in respondent 

No.2's appeal.  

 
 
 
7 

W.P.No.1359 of 2016 

11. 

In view of the above, the petition is allowed the impugned 

judgment  dated  14.01.2016,  passed  by  the  learned  Appellate 

Court,  is  set  aside  and  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 

30.10.2015,  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  is 

restored. There shall be no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
    JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2016 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

      (JUDGE) 

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
