ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Serial  No.  of 
order/ 
proceeding. 

Date  of order/ 
proceedings 

02 

27.01.2020 

CRL.MISC.  N0.795-BC 

/2019 

Saad  Karim  Laghari 

vs 

Sher Oil Khan, Etc 

Order  with signatures of judge,  and  that of parties  or 
counsel,  where  necessary. 

Raja Rizwan Abbasi &  Gulfam Ashraf Goraya, Advocate 
alongwith the petitioner. 
Qazi Jahanzeb Gui Qureshi Advocate alongwith accused/ 
respondent. 
Mr.  Zrihaib Hassan Gondal, State counsel with Muhammad 
lshaq SI,  P.S Industrial Area, Islamabad. 

GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI. J 

The  petitioner  [Saad Karim Laghari] seeks  cancellation 

of bail granted in  favour  of respondent  No.  1/  accused, in 

case  FIR  No.  273/2019,  dated  15.6.2019,  under  sections 

506 (2),  452  of PPC &  25-D Telegraph Act,  Police Station 

Industrial Area,  Islamabad. 

2. 

Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  complainant/ 

petitioner lodged the  FIR stating therein that  on  13.6.2019 

at about 9:30 PM,  the accused/respondent entered into the 

house  of  the  petitioner  armed  with  a  pistol  and  tried  to 

kidnap eight years old minor daughter  of the  petitioner, on 

her  hue  and  cry  the  accused  left  his  daughter  free  and 

threatened the  petitioner to kill him, thereafter the accused 

called  on the  cell  phone of  his wife  and threatened  her to 

kill  her and  her family.  If they  tried  to  complain the  matter 

to the police, hence the instant FIR. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the  petitioner submits that the 

bail  granting  order  is  perverse,  arbitrary  and  beyond  the 

spirit  of  law;  that  the  offence  is  of  heinous  nature  and 

sufficient evidence is  available on record to corroborate the 

allegations  levelled  against the  accused/respondent  ;  that 

the  learned  Trial  Court  has  failed  to  appreciate  that  the 

respondent  has  been  nominated  in  the  FIR  and  he  has 

failed  to  establish  any  ulterior  motive  on  the  part  of  the 

complainant  and the  police; that  the  accused/  respondent 

has  misused  the  concession  of  bail  when  he  and  his 

friends  made  numerous  calls  to  the  wife  of  the  petitioner 

from  unknown  numbers  on  25.6.2019  and threatened  her 

of dire consequences, therefore,  bail granted to him by the 

2 

CR.MISC.  N0.795-BC  /2019 

learned  Judicial  Magistrate  Section  30-West,  Islamabad 

vide order dated 10.7.2019 may kindly be re-called. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand, 

learned  counsel  for 

the 

respondent/  accused  contended  that  the  accused  did  not 

misuse  the  concession  of  bail  nor  did  threaten  the 

complainant  or  his  wife  in  any  manner;  that  the  FIR  has 

been lodged against him on the  basis of malafide intention 

and  ulterior  motives  and 

that 

false  and  baseless 

allegations have been levelled against him in the FIR. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  the  record  depicts  that  the  alleged 

incident  stated  to  have  been  taken  place  on  13.06.2019 

and FIR has been lodged on 15.06.2019 with an inordinate 

and  un-explained  delay  of  two  days.  The  accused/ 

respondent moved pre-arrest bail before the  learned Addi. 

Sessions Judge,  Islamabad, which was  refused vide order 

dated 29.06.2019, therefore, the  accused  moved bail after 

arrest  which  was  granted  to  the  accused/  respondent  on 

10.07.2019 by the  learned  Magistrate  Section-30.  Record 

further  reveals that  the  call data was  of  dated  12.06.2019 

to 06.10.2019 whereas the  accused/ respondent has been 

granted  bail on  10.07.2019. Further, there  is  no evidence 

on record with  regard to threats  extended  by the  accused/ 

respondent to the prosecution witnesses after grant of bail, 

Record  further  shows  that  no  application  has  been  filed 

with  regard  to  allegations  for  extending  of  threats  to  the 

complainant  and  misuse  of  concession  of  bail,  before the 

learned Trial Court. 

7. 

The  Hon'ble  Apex  Court  while  dealing  with  an 

identical preposition has laid down the  principles for  grant 

of  bail  in  elaborative  manner  in  the judgment  rendered  in 

the case titled"  The State v.  Rafiq Ahmad  Channa" [2010 

SCMR  580]  and  it  is  instructive to  reproduce the  relevant 

passage therefrom for learning of all  concerned: 

a) 

(b) 

Whether  there  is  or  is  not  a  reasonable 
ground for  believing that the  accused  has 
committed  the  offence  with  which  he  is 
charged? 

Whether the case  requires further  enquiry 
into the guilt of commission of non-bailable 
offence  within  the  scope  of  Section  497 
(2) Cr.PC? 

(c) 

Whether  the  accused  is  minor,  woman, 
sick or infirm person? 

(d) 

The nature and gravity of the charge. 

CR.MISC.  N0.795-BC  /2019 

3 

(e} 

(f) 

(g} 

(h} 

(i} 

U} 

(k} 

(I} 

The  severity or  degree  of the  punishment 
which might follow  in  the circumstances of 
the case on  conviction. 

The  danger  of  the  accused  absconding  if 
he  is  released on bail. 

The danger of witnesses tampered with. 

The  danger  of  the  alleged  offence  being 
continued or repeated. 

The character, the  means and standing of 
the accused. 

An  opportunity  to  the  accused  to  prepare 
his  defence. 

The accused has already  been in jail  for a 
considerable  period  and  the  trial  is  not 
likely to conclude in  near future at least. 

Bail  should  never  be  withheld  as  a 
punishment." 

8. 

The  considerations  for  grant  of  bail  are  quite 

different  from  the  considerations  for  cancellation  of  bail. 

Once bail has been granted  by a  competent  Court of law, 

strong and exceptional grounds are required for cancelling 

the  same.  In  such  cases,  it  is  to  be  seen  as  to  whether 

order  granting  bail  is  patently  illegal,  erroneous,  factually 

incorrect  and  has  resulted  in  miscarriage  of  justice. 

Considering  the  case  of  present  respondent/accused  for 

the grant of bail on  the  above touchstone,  I  am of the view 

that the  learned Judicial Magistrate has rightly granted the 

bail  to  the  respondent/accused.  There  is  no  evidence  on 

record 

that 

the  respondent  has 

tampered  with 

the 

prosecution  evidence  or  misused  the  concession  of  bail. 

The  bail  can  be  cancelled  if the  order  on  the  face  of  it  is 

perverse and has been passed in  violation of the principles 

for  grant  of  bail  or there  is  any  apprehension  of  repetition 

of the  offence.  In  this  regard  reliance  has been placed  on 

the  Judgment titled  "  The  State VS  Abdul  Hameed"  [2015 

YLR  568],  "The State VS  Khalid Mahmood" [2006 SCMR 

1265] & "  Ahsan Akbar VS The State" [ 2007 SCMR 482]. 

8. 

For the foregoing reasons, instant petition is  devoid 

of merits,  therefore, is  hereby dismissed. 

9. 

However, the  observations  made  hereinabove  are 

meant for  disposal of this  application, which  shall  have no 

bearing on  merits of the case. 

I 

_(GHUbAM' ~Ql(M8~A.I) 

JUDGE 

