ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.3169/2018 
Fizza Mai 

VS          

Shahbaz Hassan Khan and others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 

13.06.2019  
Mian Imtiaz Haider, Advocate 
Mr.  Muhammad  Ayaz  Gondal,  Advocate 
for respondent No.1. 

_________________________________________________________________________ 

 MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB:-  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition,  the  petitioner  (Fizza  Mai) 

impugns  the  order  dated 

01.08.2018,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  District 

Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  custody  of  minor,  Sehrish,  was  handed 

over  to  her  father/respondent  No.1  in  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under 

Section 491 Cr.P.C. 

2. 

The  facts  essential  for  the  disposal  of  this  petition  are  that 

Shahbaz Hassan Khan (respondent No.1) and Kinza Fatima had been 

married.  The  couple  were  blessed  with  a  daughter,  Sehrish,  who  is 

presently 09 years of age. Six days after Sehrish’s birth, Kinza Fatima 

passed away.  

3. 

Respondent  No.1  had  proceeded  abroad  to  earn  a  livelihood 

and  after  his  return  to  Pakistan  he,  on  31.07.2018  (i.e.  eight  years 

after  Sehrish’s  birth),  filed  a  petition  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C. 

seeking  a direction in  the nature of habeas corpus  to  Mst.  Fizza  Mai 

(petitioner) to produce Sehrish, presently aged 09 years, and for her 

custody  to  be  given  to  him.  Vide  impugned  order  dated  01.08.2018, 

the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad, 

disposed of respondent No.1’s petition under Section 491 Cr.P.C. by 

temporarily  giving  Sehrish’s  custody  to  respondent  No.1  subject  to 

the  submission  of  surety  bonds  in  the  sum  of  Rs.1,00,000/-  with  one 

surety.  Respondent  No.1  was  also  directed  to  produce  the  minor 

before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Guardian  Judge  and  not  to  stop  the 

visitation  of  the  petitioner  with  the  minor.  The  Court  also  observed 

that there was much attachment between the petitioner and Sehrish. 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

The said order dated 01.08.2018 has been assailed by the petitioner 

in the instant writ petition.  

4. 

Prior to the filing of the petition under Section 491 Cr.P.C., the 

petitioner’s  petition  for  being  declared  as  Sehrish’s  guardian  was 

dismissed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Guardian  Judge,  Islamabad, 

vide judgment dated 31.05.2018.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  after  narrating  the  facts 

leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition,  submitted  that  the 

petitioner has taken Sehrish’s care ever since her mother’s death on 

10.04.2010; that respondent No.1 remained abroad for several years 

and  had  not  provided  any  maintenance  for  Sehrish;  that  the  suit  for 

the  recovery  of  maintenance  filed  by  the  petitioner  and  Sehrish 

against  respondent No.1 was  decided  on  07.04.2018 on the basis  of 

the statement given by the learned counsel for respondent No.1; that 

respondent  No.1  was  ordered  to  pay  monthly  maintenance  of 

Rs.5,000/- for Sehrish until her marriage; that this establishes the fact 

that  respondent  No.1  was  well  aware  as  to  Sehrish  being  in  the 

petitioner’s  lawful  custody;  that  had  respondent  No.1  provided 

maintenance for Sehrish, the occasion for filing a suit for recovery of 

maintenance  against  respondent  No.1  would  not  have  arisen;  that 

Sehrish  was  not  placed  in  illegal  confinement  at  any  material  stage; 

that  the  petitioner  had  not  forcibly  taken  Sehrish  from  respondent 

No.1’s  custody;  that  the  provisions  of  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  were  not 

attracted  in the case at  hand;  and  that  the  welfare  of  Sehrish  would 

be best served if the petitioner is given her custody. Learned counsel 

for the petitioner prayed for the writ petition to be allowed in terms of 

the relief sought therein.  

6. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1 

submitted  that  respondent  No.1  returned  from  abroad  so  that  he 

could  take care  of  his  daughter; that  since  the petitioner’s  guardian 

petition  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Guardian  Judge,  it  would  be 

presumed  that  her  custody  over  Sehrish  was  not  lawful;  that 

respondent No.1, being Sehrish’s father, had got a preferential right 

to  have  her  custody  as  compared  to  the  petitioner,  who  is  her 

maternal grandmother; and that respondent No.1 shall show absolute 

compliance  with  conditions  imposed  in  the  impugned  order  dated 

 
 
 
3 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

01.08.2018  and  shall  ensure  that  there  is  no  default  in  the  visitation 

between the petitioner and Sehrish. Learned counsel for respondent 

No.1 prayed for the writ petition to be dismissed. 

7. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.   

8. 

The facts leading to the filling of the instant petition have been 

set  out in sufficient details  in  paragraphs  2  to  5 above  and  need  not 

be recapitulated.  

9. 

 What  has  been  challenged  in  the  instant  petition  is  the  order 

dated  01.08.2018,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad,  whereby  Sehrish’s  custody  was 

temporarily  given  to  respondent  No.1,  being  her  father  and  natural 

guardian.  Express  reference  in the  said  order dated  01.08.2018  has 

been  made  to the  earlier judgment  dated  31.05.2018, passed  by  the 

learned  Guardian  Judge,  whereby  the  petitioner’s  application  to  be 

appointed  as  the  guardian  of  the  person  of  the  minor,  Sehrish,  was 

dismissed.  It  has  also  been  noted  that  no  specific  order  had  been 

passed by the learned Guardian Judge as regards Sehrish’s custody. 

The petitioner’s visitation with Sehrish was ordered to continue. 

10.  A  Court,  in  exercise  of  its  jurisdiction  under  Section  491 

Cr.P.C., can direct that any person “illegally or improperly detained” 

in public or private custody within its limits be set at liberty. A petition 

under Section 491 Cr.P.C., or a writ of habeas corpus is not ordinarily 

found to be competent where there is no element of illegal custody of 

a  minor.  However,  in  the  interests  of  the  child’s  welfare,  the  Court 

can pass an appropriate order in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. 

A  Court  while  deciding  such  petitions  does  not  conduct  detailed 

inquiries  or  go  into  factual  controversies.  Such  proceedings  are 

summary in nature and aimed at providing immediate and efficacious 

relief to the aggrieved party. Orders passed in such proceedings are 

interim in nature and are subject to the final orders passed by a Court 

exercising  jurisdiction  under  the  provisions  of  the  Guardians  and 

Wards Act, 1890. 

11.  Jurisdiction  under  Section 491 Cr.P.C.  is  exercised  by  a  Court 

so as to “restore”  the custody of the  detenue  to  the person where it 

 
 
 
4 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

rightfully  and  lawfully  belongs.  Before  passing  an  order  for  the 

restoration  of  custody,  the  Court  must  form  a prima-facie  view  that 

the  custody  from  which  the  detenue  is  sought  to  be  recovered  is 

“illegal and improper”, and that there is a real urgency in the matter. 

Where  the  detenue  is  a  minor,  the  snatching  or  removal  from  the 

custody of the applicant has to be an incident of the recent past.  

12. 

In  the  case  at  hand,  it  is  an  admitted  position  that  ever  since 

Sehrish was six days of age, her custody has been with her maternal 

grandmother,  i.e.  the  petitioner.  There  is  nothing  on  the  record  to 

suggest  that  Sehrish’s  upbringing  by  the  petitioner  was  wanting  or 

deficient  in  any  manner.  In  the  proceedings  before  the  learned 

Guardian  Judge,  respondent  No.1  had  admitted  that  just  seven 

months prior to  the recording of his  evidence, he  had returned from 

Dubai.  For  eight  long  years,  Sehrish  was  cared  for  by  her  maternal 

grandmother.  Could  it  be  said  that  for  the  eight  years  that  Sehrish 

had lived with her maternal grandmother, she was in fact “illegally or 

improperly detained”?  I  would  say,  most  certainly  not.  Since neither 

was  Sehrish  snatched  by  her  grandmother  from  her  father  in  the 

recent past and since there was no urgency in the matter due to the 

fact  that  Sehrish  had  remained  in  her  grandmother’s  custody  for 

eight years, I am of the view that the very ingredients for the exercise 

of jurisdiction under Section 491 Cr.P.C. were lacking in the case at 

hand.  In  holding  so,  I  derive  guidance  from  the  law  laid  down  in  the 

following cases:-  

(i) 

In the case of Mst. Nadia Perveen VS Mst. Almas Noreen (PLD 

2012 SC 758), a mother of three minor children, aged 8, 10 and 

12 years,  had  left them  in  the care  of  her deceased  husband’s 

relatives.  Subsequently,  she  filed  a  petition  before  the  Hon'ble 

High Court  under  Section 491  Cr.P.C.  for  the  recovery  of their 

custody  from  her  deceased  husband’s  sister.  The  High  Court 

dismissed  her  petition  on  the  ground  that  the  children  had  not 

been removed from the mother’s custody and could not be said 

to  be  illegally  detained  by  their  aunt.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme 

Court while dismissing the mother’s appeal held as follows:-  

“3.  It has consistently been held by this Court in the cases 
of Muhammad Javed Umrao v. Miss Uzma Vahid (1988 SCNIR 
1891), Nisar Muhammad and another v. Sultan Zari (PLD 1997 

 
 
 
 
5 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

SC 852), Mst. Khalida Perveen v. Muhammad Sultan Mehmood 
and another (PLD 2004 SC 1) and Naziha Ghazali v. The State 
and another (2001 SCMR 1782) that the matter of custody of 
minor children can be brought before a High Court under 
section 491, Cr.P.C. only if the children are of very tender ages 
they have quite recently been snatched away from lawful 
custody and there is a real urgency in the matter and also that 
in such a case the High Court may only regulate interim 
custody of the children leaving the matter of final custody to be 
determined by a Guardian Judge. In those cases this Court 
had  repeatedly  emphasized  that  in  such  matters  the 
jurisdiction of a High Court under section 491, Cr.P.C. is to be 
exercised, sparingly and such exercise may be undertaken 
only in exceptional and extraordinary cases of real urgency 
keeping in view that even a Guardian Judge has the requisite 
powers of recovery of minor children and regulating their 
interim custody.” 

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Shazia  Akbar  Ghalzai  VS  Khurram  Mehboob 

(2019 SCMR 116), after a father had handed over custody of his 

minor son to the mother, he visited the mother’s residence and 

took  away  the  minor  from  her  custody.  This  prompted  the 

mother  to  file  a  petition  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  before  the 

Hon'ble  High  Court.  The  Hon'ble  High  Court  disposed  of  the 

said petition by holding that the father had taken the minor out 

of its territorial jurisdiction. Pursuant to the order passed by the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court, custody of the minor was handed over 

to  the  mother.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  allowed  the 

mother’s appeal against the order of the Hon'ble High Court. It 

was  held  that  the  minor’s  custody  shall  continue  with  the 

mother  “subject to any other order passed by a Court of 

competent jurisdiction in appropriate proceedings”. The father 

was  left  to  assert  his  rights  before  a  Guardian  Court  in 

accordance with the law.  

(iii) 

In the case of Mah Rukh Bajwa VS Aftab Alam (2008 MLD 751), 

a petition filed under Section  491 Cr.P.C. by the mother of two 

minor children was dismissed by the Hon'ble Lahore High Court 

on  the  ground  that  the  children  were  living  with  their  paternal 

uncle and paternal grandmother since a few years and that the 

children  were  not  snatched  from  their  mother  in  the  recent 

past. Since the children’s father had been abducted years ago, 

their  custody  with  their  uncle  and  grandmother  could  not  be 

termed as illegal and improper.  

 
 
 
6 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Irshad  Bibi  VS  District  Police  Officer  (2019 

P.Cr.L.J.  436),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  held  that  the 

matter  of  custody  of  a  minor  can  be  brought  before  a  High 

Court  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  only  if  (i)  the  child  is  of  very 

tender age, (ii) he has quite recently been snatched away from 

lawful  custody,  and  (iii)  there  is  real  urgency  in  the  matter.  In 

the  said  case,  the  custody  of  the  minor,  who  was  a  13-day  old 

suckling  baby,  and  had  been  taken  away  from  the  mother’s 

custody  a  few  days  earlier,  was  ordered  to  be  handed  over  to 

the mother in exercise of the power  under  Section 491 Cr.P.C. 

In  the  said  report,  it  was  inter-alia observed  that  the  minor’s 

father  could  approach  the  Guardian  Court  for  the  minor’s 

custody.  

13.  Another  question  that  needs  to  be  answered  is  whether 

Sehrish’s custody by her maternal grandmother would transform into 

an “illegal or improper detention” simply on account of the dismissal 

of the petitioner’s application for the grant of guardianship certificate 

by  the  learned  Guardian  Judge.  In  the  impugned  order  dated 

01.08.2018,  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad,  had  observed  that  although  the  petitioner’s  guardian 

petition  had  been  dismissed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Guardian 

Judge, vide judgment dated 31.05.2018, “regarding custody of minor, 

no specific order had been passed by the learned Guardian Judge 

that whom the custody of minor be given.” Even if it is assumed that 

the learned Guardian Judge had directed for Sehrish’s custody to be 

handed over to her father/respondent No.1, the latter could not have 

filed  a  petition  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  so  as  to  enforce  such  an 

order passed by the learned Guardian Judge.  In  the case of Ayesha 

Naseer VS District and Sessions Judge (2011 YLR 78), even though a 

mother’s  application  under  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890,  for 

her  appointment  as  the  guardian  of  the  person  and  property  of  her 

minor  children  had  been  allowed  by  the  learned  Guardian  Judge, 

Pakpattan  Sharif,  her  petition  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  for  the 

recovery  of  the  children  from  the  custody  of  their  maternal 

grandparents  was  dismissed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Sessions 

Judge,  Pakpattan  Sharif.  The  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  did  not 

 
 
 
7 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

interfere  with  the  said  order  since  it  could  not  be  established  with 

exactitude as to when the minors were removed from the custody of 

their mother. 

14.  Contest  over  the  custody  of  a  minor  between  a  father  and 

maternal  grandmother  is  not  uncommon.  Courts,  in  exercise  of 

jurisdiction  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C.,  tend  not  to  interfere  with  a 

maternal  grandmother’s  custody  over  minors  where  there  is  no 

element  of  snatching  of  the  minor.  Reference  in  this  regard  may  be 

made to the following case law:-  

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Nadeem  Iqbal  VS  Muhammad  Kabir  Khan  (2011 

YLR 348), it was held by the Hon'ble Lahore High Court that the 

grandmother would have a preferential right for the custody of 

a minor of tender age whose mother had passed away.  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Ayesha  Naseer  VS  District  and  Sessions  Judge 

(supra),  a  petition  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  filed  by  a  widow 

for the recovery of her four minor children from the custody of 

their maternal grandparents was dismissed by the Court of the 

learned Sessions Judge, Pakpattan Sharif. The widow assailed 

the  order  of  the  learned  Sessions  Judge  before  the  Hon'ble 

Lahore High Court and also sought the issuance of a writ in the 

nature  of  habeas corpus.  Earlier  her  application  under  the 

Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890,  for  her  appointment  as  the 

guardian of the person and property  of her minor children had 

been allowed by the learned Guardian Judge, Pakpattan Sharif. 

The Hon'ble High Court did not interfere with the order passed 

by  the  learned  Sessions  Judge,  Pakpattan  Sharif,  and  after 

observing that it could not be established with exactitude as to 

when  the  minors  were  removed  from  the  custody  of  their 

mother, dismissed the petition. 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Khurshid  VS  Ihtisham  (2014  PCr.LJ 

1249),  the  petitioner/father  filed  a petition  under  Article  199  of 

the  Constitution  read  with  Section  491  Cr.P.C.  for  the  custody 

of  his  minor  children,  aged  3½  years  and  9  years,  against  the 

minors’  maternal  grandmother  and  grandfather.  The 

petitioner’s  wife  i.e.  the  minors’  mother  had  died.  After  her 

death,  the  custody  of  the  minors  was  handed  over  to  their 

 
 
 
8 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

maternal  grandparents  with  the  assurance  that  they  would  be 

handed back to the petitioner after ten weeks. The said petition 

was dismissed by the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh inter-alia on 

the  ground  that  there  was  no  apparent  improper  and  illegal 

custody  of  the  minors  with  their  maternal  grandparents  and 

that  an  equally  efficacious  remedy  was  available  under  the 

Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890.  It  was  further  observed  that 

nothing  had  been  brought  on  record  to  show  that  father  could 

look  after  the  minors  with  the  same  zeal  as  affection  as  the 

maternal grandmother.  

15. 

In  the  case  at  hand,  Sehrish  was  neither  “removed”  nor 

“snatched”  by  the  petitioner  from  respondent  No.1’s  custody  at  any 

material stage. There is not even an allegation that the petitioner had 

taken Sehrish away from her father’s custody. There was no element 

of  force,  fraud  or  deceit  in  Sehrish’s  custody  by  the  petitioner  for 

eight years. Since Sehrish had remained in the petitioner’s custody for 

eight years the question  of  “restoration”  of  her custody  to  respondent 

No.1  did  not  arise.  All  this  leads  me  to  hold  that  the  essential  pre-

requisites  for  the  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under  Section  491  Cr.P.C. 

were  absent  in  the  case  at  hand.  Consequently,  the  impugned  order 

dated 01.08.2018 is without jurisdiction.  

16.  After  declaring  the  impugned  order  dated  01.08.2018  passed 

by the Court of the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Islamabad, to 

be  without  jurisdiction,  the  question  that  crops  up  is  whether  this 

Court  should  grant  the  consequential  relief  of  directing  respondent 

No.1  to  hand  over  Sehrish’s  custody  back  to  the  petitioner.  Ever 

since  the  passing  of  the  said  order  nine  months  ago,  Sehrish  has 

been in respondent No.1’s custody. She has been admitted to school 

by  her  father  in  District  Jhang.  The  petitioner  resides  in  Islamabad, 

and if Sehrish’s custody is to be returned to the petitioner, she would 

have to be pulled out from her school in Jhang and re-admitted to her 

earlier school in Islamabad. If this were to happen, Sehrish’s welfare 

and  interest  would  not  be  best  served.  Respondent  No.2  has 

returned  from  Dubai  and  undertaken  to  show  compliance  with  the 

visitation  schedule  being  followed  pursuant  to  the  order  dated 

01.08.2018.  In  the  case  of  Shaukat  Masih  VS  Mst.  Farhat  Parkash 

 
 
 
9 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

(2015  SCMR  731),  a habeas corpus  petition  filed  by  the  mother  of  a 

minor  girl  was  allowed  by  the  Hon'ble  High  Court  despite  the 

existence  of  a  guardianship  certificate  in  favor  of  the  minor’s 

paternal  grandfather.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  observed  that 

even  if  there  were  some  questions  regarding  proper  exercise  of 

jurisdiction  by  the  High  Court  in  the  matter,  the  minor  could  not  be 

made into a ping pong ball and her custody shuttled during the legal 

battles being fought by those interested in her custody.  Taking heed 

of  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court’s  judgment  in  the  said  case,  I  am  not 

inclined to direct respondent No.1 to hand over Sehrish’s custody to 

the  petitioner.  However,  in  the  event  respondent  No.1  proceeds 

abroad, the petitioner would have the right to invoke the jurisdiction 

of  the  learned  Guardian  Judge,  Islamabad,  for  Sehrish's  custody 

under  the  provisions  of  the  Guardian  and  Wards  Act,  1890. 

Respondent  No.1's  proceeding  abroad  would  be  a  contradiction  to 

his  stance  that  he  had  returned  to  Pakistan  in  order  to  take  care  of 

Sehrish's welfare. Disposed of in the above terms. There shall be no 

order as to costs.  

 (MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ________/2019 

                                            (JUDGE) 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By: Engr. Umer Rasheed Dar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

W.P.No.3169/2018 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
