('

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISIXMABAD HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.
Writ Petition  No. 123412OL9
Mst. Ghulam  Begum
VS

Additional District

Islamabad  etc.

S. No. of
order/
proceedings
(03) 

Date of
order/
Proceedings
01.10.2019

Order with signature  of Judge and that of pafties
or counsel where  necessary.
Ch. Muhammad  Nasir, Advocate for petitioner.
Sheikh Nazakat  Hussain, Advocate  for respondent  No.2.

Through this writ petition, petitioner has

assailed  the judgment  dated 26.03.2019  passed by

Additional Sessions  Judge  (West), Islamabad, whereby

appeal preferred  against  the judgment/decree dated

29.09.20L8,  passed by learned  Guardian Judge  (West),

Islamabad  was accepted  wherein respondent  No.2  has

been appointed  guardian of minors namely  Habiba Khalid

Malik aged  about 17 years and Taha Khalid  Malik aged

about  13 years.
2. 

Learned counsel for petitioner  contends

impugned  judgment/decree passed  by respondent No. 1

,, is against the law and facts of the case; that appellate

Couft has deprived the petitioner  from his valuable right

of guardianship  despite the fact that minors are living

outstanding  life and getting excellent  education;  that

while deciding the question  of guardianship appellate

Court has erred in the prime consideration; that

petitioner  is currently  doing job abroad, however, intends

to settle here soon.

3. 

Conversely, learned counsel for the respondent

No.2 contends  that appellate Court has rightly passed the

judgment/decree  on the ground that when mother of

minors  is alive, they cannot be left at mercy  of

grandmother;  that since father of minors/petitioner  is

living abroad the mother is suitable to be granted

custody  as well as to be appointed as guardian.
4. 

At this point, learned  counsel for respondent

No.2  has been confronted  as to whom the custody of

minors is allowed, the learned counse!  points out that

presently custody is with petitioner  and learned  appellate

Court  has not yet decided  question of custody.  The point

raised by the counsel has been confirmed from the

record and the same is silent qua the findings upon

custody  of minor.
5. 

On Court question,  learned counsel for the

pafties are in agreement that it would be appropriate

that the matter  may be remanded to learned  appellate

Court for decision afresh.
6. 

Keeping in view the above, the impugned

judgment/decree  dated 26.03.20L9  passed by learned

appellate  Couft is hereby  set-aside and matter  is

remanded  to appellate  CouO  accordingly.
7. 

Learned  Sessions  Judge  (West),  Islamabad is

directed to entrust the instant  matter to any other

available learned  District  Judge  Court except (Mr. Abdul

Ghafoor Kakar,  learned Additional District Judge-IX

(West), Islamabad). The Couft  seized  with the matter

1r.

shall decide the same within a period of two (02)

months, after  hearing  learned  counsel for the parties.

8. 
above terms.

Instant  Writ Petition  stands disposed  of, in

Khunam

(MOHSIN AKHTAR

JUDGE

