ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

W.P.No.1522 of 2017 
Mansoor Ali 

VS          

The learned Additional District Judge (West), Islamabad and 
others 

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioner by: 

      23.05.2017 
      Sardar Muhammad Tariq Fareed 
      Gopang, Advocate, 

Respondents No.3(a) to 3(f) by:  Mr. Ghulam Fareed Chaudhry,  

____________________________________________________________________ 

       Advocate. 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant 

writ  petition,  the  petitioner,  Mansoor  Ali,  impugns  the  judgment 

and decree dated 09.01.2017, passed by the Court of the learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  the  petitioner’s 

appeal  against  the  order  and  decree  dated  18.11.2016,  passed 

by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Rent  Controller,  Islamabad,  was 

dismissed. Vide the said order and decree dated 18.11.2016, the 

learned  Rent  Controller  allowed  respondents  No.3(a)  to  3(f)s' 

petition  under  Section  17  of  the  Islamabad  Rent  Restrictions 

Ordinance,  2001  (“IRRO”)  seeking  the  petitioner’s  eviction  from 

Basement  Unit  No.5,  Plot  No.15,  G-9  Markaz,  Islamabad  (“the 

rented premises”). 

2. 

The  record  shows  that  on  01.05.2004,  Muhammad  Saeed/ 

respondent No.3(a) entered into a lease agreement with Mansoor 

Ali (petitioner) whereunder the said rented premises were taken 

on  rent  by  the  petitioner  for  a  period  of  two  years  (i.e.  from 

01.05.2004  to  30.04.2006).  As  per  Clause-4  of  the  said  lease 

agreement,  after  the  expiry  of  two  years,  a  fresh 

lease 

agreement  was  to  be executed  between  the  parties  with  mutual 

consent. It is an admitted position that after the expiry of the said 

two-year period,  a  fresh lease  agreement was  not  executed.  On 

21.12.2013,  Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar  (who  was  respondent  No.3(a)’s 

wife,  and  the  owner  of  the  rented  premises),  filed  an  eviction 

petition  under  Section  17  of  the  IRRO  against  the  petitioner 

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

before  the  Court  of  the  learned  Rent  Controller.  The  grounds 

taken in the said eviction petition were, (i) the expiry of the lease 

agreement,  (ii)  the  unauthorized  utilization  of  the  rented 

premises, (iii) violation of the C.D.A.’s byelaws by the petitioner, 

and  (iv)  the  owner’s  personal  bonafide  need  for  the  rented 

premises.  The  petitioner  contested  the  said  eviction  petition  by 

filing a written reply. In the said reply, the petitioner admitted the 

existence  of  the  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between                 

Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar  and  the  petitioner.  Additionally,  the  petitioner 

did not deny Mst. Jamil Akhtar’s pleading that she was the owner 

of  the  rented  premises.  During  the  pendency  of  the  eviction 

petition, Mst. Jamil Akhtar died. Thereafter, an amended eviction 

petition  was  filed,  wherein  Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar’s  legal  heirs  (i.e. 

respondents No.3(a) to 3(f) were impleaded as petitioners in the 

said  eviction  petition.  From  the  divergent  pleadings  of  the 

parties,  the  learned  Rent  Controller,  on  15.10.2014,  framed  the 

following issues:- 

“1.  Whether the lease agreement has been expired? OP 

Parties. 

2.  Whether the rented premises is required by the petitioner 

for the personal bonafide need? OPA 

3.  Whether the petitioner has no cause of action to file 

instant petition? OPR 

4.  Relief.” 

3.  Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar’s  son,  Aamir Saeed  (respondent No.3(d) 

herein),  entered  the  witness  box  as  AW-1  and  submitted  his 

affidavit-in-evidence as Exh.A1. The petitioner appeared as RW-1 

and submitted his affidavit-in-evidence as Exh.R1. Vide order and 

decree  dated  18.11.2016,  the  learned  Rent  Controller  allowed 

the  eviction  petition  and  directed  the  petitioner  to  hand  over 

possession of the rented premises within a period of thirty days. 

The said order and decree was impugned by the petitioner in an 

appeal before the Court of the learned Additional District Judge, 

Islamabad.  Vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  09.01.2017,  the 

learned Appellate Court dismissed the petitioner’s appeal.  

4. 

The learned Courts below concurrently held that the lease 

agreement  dated  01.05.2004  had  expired.  It  was  also  held  that 

 
 
 
 
 
3 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

the  eviction  petitioners  were  successful  in  proving  that  the 

rented premises were required for their personal bonafide need. 

The  petitioner  in  the  instant  writ  petition  has  impugned  the  said 

concurrent judgments of the learned Courts below.  

5. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted  that  under 

Clause-4 of the lease agreement dated 01.05.2004, the parties to 

the  said  agreement  were  supposed  to  execute  a  fresh  lease 

agreement after the expiry of the initial lease period of two years; 

that despite the expiry of the said lease agreement, the landlord 

continued  accepting  the  rent  in  accordance  with  the  said  lease 

agreement;  that  the  eviction  petition  was  initially  filed  by  Mst. 

Jamil Akhtar, who was not a party to the lease agreement dated 

01.05.2004;  that  respondent  No.3(a),  who  executed  the  lease 

agreement,  had  filed  an  affidavit-in-evidence  deposing  on  oath 

that he was Mst. Jamil Akhtar’s special attorney; that respondent 

No.3(d), who had appeared as AW-1 was not a party to the lease 

agreement;  that  the  petitioner  in  his  affidavit-in-evidence  had 

deposed  that  he  was  not  respondent  No.3(d)’s  tenant;  that 

respondent  No.3(d),  in  his  cross-examination,  had  deposed  that 

the  rented  premises  had  earlier  been  vacated  through  the 

process  of  the  Court  by  taking  the  ground  of  personal bonafide 

need;  that  after  evicting  the  tenants  from  the  rented  premises, 

the  landlord  again  rented  out  the  rented  premises;  and  that  the 

respondents  had  other  properties  which  they  could  utilize  for 

their personal bonafide need. In support of his contention that a 

tenant cannot be evicted on the ground of the expiry of the lease 

agreement,  the 

learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  placed 

reliance  on  the  case  of  Mst.  Munawar  Sultana  VS  Additional 

District Judge, Islamabad, and others (2005 CLC 1119). Learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioner  also  placed  reliance  on  the  case  of 

Allies  Book  Corporation  through  legal  heirs  VS  Sultan  Ahmad 

and  others  (2006  SCMR  152).  Learned  counsel  prayed  for  the 

concurrent orders passed by the learned Courts below to be set-

aside.  

6. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondents 

No.3(a)  to  3(f)  submitted  that  the  petitioner  in  his  written  reply, 

4 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

filed  before  the  learned  Rent  Controller,  had  admitted  the 

relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  with  the  eviction  petitioners; 

that Mst. Jamil Akhtar was the owner of the rented premises; that 

after her demise, her legal heirs were impleaded as petitioners in 

the  eviction  petition;  that  the  lease  agreement  was  executed 

between  respondent  No.3(a)  (who 

is  Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar's 

husband)  and  the  petitioner;  that  respondent  No.3(a)  is  a  co-

owner  of  the  rented  premises;  that  respondent  No.3(d),  (who  is 

Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar  and  respondent  No.3(a)’s  son),  is  also  a  co-

owner  of  the  rented  premises;  that  the  rented  premises  were 

earlier  vacated  on  the  ground  of  personal  bonafide  need,  but 

thereafter the owners had put the premises to their personal use 

by establishing an agency for cooking oil and rice; that given the 

definition  of  ‘landlord’  in  Section  2(g)  of  the  IRRO,  Mst.  Jamil 

Akhtar and  her legal heirs  come within the meaning  of landlord; 

that  the  petitioner  admits  the  execution  of  the  lease  agreement 

dated  01.05.2004;  and  that  the  petitioner  entered  the  rented 

premises  on  the  basis  of  the  said  lease  agreement.  Learned 

counsel prayed for the writ petition to be dismissed. In support of 

his contentions, the learned counsel for the respondents No.3(a) 

to  3(f)  placed  reliance  on  the  cases  of  Asim  Siddique  Butt  VS 

Muhammad  Khursheed  Mirza  (2017  YLR  Note  63),  Jehangir 

Rustam  Kakalia  through  legal  heirs  VS  Messrs  Hashwani  Sales 

and  Services  (Pvt.)  Limited  (2002  SCMR  241),  Najma  Sultana 

through  Attorney  VS  Anjuman  Jamiat-ul-Akhwan  and  others 

(2017 YLR 164), and Bashir Ahmed through Special Attorney VS 

Mst. Fatima Begum and others (2017 YLR 453). 

7. 

I have heard the contentions of the learned counsel for the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance.  The  facts  leading  to  the  filing  of  the  instant  petition 

have been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 4 above, 

and need not be recapitulated.   

8. 

The  eviction  petition  was  instituted  by  Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar 

(i.e.  the  owner  of  the  rented  premises)  as  early  as  21.12.2013 

(i.e.  more  than  three  years  ago).  During  the  pendency  of  the 

eviction petition, Mst. Jamil Akhtar passed away. Thereafter, her 

5 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

legal heirs were impleaded as petitioners in the eviction petition. 

The  relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between  the  contesting 

parties  has  not  been  denied.  Admittedly,  the  petitioner’s  entry 

into  the  rented  premises  was  on  the  basis  of  lease  agreement 

dated  01.05.2004.  The  said  lease  agreement  was  entered  into 

between  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3(a),  who  was  Mst. 

Jamil  Akhtar’s  husband.  The  lease  agreement  between  the 

parties  had 

long  expired.  The  petitioner, 

in  his  cross-

examination,  admitted  that  after  the  expiry  of  the 

lease 

agreement  dated  01.05.2004,  a  fresh  lease  agreement  was  not 

executed.  

9. 

Respondent No.3(d), who was Mst Jamil Akhtar’s son, and 

one  of  the  co-owners  of  the  rented  premises  gave  evidence  as 

AW-1.  Respondent  No.3(d),  in  his  cross-examination,  did  not 

deny  that  earlier  the  landlord  had  had  rented  premises  vacated 

on  the  ground  of  personal  bonafide  need,  but  it  has  also  been 

deposed  that  after  the  rented  premises  were  vacated  by  the 

earlier tenant,  the  same  were  used  by  landlord  for  the  business 

of  an  agency  for  cooking  oil  and  rice  by  the  name  of  “Pak 

Traders”. It was also deposed that this business continued for a 

year  and  a  half  after  which  the  rented  premises  were  again 

rented out. Therefore, it is my view that the owners of the rented 

premises  could 

institute  an  eviction  petition  against  the 

petitioner  on  the ground of personal bona fide need for the said 

premises.  

10. 

It is also not denied that in addition to the rented premises, 

the  landlords  had  other  commercial  properties,  but  it  is  well-

settled  that  it  is  the  landlord’s  unfettered  choice  as  to  which  of 

his  properties  he  puts  to  his  personal  use.  It  does  not  lie  in  the 

mouth of the tenant to say that the landlord should use any other 

of  his  properties  for  his  personal  use.  Even  the  Rent  Controller 

does not have the authority to determine the property which the 

landlord  should  put  to  his  own  personal  use.  A  landlord  is  not 

even  required  to  mention  in  the  eviction  petition  or  in  his 

evidence,  the  nature  of  business  he  wants  to  carry  out  at  the 

rented premises. In the case of Pakistan Institute of International 

6 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

Affairs VS Naveed Merchant (2012 SCMR 1498), it has been held 

that  the  choice  lies  with  the  landlord  to  select  any  of  the 

tenement  for  his  personal  need  and  for  this  purpose  the  tenant 

has no locus standi to give advice to the landlord to use alternate 

accommodation. In the case of S.M. Nooruddin VS Saga Printers 

(1998  SCMR  2119),  it  has  been  observed  that  a  landlord  has  a 

complete  option  to  choose  from  one  of  the  several  tenements 

occupied  by  tenants  for  his  personal  requirement  and  the 

discretion  is  not  assailable,  except  in  the  rarest  cases  of  bad 

faith.  Furthermore,  this  Court,  in  the  case  of  Javaid  Ahmed  VS 

Muhammad  Imran  Malik  (PLD  2011  Islamabad  30),  it  has  been 

held as follows:- 

“11.  Now adverting to the contention that respondents Nos.1 
and 2 are owners of other shop, suffice it to say that it is 
settled law that it is the prerogative of the landlord to choose 
premises for his personal need and no discretion in respect 
thereof can be given to the landlord and in this respect 
reliance is placed upon the case of Malik Muhammad Ramzan 
v. Messrs General Iron Stores and another (1995 SCMR 1125), 
wherein it has been held that "landlord" would have privilege 
to choose anyone of his properties for self-use, considered by 
him suitable for his requirement, provided his need was not 
tainted with mala fide. Further in the case National Tubewell 
Construction Corporation Ltd. v. Tariq Rahim (Advocate) and 
another (NLR 1991 Civil 366), it has been observed that it is 
for landlord to choose and make a choice as to which of his 
properties is suitable to meet his needs/requirements and 
tenant cannot dictate to landlord that he should occupy this 
property or that property or that he should move for eviction 
against this tenant or that tenant.” 

11.  As  mentioned  above,  Respondent  No.3(d)  entered  the 

witness box as AW-1 and deposed that the rented premises were 

required  to  be  used  as  a  clinic  by  his  wife,  who  was  a  doctor. 

Respondent  No.3(d)’s  said  stance  was  not  shaken  in  his  cross-

examination.  Respondent  No.3(d),  in  his  cross-examination,  had 

deposed  that  he  had  got  married  in  1998;  that  his  wife  was 

doctor  before  they  got  married;  and  that  she  continued  to  work 

as  a  doctor  after  their  marriage.  In  the  eviction  petition,  it  has 

been  clearly  pleaded  that  respondent  No.3(d)’s  wife  was  a 

Senior  Registrar 

in  the  Radiology  Department  of  Pakistan 

Institute  Medical  Sciences,  Islamabad;  and  that  the  rented 

premises were required to be used by respondent No.3(d)’s wife 

 
7 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

as  a  clinic.  There  was  no  inconsistency  between  the  averments 

in the eviction petition and the evidence adduced by respondent 

No.3(d).  It  is  well  settled  that  the  sole  statement  of  the  landlord 

regarding  the  personal bona fide  need  for  the  rented  premises 

was  sufficient  for  the  eviction  of  the  tenant.  In  the  case  of  Iqbal 

Book  Depot  VS  Khitab  Ahmed  (2001  SCMR  1197),  it  has  been 

held  the  where  the  statement  of  the  landlord  on  oath  was 

consistent  with  his  averments  in  the  ejectment  application  and 

the  same  had  neither  been  shaken  nor  had  anything  been 

brought 

in  evidence  to  contradict  the  statement,  such  a 

statement  would  be  considered  sufficient  for  the  acceptance  of 

the ejectment application.  

12.  The  petitioner,  in  his  affidavit-in-evidence,  has  deposed 

that  he  is  not  respondent  No.3(d)’s  tenant,  but  that  of  his 

parents.  It  was  also  deposed  that  the  petitioner  was  regularly 

paying rent. Now, on account of Mst. Jamil Akhtar’s demise, both 

respondent  No.3(a)  and  respondent  No.3(d)  have  become  co-

owners  of  the  rented  premises.  Therefore,  they  were  both 

competent, jointly or severally to institute or pursue the eviction 

proceedings against the petitioner. The term “landlord” has been 

defined in Section 2 (g) of the IRRO in the following terms:- 

““landlord” means the owner of the premises and includes any 
person for the time being authorized or entitled to receive rent 
in respect of any building or rented land, whether on his own 
account or on behalf, or for the benefit, of any other person, or 
as a trustee, guardian or receiver, and or a tenant who, being 
authorized under the terms of his lease so to do, sublets the 
building and every other person for the time being deriving title 
from the landlord;”  
(Emphasis added) 

13.  Since  it  is  not  disputed  that  Mst.  Jamil  Akhtar  was  the 

owner  of  the  rented  premises,  there  was  no  legal  impediment 

before  her  to  have  instituted  an  eviction  petition.  After  her 

demise  during  the  pendency  of  the  eviction  petition,  her  legal 

heirs  were  brought  on  record.  One  of  her  legal  heirs  was  her 

husband/respondent  No.3(a),  who  had  executed  the 

lease 

agreement dated 01.05.2004, with the petitioner.  

14.  Under Section 17(5) of the IRRO, the Rent Controller has to 

satisfy  himself  about  the  bonafides  of  the  landlord’s  claim 

 
 
 
8 

W.P.No.1522/2017 

regarding  his  requirement  for  his  own  occupation  of  the  rented 

premises  in  good  faith.  The  learned  Courts  below  happen  to  be 

concurrently  satisfied  as  to  the  eviction  petitioners'  bonafides 

regarding the said claim. There is no convincing material before 

me to doubt the satisfaction of the learned Courts below as to the 

eviction petitioners' bonafides. In the event, the rented premises 

are  not  occupied  by  the  eviction  petitioners  or  by  any  of  their 

family  members,  Section  17(6)  of  the 

IRRO  gives  ample 

protection to the petitioner. For ready reference the said Section 

17(6) is reproduced herein below:- 

“17(6).  Where the landlord who has obtained possession of a 
building in pursuance of a building in pursuance of an order 
made  under  subsection  (5)  does  not  himself,  or  where 
possession of the building or rented land has been obtained for 
any member of his family such member dies to, occupy the 
building or rented land within one month of the date of obtaining 
or rented land within one month of the date of obtaining its 
possession, or having obtained possession relates it within six 
months of the said date to any person other than the tenant, the 
tenant may apply to the Controller for an order directing that 
the possession of such building be restored to him and the 
Controller may make an order accordingly.” 

15.  By  reason  of  the  above,  without  going  into  the  question 

whether the expiry of a lease is a ground under the IRRO to seek 

the eviction of a tenant, I am of the view that the learned Courts 

below  correctly  allowed  the  eviction  petition  on  the  ground  of 

landlords'  bonafide  need  for  the  rented  premises.  Resultantly, 

this writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

         JUDGE  

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON ____________/2017 

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

Sultan* 

(JUDGE) 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
