ORDER SHEET
INTHEISLAi'ABADHlgECouLI.=!SLAiIABAD

F.A.O. No.1 17120'18
TazaraL Hussain
VS
ZaY abalH ussain  and others

S. No.  of order

Order  with signature

Date of order/
Proceed
24.06.2019 Mr. Abdul
appellant
Qazi Rafi
respondents

es or counsel

ofJudge
where  n

and  that of Partl
Kamran Butt, Advocate for the
ud Din Babar'
Advocate for
No.l to 8

Through  the instant appeal,  the appellant'
Tazaral. Hussain,  impugns  the order  dated
21.05.2018, passed by the Gourt of the learned
Civil Judge, lslamabad, whereby his application
under Order XXXIX,  Rules 1 and 2, C'P'C' filed
along with his suit for declaration,  cancellation of
mutation No.1 589, dated 16'01 '2013' was
dismissed.
2.  Learned counsel for the appellant  submitted
thatvidemutationNo.1589,dated16.01.2013,the
appellant's  father, Qurban Hussain,  is alleged to
havesold'l44kanals,Osmarlasoflandinmouza
Arra, Tehsil and  District lslamabad  to
respondents  No.1 to  3  for  a  total sale
consideration  of Rs.5,00,OOO/-  only; that Qurban
Hussain  was on his death bed when the said
mutation  is alleged to have been executed; that
Qurban Hussain died on 28'05'2013;  that the
appellant  came to know about mutation  No'1589
when he went to have the inheritance mutation
attested with respect to the said land; that
Qurban  Hussain  was the father of the appellant
and respondents  No.1 to 3; that other than the
appellant and respondents  No'1 to 3' Qurban
Hussainwasalsosurvivedwiththreedaughters
and one widow; that four months after the

2

F.A.O.No.117l20l8

attestation  of  the said mutation  No'1589,
respondents  No.1 to 3 sold the said land to
Al-Hamra  Society at the rate of Rs.2,50,000/-  per
kanal, vide agreements dated 22.05'2013  and
21.06.2013;  and that the said sale took place six
days prior to Qurban Hussain's demise'
3.  Learned counsel for the appellant further
submitted that mutation  No.1589 was made
fraudulently and the same was hit by the doctrine
of maru ul maut that Qurban  Hussain's death was
immanent when  the said mutation was executed;
that the appellant has a house where  he is living
with his family in the land which is the subject
matter of the said mutation; and that the learned
Trial court erred by dismissing  the application  for
interim injunction. Learned counsel for the
appellant prayed for the instant appeal to be
allowed and for the impugned  order dated
21.05.2018 to be set-aside.
4.  On the other hand, learned  counsel for
respondents  No.1 to I submitted  that the doctrine
of lis pendens  adequately protects the appellant;
and that since the appellant is challenging
mutation No.1589 0n the basis of fraud and the
principle of marz ul maut, he is under  an
obligation  to prove the same during the trial'
5.  Learned  counsel  for respondents No'1 to 8
further submitted  that the instant appeal was
grossly  time barred; and that the instant appeal
against the impugned order dated 21'05'2018 was
filed before this Gourt on 18.10.2018.  Learned
counsel  for respondents No.1 to 8 prayed  for the
appeal  to be dismissed.
6.lhaveheardthecontentionsofthelearned
counsel for the contesting parties and have
perused the record  with their able assistance'

3

F.A.O.No.l  1712018

7. 
I propose,  in the first instance, to decide the
objection taken by the learned counsel for
respondents  No.1 to 8 to the maintainability  of the
instant apPeal.
8.  Vide impugned order dated 21'O5'2O18,  the
appellant'sapplicationforinteriminjunctionwas
dismissed by the learned Givil court. The said
order was assailed by the appeltant in an appeal
before the court of the learned  Additional District
Judge, lslamabad, which appeal was filed on
23.05.2018.  Vide order dated 17'10'2018, the
court of the learned Additional District Judge
returned  the said appeal to the appellant on the
groundthatthesaidCourtdidnothavethe
pecuniary jurisdiction  to adjudicate  upon the
matter. Thereafter,  the instant  appeal was filed by
the appellant  before this Court on 18'10'2018'
9. 
ln paragraph  10 of the appellant's  suit, the
value of the suit for the purposes  of jurisdiction
and court fee was clearly stated to  be
Rs.2,50,0O,OOO/-.  ln this view of the matter, the
court of the learned Additional District  Judge,
lslamabad, was bereft of  the  pecuniary
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the appellant's
appeal.
10. The appellant,  in  his application for
condonation of delay in filing the instant  appeal,
has taken the position that the valuation entered
inparagraphl0ofthesuitwastheresultofa
typographicalmistake;andthatthevaluationwas
in fact Rs.5,00,000/-,  which was the consideration
allegedtohavebeenpaidbyrespondentsNo.lto
3 for the suit land. This stance,  in my view, is an
afterthought. The appellant had consciously  fixed
the value of the suit for the purposes of
jurisdictionandGourtfeetobeRs'2,50,00,000/-'

4

F.A.O.No.l  17l20l8

ll.NowasregardsthequestionaStowhether
thetimeconsumedbytheappellantin
prosecutinghisappealbeforethecourtofthe
learned  Additional District  Judge, lslamabad,  can
beignoredorexcludedfromthethirty-day
limitation period for filing of an appeal' the
appellant has not advanced any plausible
explanationastowhyhehadfiledtheappealon
23.os.2olEbeforetheCourtofthelearned
Additional District Judge, lslamabad' The
valuation in the suit was Rs.2,50,00,000,. and
therefore,  more than the pecuniary  jurisdiction of
thelearnedDistrictcourt.lgnoranceofthelaw
cannotbeavaliddefence.Therefore,the
appellantcannotbesaidtohavefiledtheappeal
ortohaveprosecutedtheSamebeforetheCourt
ofthelearnedAdditionalDistrictJudgefora
period of almost five months with "d.te diligence"
or,ingoodfaith.,lnthecaseofKhushi

8g2),ithasinter-aliabeenheldasfollows:-

"38. .... Time spent pursuing an appeal b9.tor9 a
wrong forum, in good faith and with due
diligince  ought ii  our view to constitute
sufficient ,ai"" for condonation of delay' But
ii" act of ap^.oaching  a wrong.f.?r.um=l!us=t  9e
ffiould 
be established  thatdue
to some honest, bona fide and genuine
ambiguity  in the iaw or in fact, a party or lis
couniet was led astray in terms  of approaclilg
a wrong forum. Mere incompetence  of the
,ounseii  inadvertence,  negligence  or ignorance
of law attributable  to him-and/or  overlooking  of
therecordbythecounselcannotconstitute
sufficient ,ri""  ipso facto, but the factor(s)
which misted the legat counsel,  including any
ambiguity  i1 the law, causing him to file the
iiie-at 'before the wrong forum must be
inbicated. Mere wrong  advice of counsel  is not
an adequate ground  per se to constitute
sufficientt  cauie because if  this rule is
iciepted,  the centuries tested rule that
ignorance  of law is no excuse  would stand
iiolrt"d. Besides,  the above factors'. which
caused  ambiguity and misled the appellant (or
ffie 
case maY be) have-to -be
siated with ctarity and precision in the

5

F.A.O.No.1l7l20l8

application  for condonation  of delay  and proved
on the record."
(EmPhasis  added)

12. Since the  appellant's application  for
condonation of delay contains  no pleadings with
specificity as to  what accounted for  the
appellan l's bonafide,  honest and genuine mistake
or ambiguity in the law or in fact causing it to file
the appeal before the wrong forum (i'e" the Court
of the learned  Additional District Judge), it falls
short of the requirements  for such an application
set in the case ol Khushi Muhammad  VS' MsL
Fazal  Bibi (suPra).
13.  ln view of the above, I have no reason to
allow the appellant's  application for condonation
of delay in filing the instant appeal'  After holding
so, it would not be appropriate  to give any
findings  on the merits of the main appeal' The
petitioner's  application for the condonation  of
delay  is dismissed  and as a consequence  of such
dismissal, the  instant appeal too  stands
dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs'
14. Before parting with this order' it may be
noted that the learned counsel  for respondents
No.1 to I  has taken a very fair stance  that
regardless of the dismissal of the appellant's
application for interim injunction,  the doctrine of
lis pendens adequately protects the appellant'

Ahtasham*

(i,llANGU  L HASSAN  AU RANGZEB)
- 
JUDGE

