2012 Y L R 930 

[Islamabad] 

Before Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, J 

Malik SAFDAR ALI KHAN---Petitioner 

VS

THE STATE and another---Respondents 

Criminal Miscellaneous No.695-B of 2011, decided on 2nd December, 2011 

Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898)--- 

----S. 497---Penal Code (XLV of 1860), Ss.489-F & 406---Dishonestly issuing a cheque, criminal 
breach of trust---Bail, grant of---Accused had given two cheques to the complainant which were 
dishonoured---Bail  applications  of accused  were  refused by  both  the courts  below---Validity---
Sections  406  and  489-F,  P.P.C,  provided  three  different  sets  of  punishments,  namely 
imprisonment, or fine or both---Law had to be stretched in favour of the accused and beneficial 
interpretation had to be made in his favour---Offence under S. 489-F, P.P.C did not fall within the 
prohibitory clause of S. 497, Cr.P.C---Accused had no criminal history and no F.I.R. had been 
registered  against  him  in  the  past---No  exceptional  circumstances  existed  to  deny  bail  to  the 
accused---Bail petition of accused was allowed and he was granted bail.  

Zafar Iqbal v. Muhammad Anwar and others 2009 SCMR 1488; Shameel v. The State and others 
2009 SCMR 174; Riaz Jaffar Natiq v. Muhammad Nadeem Dar and others 2011 SCMR 1708; 
Sikandar Zaman v. The State and others 2011 SCMR 870; Muhammad  Jamil v. The State PLJ 
2011 Cr.C. (Lahore) 1087 and Kshif Khan v. The State 2009 PCr.LJ 418 rel. 

Malik Amir Dad Awan, for Petitoiner. 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
            
            
Khawaja Javed Iqbal, and Manzoor Ahmed, S.I. for the State. 

Mian Abdul Razzaq for Respondent No.2. 

JUDGMENT 

SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI, J.---Petitioner Malik Safdar Ali Khan seeks bail in case registered 
vide  F.I.R  No.497,  dated  25-7-2011,  offence  under  section  489-F,  P.P.C.  at  Police  Station 
Shalimar, Islamabad. 

2.  Briefly,  the  prosecution  story  as  gleans  out  from  the  F.I.R.  is  that  complainant  of  the  case 
namely, Brig. (R.) Syed Zulfiqar Akbar Naqvi moved an application to the I.G. Police, Islamabad 
with  the  assertion  that  he  retired  from  Army  25  years  ago  and  is  residing  in  House  No.28,  St. 
No.60, Sector F-11/4, Islamabad. That one Malik Safadar Ali son of  Malik Akhtar Nawaz (present 
petitioner) who was working as P.A in NHA met him through an acquaintance named Amir Latif, 
and offered to him open files of the plots in the newly floated NHF Housing Society, at very low 
cost.  Petitioner  tricked  him  into  trusting,  so  he  purchased  files  of  seven  plots  and  by  trusting 
petitioner even did not go through the contents of the files and paid him in advance to deposit the 
first instalment of tie cost prior to obtaining the files. Later on, on repeated enquires, petitioner 
ensured him profitable disposal of the files once the society is declared established. Petitioner met 
the  respondent/complainant  last  time,  in  the  middle  of  2009  and  thereafter  started  avoiding  to 
face him. On scrutiny of the files, it transpired that most of the stamp papers were blank with no 
authentication by the vendor in token of sale to the buyer and on thorough probe it also revealed 
that most of the Pay Orders had been got redeemed by the petitioner and pocketed the proceeds 
without  knowledge  of  the  complainant.  Against  each  file  petitioner  charged  the  complainant, 
double the amount, as performance for himself and complainant. On repeated demands petitioner 
issued two cheques which were dishonoured by the bank, detail of the same is as under:--- 

(i) Cheque No.CD9136111,  dated  30-3-2006 amounting to Rs.5,50,000 drawn on Union Bank 
Jinnah Road, Rawalpindi. 

(ii) Cheque No.CD9125116,  dated  25-5-2006 amounting to Rs.4,50,000 drawn on Union Bank, 
Jinnah Road, Rawalpindi. 

            
            
  
            
  
  
  
  
3. The  petitioner  was  arrested  on  8-8-2011. He approached the "Allaqa Judicial Magistrate" for 
grant of bail but  his request was declined  vide  order  dated  15-9-2011. Feeling aggrieved, the 
petitioner approached learned Sessions Judge, Islamabad who entrusted the bail petition to learned 
Additional Sessions Judge, Islamabad but it met the same fate. Resultantly, petitioner approached 
this court for grant of bail after arrest. 

4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that complainant with mala fide intention and 
ulterior  motives  distorted  the  real  facts  while  presenting  application  before  the  police  for  the 
purpose of registration of case against the present petitioner. The complainant while exercising his 
lucrative influence and pressure of status maneuvered with the local police and got registered the 
instant case. The learned counsel further contends that from the contents of the F.I.R., it revealed 
that complainant of the case invested an amount in the business of real estate and at the most matter 
being  business  deal  is  one  of  rendition  of  accounts,  which  can  only  be  settled  by  the  court  of 
competent jurisdiction i.e. Civil Court. The learned counsel went on to submit that the petitioner 
is behind the bar from last about four months, moreover offence under section 489-F, P.P.C. does 
not fall within the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to 
the concession of bail. 

5. Conversely, the learned counsel for the complainant assisted by the learned, standing counsel 
vehemently opposed the bail by submitting that the contents of the F.I.R. also constitute the offence 
under section 406, P.P.C.; the complainant has been deprived from huge amount of Rs.10,00,000; 
the petitioner may not be granted bail till the amount is recovered from the petitioner. And that 
case of the petitioner is one of exceptional circumstance, therefore, discretion may not be exercised 
in his favour despite the fact that the alleged offence does not fall within the prohibitory clause of 
section 497, Cr.P.C. 

6. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. The plain reading of 
section 489-F, P.P.C. which is being reproduced hereinbelow, makes it abundantly clear that three 
different punishments are provided, which obviously in the facts and circumstances of the case can 
be 
of 
upon 
evidence  and  data  available on  the  record:-- 

punishment 

inflicted 

strength 

accused 

any 

the 

on 

as 

"Whoever dishonestly issues a cheque towards re-payment of a loan or fulfilment of an obligation 
which is dishonoured on presentation, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to three years, or with fine, or with both, unless he can establish, for which the burden of proof 
shall rest on him, that he had made arrangements with his bank to ensure that the cheque would be 
honoured and that the bank was at fault in not honouring the cheque". 

As is evident from above, following three punishments are available in the section; 

  
  
  
  
            
(i) Imprisonment which may extend to 3 years. 

OR 

(ii) with fine 

OR 

(iii) with both. 

The provision  itself provides a right  to  an  accused to  get himself  absolved from  the charge by 
adducing evidence that he made arrangements with his bank to ensure that the cheque was to be 
honoured  and  it  was  the  fault  of  the  bank  not  honouring  the  cheque.  In  my  estimation,  on  the 
conclusion  of  trial  despite  finding  any  accused  guilty  of  the  offence,  there  is  every  likelihood/ 
probability/possibility  that  trial  court  may  impose  fine  of  a  meager  amount  of  Rs.50  only  as 
punishment. 

8. Now, adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the complainant that contents of the 
F.I.R.  constitute  the  offence  under  section  406,  P.P.C.,  which  provides  punishment  of 
imprisonment up to 7 years. The plain reading of the section 406, P.P.C. which being reproduced 
herein-below for the sake of convenience, possesses same punishment as contained in section 489-
F, P.P.C. except that term of imprisonment is up to 7 years therefore, same interpretation has to be 
made for this also. 

"Whoever  commits  criminal  breach  of  trust  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either 
description for a term which may extend to (seven) years, or with fine, or with both." 

9.  It  is  being  observed  that  ever  since  the  insertion  of  section  489-F,  P.P.C.  in  the  statue  by 
Ordinance  LXXXV  of  2002,  dated  25-10-2002,  recovery  proceedings  by  way  of  summary 
procedure on negotiable instruments, provided under Order XXXVII, C.P.C. almost has gone to 
six. The cheque which admittedly is a Negotiable Instruments, invariably being used for exerting 
pressure  through  device  of  criminal  cases,  although  there  is  no  mechanism  provided  by  the 
provision of section 489-F to make it a recovery mode in most of the cases relating to cheques 

  
            
  
            
  
  
  
            
  
criminal  proceeding  are  being  used  as  a  tool  to  compel  the  family  members  of  an  accused  to 
arrange the amount which results into penalizing the entire family for the wrong of one person. 
There is no doubt that when allegation of fraud, conclude in to the guilt of any accused person, he 
can be awarded punishment for the same but to punish the entire family before finding of guilt is 
recorded, for an offence which provides alternate punishment of fine only, to my mind is against 
all cannons of justice and golden principle of (             ) 

10. So, in such an eventuality, to deprive any person from the concession of bail is simply harsh 
and unjust. It is well settled law with the mandate of the dictums of the Superior Courts of the 
country that law has to be stretched in favour of accused and beneficial interpretation has to be 
made. When there is just a remote possibility that an accused may not be awarded imprisonment 
of even one month, then propriety demands that discretion has to be exercised in favour of the 
accused.  Now  coming  to  the  other  extreme,  that  maximum  punishment  provided  for  the 
offence  is  up to  03  years,  which  does  not fall within the prohibitory clause of section 497, 
Cr.P.C. The honourable Supreme Court and other Superior Courts of Pakistan through different 
authoritative pronouncements, time and again held, that when an offence does not fall within the 
prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C, bail is a rule and refusal is an exception. In this regard, 
I  am  fortified  with  case-law  Zafar  Iqbal  v.  Muhammad  Anwar  and  others  (2009  SCMR,  page 
1488), Shameel v. The State and others (2009 SCMR page 174), Riaz Jaffar Natiq v. Muhammad 
Nadeem Dar and others (2011 SCMR, Page 1708), Sikandar Zaman v. The State and others (2011 
SCMR, page 870) Muhammad  Jamil v. The State (PLJ 2011 Cr.C. (Lahore) 1087) and Kshif Khan 
v. The State (2009 PCr.LJ 418) 

11. On enquiry, the I.O. informed the court that present petitioner has no criminal history and till 
to date even no other F.I.R. is registered against him. As such there is no exceptional circumstances 
on the basis of which petitioner may be deprived of the concession of bail. Thus for the foregoing 
reasons, this petition is allowed. The petitioner is granted bail subject to furnishing of bail bonds 
of Rs.500,000 with two sureties of like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court. 

12. All the observations made hereinabove are tentative in nature and shall have no bearing on the 
final determination of guilt or innocence by the trial court. 

M.W.A./26/Isl                                                                                                 Bail granted. 

  
  
  
  
  
  
 
