ORDER SHEET 

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT,  ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT. 

Criminal  Misc.  No.  60/B/2020. 

Dr. Atif Muhammad  Khan 

VS

The State, etc. 

.No.of 
rder/ 
~oceedings 

~

Date  of 
order/ 
Proceedings 
18.02.2020. 

Order with  signature  of Judge  and  that  of parties  or 
counsel  where  necessary. 

Mr. Sajeel Sheryar Swati, Advocate  for petitioner. 
Barrister M. Mumtaz  Ali, AAG. 
Raja Khurram  Shahzad,  Advocate  for complainant. 
Humaira  Aslam, S.I.  FIA Cyber  Crime,  Islamabad. 

Through  this  Crl.  Misc.  petition,  the  petitioner 

has  applied  for post-arrest  bail in case FIR No.01, dated 

01.01.2020, U/S  20(1), 21(1-b,  c,  d),  24(1-d)  of  PECA, 

2016 read  with  Section 509 PPC,  P.S. FIA, Cyber  Crime 

Reporting  Centre,  Islamabad,  lodged  on  the  complaint 

of Ms. Faiza  Anwar. 

2. 

Brief facts  referred  in  the  above  mentioned  FIR 

are  that  petitioner  Dr.  Atif  Muhammad  Khan  ex- 

husband  of  complainant 

/respondent  No.2  with 

malafide 

intentions  &  ulterior  motives  created/ 

developed  WhatsApp  Profile  associated  with  mobile 

phone  No.+447572799593  and  used 

the  same  for 

blackmailing,  harassing,  threatening  and  defaming  the 

complainant. 

The 

accused 

has 

transmitted/ 

disseminated 

personal/ private/  sexually 

explicit 

pictures  of complainant  through  the  alleged  WhatsApp 

profile  associated  with  the  said  phone  number  to  the 

family  members  of the  complainant  on  their  WhatsApp 

Crl.  Misc.  No.60/B/2020 

2 

profiles  and  as  such  outraged 

the  modesty  of 

complainant. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for the  petitioner  contends  that 

investigation  has  been  completed 

in  this  case  and 

petitioner 

is  no  more  required  for  the  purpose  of 

investigation;  that  offence  with  which  petitioner  has 

been charged  does not fall within  the  prohibitory  clause 

of Section 497 Cr.P.C. and  as  such  petitioner  is entitled 

for concession of post-arrest  bail as matter  of right. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  AAG  as  well  as  learned 

counsel for the complainant  contends  that petitioner  is a 

highly  educated  person  having  computer  background 

has  disseminated  and  transferred  private  sexual  explicit 

pictures  of his  ex-wife Faiza  Anwar  to  different  family 

members  and  blackmailed  the  complainant  and  as such 

the  offence  with  which  petitioner  has  been  charged  is 

against  entire  society;  that  challan  has  been  prepared 

and  same  has  been  transmitted  to  concerned  quarters 

for onward  submission  in the Court. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard,  record  perused. 

Tentative  assessment  of  record  reveals  that 

complainant/respondent  No.2  is  ex-wife  of  petitioner, 

who  got  lodged  the  instant  criminal  case  with  the 

allegations 

that  petitioner  has  disseminated 

and 

transmitted  personal/ private  sexually  explicit  pictures 

through  WhatsApp  profile developed  by him  on mobile 

No.+44757279953 for  the  purpose  of  blackmailing  and 

harassment  and  as such outraged  her modesty. 

Crl.  Misc.  No.60/B/2020 

3 

7. 

The record  reflects that  petitioner  was  found  in 

possession  of mobile which  was  confiscated  during  the 

course  of investigation,  however,  the  same  contains  the 

sexually explicit images of the  complainant  and  as such 

petitioner 

is  connected  with  the  hideous  crime  of 

exploiting  her  ex-wife  by  dissemination  of  explicit 

pictures.  The  forensic  report  prima-facie  confirms  the 

allegation  of  the  complainant  as  number  from  which 

those  pictures  were  transmitted  to  the  family  members 

of  complainant  belongs  to  the  petitioner.  FIA  has 

confirmed 

that 

IP  address  of  said  number  was 

registered  on  Haier  Colleges  of  Technologies,  Dubai, 

whereby  petitioner  has  served  on  the  said  address  for 

the  last  few  months,  therefore,  no  other  view  could  be 

taken  except  that  digital  forensic  report  has  confirmed 

the  allegation  at  this  stage.  Respondent/  complainant 

has  already  obtained  the  decree  for  dissolution  of 

marriage  and  has  no  relationship  with  the  accused/ 

petitioner.  The petitioner  is highly  educated  person  who 

is  presently  Assistant  Professor  at  NUST  University 

having  extra  ordinary  experience 

in 

the  field  of 

computer  and other similar background. 

8. 

The  background  of  this  case  clearly  spells  out 

that  pictures  which  have  been  transmitted 

through 

information  system  was  disseminated 

to  harm  the 

reputation  and  privacy  of  respondent  No.2  rather 

intends  to  take revenge  and  blackmail  although  offence 

U/S  20,  21  &  24  of  PECA  provides  the  maximum 

Crl.  Misc.  No.60/B/2020 

4 

sentence  for 03 years with  fine and  as such  these  offence 

do  not  fall  within  prohibitory  clause  of  Section  497 

Cr.P.C. However,  at  this  stage  the  conduct  of petitioner 

does  not  entitle  him  for  grant  of  post-arrest  bail  as  the 

accused  is prima-facie  involved  in  case  of  dissemination 

of explicit photographs  of his ex-wife to dishonor  her  in 

the  public and  to take revenge,  such conduct  amounts  to 

humiliate  the complainant  online  which  has  detrimental 

effect  upon  the  entire  life  of  complainant 

rather  it 

amounts  to a social stigma.  Reliance is placed  upon 2018 

YLR 329 (Farhan Kamrani  VS  State). 

9. 

In  view  of  above,  this  Court  is  not  inclined  to 

grant  post-arrest  bail.  Challan  has  already  been 

processed 

for  submission  before 

the 

trial  Court, 

therefore,  instant  post-arrest  bail  application  is  hereby 

dismissed.  However,  while  relying  upon  2011  SCMR 

1332 (Rehmat  Ullah  VS  The State),  learned  trial  Court 

seized  with  the  matter  is  directed  to  conclude  the  trial 

within  period  of six (06)  months  under  intimation  to this 

Court. 

Zilhid 

(MOHSIN  ~KHTAR  KA/'I ANI) 
JUDGE 

