ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  151.AMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  151.AMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

·w.P  No. I 7 I 8 of  2020" 

Jehad Ali 

~ 

The Chairman  Arbitrary  Council,  Islamabad. 

Petitioner  By: 
Respondent  No.1  By: 
Respondent  No.3  By: 

Mr.  Ahmed  Ejaz  Yousaf,  Advocate. 
Mr.Abid  Hussain  Chaudhry,  Advocate. 
Mr.Zahid  Ali  Khan, Advocate. 

Date  of hearing: 

20.07.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambranl,  J:  Through this petition under 

Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 

1973, the  petitioner  has  invoked the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  with 

the following prayer;- 

"It  is  therefore,  most  respectfully  prayed  that  this 
Honorable  Court may  very  graciously be  pleased  to  set  
aside  Order  dated  29.04.2020,  and  declare  that  all 
proceedings  before  the  respondent  No.1 and 3  as  without 
jurisdiction/  lawful authority, and of no legal consequence. 
Any  other  relief to  which  the  petitioner  may  be found 
entitled  to  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case  may  also  be 
awarded." 

2. 

Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner got  married with 

respondent  No.3  in  the  year  2014  at  Mardan  and  out  of  the  said 

wedlock,  two  daughters  were  born.  On  10.06.2018,  parents  of 

respondent  No.3  took  her  alongwith  minor  daughters  with  them 

amicably, but thereafter, in-spite of the best efforts of the petitioner, 

she  did  not  return.  The  petitioner  submitted  an  application  before 

the  concerned  Arbitration  Council  for  grant  of  permission  for 

contracting  second  marriage,  which  was  accepted  and 

the 

petitioner entered into second marriage.  Respondent No.3 not only 

filed  a  suit  against  the  petitioner  at  Family  Court,  Islamabad,  for 

grant  of  maintenance,  dissolution of marriage but she also filed  an 

application  against  the  petitioner  to  respondent  No.1  (Chairman 

2 

"W.P  No.171812020" 

Arbitration  Council,  Islamabad) for  initiating of  proceedings against 

the  petitioner  on  contracting  second  marriage  without  her 

permission.  In  response to said application, the petitioner appeared 

before respondent No.1  and filed reply with the prayer for dismissal 

of the  application  filed  by the  respondent  No.3 on  the  ground that 

respondent  No.1  has  no  jurisdiction  in  the  matter;  and  also  that 

neither  the  petitioner  has  committed  any  offence  within  his 

jurisdiction  nor  he  is  resident of  Islamabad.  It  was  also  stated that 

he  had  obtained  permission  from  the  Chairman/  Nazim  of  the 

cornered union council for contracting second marriage. Thereafter, 

due to  pandemic  and  lockdown in  the  country,  the  petitioner could 

not appear  before  respondent No.1  and after  relaxation in  the  lock 

down  by  the  government,  the  petitioner  approached  the  office  of 

respondent  No.1  where  it  was  informed  that  the  matter  has  been 

decided  against  him  due  to  his  non-appearance  vide  order  dated 

29.04.2020  and the  case  has been referred to the  learned Judicial 

Magistrate,  Islamabad  for  further  proceedings  hence,  the  instant 

petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submits  that  impugned 

order is violative of the principle of natural justice; that he same has 

been  passed  in  absence  of  the  petitioner;  that  respondent  No.1 

should  have  adjourned  the  case  due  to  prevailing  pandemic 

condition  in  the  country; that the  impugned order  is  a  nonspeaking 

one and no ground is  mentioned in  the impugned order for initiation 

of criminal  proceeding against the  petitioner; that the petitioner has 

been  deprived  of  his  fundamental  right  of  fair  hearing;  therefore, 

the same is  liable to be set-aside. 

4. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3 

submitted  that  the  petitioner  has  filed  a  fake  document;  that  the 

petitioner  failed  to  appear  before  respondent  No.1 

in-spite  of 

repeated opportunities and prayed for dismissal of instant petition. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of the  record  reveals that  the  respondent  No.3 filed 

an application  before the  Chairman Arbitration  Council,  Islamabad, 

3 

"W.P  No.171812020" 

under Section 7  (2) of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance,  1961  for 

award  of  punishment  for  contracting  second  marriage  by  the 

petitioner  without  her  permission.  The  petitioner  appeared  before 

respondent  No.1  by  submitting  a  petition  for  dismissal  of  the  said 

application for want of jurisdiction with the averments that  marriage 

between  the  petitioner  and  respondent  No.3  was  solemnized  at 

Mardan  on  29.11.2014.  Record  further  reveals  that  the  petitioner 

contracted  second  marriage  on  25.6.2018  at  Mardan  after 

obtaining  necessary  permission from  the  Chairman/  Nazim  of  the 

concerned  Union Council, which was granted to him vide certificate 

dated  13.06.2018. The  same  is  available  on the  file  at  page 20  of 

this petition. 

7. 

The record further shows that the petitioner could not appear 

before  respondent  No.1  due to  the  prevailing  pandemic  condition 

and  lockdown  in  the  country which  was  beyond his control  but the 

impugned  order  has  been  passed  against  the  petitioner  without 

providing  proper  opportunity  of  hearing,  the  same  is  against  the 

principle  of  natural justice.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  upon 

the judgment  report as "Messrs DEWAN  SALMAN FIBER Ltd.  and 

others  VS Government  of  N. WF.P.. 

through  Secretarv. 

Revenue Department.  Peshawar and others" (PLO  2004  SC 411 ). 

In  the case reported as  "Muhammad  Rafique  VS University  Of 

The Punjab  through  Registrar  and  others."  (2020  YLR  42),  it  has 

been held as under:- 

to  advance  his  defence,  which  amounts 

"It is also not  discernible from  the  impugned  orders  that 
petitioner  was  afforded  reasonable  opportunity  of 
hearing 
to 
violation  of  well-enshrined  and  celebrated  principle  of 
audi  alteram  partem  i.e.  no  one  should  be  condemned 
unheard.  Said  principle  is  applicable  to  judicial,  quasi  
judicial  and  non-judicial proceedings.  No order  affecting 
the  right  of  a  party  could  be  passed  without  affording 
opportunity  of hearing.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  Naeem 
Abbas  v.  Government  of Punjab  through  Secretary  and 4 
others  {2017 PLC (C.S.) 404]" 

In  the  case  reported  as "Engineers  Study Forum  (Registered) and 

another  VSFederation  Of  Pakistan  and  others"  (2016  SCMR 

1961) it has been held as under:- 

4 

"W.P  No.171812020" 

to  keep 

"It is  true  that  while  hearing  a  case  before  it,  the  Court 
has 
into  consideration  well  enshrined  and 
celebrated  principle  of  Audi  Alteram  Partem  (no  man 
should  be  condemned  unheard)  and  the  Court  was  well 
informed  of this  principle  while  hearing  a  matter  before 
it. II 

8. 

In  view  of what  has  been discussed  above,  this  writ  petition 

is  accepted. 

Impugned  order  dated  29.04.2020  passed  by 

respondent  No.1 

is  set-aside.  The  application 

filed  by  the 

respondent No.3 shall be deemed to be pending before respondent 

No.1. Parties are directed to appear before the respondent No.1  on 

06.08.2020,  who is  directed to decide the application of respondent 

No.3,  keeping  in  view  all  the  relevant  documents  and  point  of 

jurisdiction,  strictly  in  accordance  with  law  after  providing  proper 

opportunity  of hearing to  both the parties preferably within a  period 

of one month after a  receipt of certified copy of this judgment. 

"{Ghulam Azam  a,mJ'rani) 

Judge  V 

Announced  in  open Court on this 24th day of July, 2020. /'\ 

.µ VW\. ."M!fgt: 
v ... 

