Form  No:  HOD/C-121 
JUDGMENT  SHEET. 

IN  THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT. 
ISLAMABAD. 

Writ Petition No.4513 of 2019 

Syed Waseem Abbas. 

VS

Additional District Judge (East), Islamabad and 02 others. 

Petitioner By 

Malik Muhammad Ashfaq, Advocate. 

Respondent By 

Raja  Mazhar Ali, Advocate. 

Date of  Decision 

02.07.2020. 

***** 

AAMER FAROOQ. J.  -  Through  the  instant  petition,  the  petitioner 

has  challenged  judgment  dated  26.10.2019,  whereby  the  appeal  filed  by 

respondents No.2  and  3  was  allowed  and  the  guardianship  application  filed  by 

the  petitioner  under Section 25 of the Guardian and Wards Act was dismissed. 

2. 

The  facts,  in  brief,  are that  the  petitioner  filed  an  application  under 

Section 25  of  the  Guardian and Wards Act for  custody of  respondent No.3. The 

referred  respondent is  the  minor  daughter  born out  of  wedlock of  the  petitioner 

and respondent No.2.  Due to  strained relations,  respondent  No.2 left  the  house 

of  the  petitioner  and  ultimately  the  marriage  ended  in  divorce  in  2017. 

Respondents No.2  and  3  also filed  proceedings for  maintenance of  respondent 

No.3.  Both  the  matters  were  consolidated and  the  learned  Family Court,  vide 

consolidated judgment  dated  01.10.2019  allowed the  petition  for  guardianship, 

-2- 

Writ Petition No.4513of2019 

filed  by  the  petitioner,  by  granting  custody of  respondent  No.3  to  her  paternal 

grandmother.  The  suit  for  maintenance was also  allowed and  in  this  behalf sum 

of  Rs.5,000/- per month  was awarded as  maintenance. Appeal was  preferred by 

respondents No.2  and  3  before  respondent  No.1, which  was  allowed,  as  noted 

above. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  inter-alia,  contended  that  since 

respondent No.2 is  a  woman of  promiscuous character,  hence it  is  inappropriate 

that  the  petitioner's  minor  daughter  should  remain  with  her.  It  was  further 

contended  that  respondent  No.2  has  no  independent  means  to  bring  up 

respondent No.3; that  it  is  appropriate that  respondent  No.3  should be  brought 

up  in  a  congenial  environment  by  her  paternal  grandmother.  Learned counsel 

took  the  Court  through  the  evidence to  substantiate  his  plea  that  respondent 

No.2  is  not entitled  to  retain the custody of respondent No.3. 

4. 

Learned counsel for  respondents  No.2  and  3,  inter-alia,  contended 

that  there  is  nothing  on  record about  the  character  of  respondent  No.2; that  a 

bald  allegation  was  leveled  upon  the  character  of  respondent  No.2,  which  is 

neither  here  nor  there.  It  was  further  contended  that  since  birth,  respondent 

No.3  is  in  custody  of  respondent  No.2  and  is  of  tendered  age  i.e.  about  four 

years,  hence it  is  appropriate  that  she  should  remain  with  her  mother.  It  was 

further  contended that  despite judgment  by the  Family Court the  petitioner is  not 

depositing maintenance amount. 

5. 

Arguments  advanced  by  learned counsel for  the  parties  have  been 

heard and the documents placed  on record examined with  their  able assistance. 

6. 

The  controversy  leading  to  filing  of  the  present  petition  has  been 

mentioned hereinabove therefore  need  not be  reproduced. 

-3- 

Writ Petition No.4513of2019 

7. 

The thrust  of the arguments by the  learned counsel for the  petitioner 

was that  the  character  of  respondent  No.2  is  not  above  board.  In  this  behalf, 

attention  was drawn towards  affidavit  filed  by the  petitioner.  The  bare perusal of 

the  affidavit,  which was exhibited  in  evidence as  Ex-A/l  shows that  in  paragraph 

5  it  has  been mentioned that  the  character of  respondent  No.2 is  not good and 

in  paragraph  6  he  has  alleged  that  a  person  with  whom  respondent  No.2  is 

having an  affair  namely Ahmad shot  him,  however,  during  the  course of  cross- 

examination nothing to  the  effect was substantiated;  rather  in  cross-examination 

petitioner  admitted  that  due  to  strained  relations  respondent  No.2 went  to  her 

Khalas's house where  he was shot,  nothing was  mentioned about  Ahmad or the 

nature  of  relationship  between  respondent  No.2  and  him.  Moreover,  no 

independent evidence was produced regarding the  character of  respondent No.2 

to  substantiate  the  plea.  In  the  referred  background  the  plea  raised  by  the 

petitioner  remains  unsubstantiated  and  is  nothing  but  a  mere  allegation. 

Respondent No.1  while  dealing  with  the  matter  has  rightly  observed  that  the 

petitioner  has not  produced any evidence or  placed on  record anything  to  prove 

bad  character of  respondent No.2. The impugned judgment  does not suffer from 

any misreading or  non-reading of  evidence or any illegality  or jurisdictional  error 

calling for  interference. 

8. 

For what  has been stated above, the  instant  petition  is  without  merit 

and is accordingly dismissed. 

(AAMER  FAROOQ) 
JUDGE 

*M. Zaheer  Janjua 

