ORDER SHEET
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

W.P  No.498  of 2020 

Shahid  Mehmood 
VS
National Police Foundation, etc 

Petitioner  by: 
Respondent No.1 by: 
Respondent No.2 by: 

Mr.  Nadir Ali Siddiqui, Advocate. 
Mr.  Babar Saeed Butt, Advocate, 
Mr.  Umer Ali Khan, Law Officer,  NADRA. 

Date of Hearing: 

05.08.2020 

Ghulam  Azam  Qambrani, J:  Through  this  petition,  the 

petitioner,  Shahid  Mehmood, has  invoked the jurisdiction  of this  Court 

filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan, 1973 with the following prayer;- 

"It is humbly prayed that  petition  may graciously be allowed 
and  following 
the 
petitioner. 

reliefs  may  kindly  be  provided 

to 

1.  By an appropriate  Writ  the respondent No.1 be 
directed  not  to  recover charges/amount  from 
the  petitioner  on  account  of  solid  reasons 
given above. 

2.  Direction may also be issued to the respondent 
No.2 to unblock the CNIC of the petitioner. 

Any other  relief may also be awarded to the petitioner  in the 
best interest of justice." 

2. 

Briefly  stated  facts  of  the  case  are that  the  petitioner  is  serving 

as  Manager  IP  System  Deployment  in  Pakistan  Telecommunication 

Company  Limited  since  2007.  Respondent  No.1 

(National  Police 

Foundation) issued  notice to the petitioner to deposit additional cost of 

land  amounting  to  Rs.265,900/-  against  the  residential  Plot  No.203, 

under  Membership  No.3090,  measuring  35x65  situated  in  National 

Police Foundation E-11, Islamabad, in  line with the decision of Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan.  The  said  plot  was  allotted  by  the 

respondent  No.1  to  the  petitioner  on  account  of  benami  transaction. 

The  total  payment  of  the  said  plot  was  paid  by  the  deceased  father 

2 

W.f  No.498 of 2020 

Muhammad  Alamgir  s/o  Fazal  Din  who  was  a  police  official  in  KPK. 

Later on, the  deceased father  asked the  petitioner to  get the  said  plot 

transferred  in  the  name  of  elder  brother  namely  Mr.Khalid  Mahmood 

s/o  Muhammad  Alamgir  which  was  done  on  21.11.1998.  The  elder 

brother of the  petitioner further sold out the said plot to Mr.  Azhar Jamil 

S/o  Fazal  Ahmad  and  Mr.  Tahir  ljaz  S/o  ljaz  Rasool  jointly  on 

17.02.2004  and  lastly,  it  was  again  sold  to  Mrs.Talat  Najeeb  who  is 

owner  in  possession  of  a  constructed  house  on  the  said  plot.  The 

petitioner  time  and  again  requested  the  respondent  No.1  being  a 

college  student  and  having  no  source  of  income  to  waive  him  from 

additional  charges  on  the  basis  of  non-beneficiary.  It  was  also 

transpired 

that 

respondent  No.1-authority  always  demands  and 

receives  an  undertaking  from  every  transferee  at  the  time  of  transfer 

that  he/she  shall  be  held responsible for  any amount  due  presently or 

in  future.  At  the  end  of  July  2019,  it  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the 

petitioner that  his CNIC was  blocked by respondent No.2 and when he 

visited its office, he was informed that blockage of CNIC was done due 

to default  and after the visit of office of respondent  No.1  and  inspite of 

repeated  requests,  it was  again  asked  him through  demand  notice to 

deposit  the  outstanding  amount.  The  demand  notice  of  additional 

charges  was  issued  after  approximately  25  years,  which  is  illegal, 

unreasonable as well as unlawful,  hence this petition. 

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contended  that  the  allotment 

of plot was made on the basis of benami transaction; that the petitioner 

was not beneficiary of the plot; that the claim can only be made against 

the  last  possessor.  Learned counsel for  the  petitioner  next contended 

that the blocking of CNIC for recovery of amount is  against the law and 

justice.  Lastly, prayed for acceptance of writ petition. 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  opposed  the 

contention  of  learned counsel for the  petitioner and contended that  no 

new  payment  has  been  demanded;  that  the  father  of  petitioner  was 

never  allotted  the  plot  and  illegal  allotment  was  made  in  the  name of 

the  petitioner;  that  by  the  order  of  District  &  Sessions  Judge, 

Islamabad, CNIC of the  petitioner has been blocked and that  notice of 

3 

W.P No.498 of 2020 

recovery  was  also  not  challenged.  Further  contended  that  order  of 

learned District & Sessions Judge has also not been challenged by the 

petitioner.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  finally  prayed  for 

dismissal  of  writ  petition.  Learned  Law  Officer  of 

respondent  No.2 

submitted  that  the  CN IC  of  the  petitioner  has  been  blocked  in 

compliance  of  an  order  passed by  learned  District &  Sessions Judge  

West,  Islamabad,  and  if  the  petitioner  clears  the  outstanding  dues 

against him, his CNIC shall be restored. 

5. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 

and have perused the material available on record. 

6. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  National  Police  Foundation, 

which  is  a  charitable  organization, was  established  on  18.03.1975 for 

the welfare  of police employees. National Police Foundation developed 

a  Housing  Scheme  in  Sector  E-11,  Islamabad,  known  as  "National 

Police  Foundation  Housing  Scheme,  Sector  E-11, 

Islamabad" 

(hereinafter  be  called  as  "NPFHS").  The  petitioner  applied  for  the 

membership  of  the  said  scheme  in  10-Marlas  category  plot,  he  was 

allocated  Membership  No.3090  on  04.07 .1998  and  was  allotted  Plot 

No.203  (Corner),  measuring  250  Sq.  Yds./10-Marlas.  The  petitioner 

paid an amount of Rs.6,00,350/-. 

7. 

The Apex  Court of the country  in  its judgment  dated  17.06.2015 

passed 

in  Civil  Review  Petitions  against 

the 

judgment  dated 

31.10.2013  passed  in  SMC  No.11/2011  directed  that  the  Civilians, 

Bureaucrats,  Army  Personnel  etc  were  not  at  all  entitled  for  the 

allotment  of  plots  in  the  NPFHS  and  cancelled  their  allotments.  The 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  titled  as  "Anjum  Agee/ 

Khan and others  VSNational Police Foundation through M.D. and 

others" (2015 SCMR 1348) has held as under:- 

"13. 
There are three  categories of persons  in this case. 
First,  where  the  persons  were  allotted  only one  plot.  There 
are further  two sub  categories  in  the first  category.  In first 
type  police officers/officials or employees  of the  Foundation 
have  been  allotted  only one  plot  each  and  in  second  type, 
civilians,  bureaucrats,  army  personnels  etc.  have  been 
allotted  only one plot  each. Second, where the persons  were 

4 

W.P No.498 of 2020 

allotted  more  than  one  plot  either  in  their names  or in  the 
names  of  their family  members.  Third,  where  the  persons 
have purchased plots from  the original allottees  (subsequent 
allottees). 

14. So far  as the second  category is  concerned, for  what  has 
been  discussed  above,  more  than  one  plot  allotted  to  any 
person  and  his  family  members  shall  stand  cancelled. 
However, if they  want  to retain  the  plots,  they  can pay  the 
market  price of the  plots,  which shall be  determined  by  the 
Commission, detail of which is given in  the last paragraph of 
this judgment. 

15. So far  as first sub-category  in  the first  category i.e.  police 
officers  and  employees  of  Foundation  who  have  been 
allotted  only  one  plot  is  concerned,  we  are  persuaded  to 
hold  that  they  can  keep  the  plots.  Though  we  have  found 
several illegalities in  the process of allotment  of plots  but  in 
the  interest  of justice,  we  are  not  going  to  cancel  their 
allotment.  There is  some  justification for allotment  of plots 
to them. 

16. So far  as  second  sub-category  in  the  first  category  i.e. 
civilians,  bureaucrats,  army  personnels  etc.  is  concerned, 
they  were not at all entitled for  the allotment  of plots.  Hence 
their allotment  is  cancelled. However, if they  want  to retain 
the plots,  they can pay  the market  price thereof,  which shall 
be  determined  by the  Commission. The other person(s)  who 
had been  allotted  only one plot and subsequently  they  have 
transferred  it in  the  name  of their family  members  also fall 
in  this category. 

17. However, so far  as the subsequent  purchasers/bona  fide 
purchasers are concerned, it would be harsh if their plots are 
cancelled. Many of them  have  built houses.  After  a passage 
of more  than  10 years,  depriving them  of the  plots  and  the 
houses  constructed  thereon  will  be  a  grave  miscarriage of 
justice.  They have  acted  in  good faith  and  they  are  lawful 
owners  in  possession  of the  plots  and  the  market  value  of 
the  property  at  present  has  reached  a  stage  mainly  on 
account  of the development  and construction by them.  They 
have  purchased  the  plots  from  the  original allottees  after 
having  undergone  a  thorough  process  of  due  verification 
and  paid  the  market  price  prevailing  at  that  time.  If  the 
original allottees  had not  turned  up or had not fulfilled  their 
obligations,  the  bona fide  purchasers  cannot  be  attributed 
any ma/a fide.  If at all,  any amount  is to be paid, that should 
be paid by the original allottees,  who are established  to have 
gained  unlawfully  or  who  are  the  beneficiaries  of  undue 
enrichment." 

5 

W.P No.498 of 2020 

As  per  the  above  verdict,  it  was  held  that  if  they  want  to  retain  the 

plots,  they  can  pay  the  market  price  of  the  said  plot,  which  shall 

determined  by the  commission,  which  was  constituted  by the  Hon'ble 

Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan.  The  said  commission  was  headed  by 

Mr.Justice  Moulvi  Anwar-ul-Haq,  Honourable  former  Judge  of  the 

Lahore High Court,  Lahore. The said commission  submitted  his report 

before the  Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan and as per report of the 

commission,  the  petitioner  has  paid  an  amount  of  Rs.6,00,350/-, 

whereas  the  revised  price of  the  said  plot was  fixed  at  Rs.8,66,250/-, 

as  such,  the  petitioner  was  held  responsible  to  pay  an  amount  of 

Rs.2,65,900/-.  Record further  reveals that  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

overruled  the  objections  raised  against the  report  of  the  Commission, 

vide order  dated 01.08.2018. The report of the Commission was  made 

part  of  the  order  of  the  Court  and  directed  the  learned  District  & 

Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad, to  act  as  an  Executing  Court,  to  ensure 

implementation  of  the  report. 

In  compliance  of  the  said  order, 

petitioner  was  issued  notices  on  14.12.2018  and  30.12.2019  with  a 

direction to deposit an amount of Rs.2,65,900/-, but the petitioner failed 

to  deposit  the  said  amount.  Thereafter,  the  petitioner  was  issued 

demand  notice  dated  07.12.2017  with  the  direction  to  pay  additional 

amount of  Rs.2,65,900/- in  respect of plot No. 203,  under membership 

No.  3090,  measuring  35x65,  situated  in  National  Police  Foundation 

Housing Scheme  E-11,  Islamabad, within  fifteen  days  of the  issuance 

of the notice. 

8. 

Record  further  reveals  that  the  learned  District  &  Sessions 

Judge-West,  Islamabad, vide letter dated 23.11.2019 addressed to the 

Chairman,  National  Database  and  Registration  Authority  (NADRA) 

issued  a  direction  to  forthwith  block  the  CNICs  of  201  defaulter 

allottees  of  National  Police  Foundation  Housing  Scheme  who  have 

failed to clear their respective outstanding dues, despite direction of the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court of  Pakistan and  notices issued  by the  learned 

District &  Sessions  Judge. Vide  said  letter,  it was  further  directed that 

subject  to  clearance  of  the  outstanding  dues,  the  CNICs  shall  be 

restored.  The  stance  of  the  petitioner  that  said  plot  was  allotted  by 

.  _, 

6 

W.P No.498 of 2020 

respondent No.1  to the petitioner on account of benami transaction and 

the  total  payment  of  the  said  plot  was  paid  by  his  father  namely 

Muhammad  Alimgir  is  not  believable,  as  according  to  annexure  'R/1 ', 

the  petitioner  himself  applied  for  membership  in  National  Police 

Foundation in  his private capacity, whereby  he undertook that  he shall 

abide  by  all  instructions,  bye-laws  and  building  regulations  of  the 

foundation/CDA  amended  from  time  to  time.  Thereafter,  he  was 

allotted  plot  No. 203  (Corner) measuring 250  Square Yards/10-Marlas 

in  NPFHS under membership No.3090. 

As  per order of the  Hon'ble 

Supreme Court of Pakistan dated 08.11.2017, it was held as under:- 

that 

"Syed  Zahid  Hussain  Bokhari learned  ASC for  the  Society 
the  Police 
(National  Police  Foundation)  states 
Foundation shall  take  steps  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Report  of the  Commission and  in  this  regard  will notice  of 
demand  to  each of the  allotee  of the  plot  or its subsequent 
purchaser.  He further  states  that  the  allottee  of the  plot  or 
its  subsequent  purchaser  will also  be  informed  about  the 
Commission Report and will be asked that  if such person has 
any  objection  to  the  Commission Report,  the  same  be filed 
before  this  Court.  The  National  Police  Foundation  shall 
undertake  this exercise and complete  the process preferably 
within a period of two months." 

9. 

Through  the  impugned  notice  dated  07.12.2017,  petitioner was 

directed to  pay the  additional  amount  of  Rs.  2,65,900/-  with  regard to 

the  above  said  plot,  but  he failed.  If the  petitioner  has  any  grievance, 

he may approach the  Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, for redressal 

of his grievance. 

10. 

In  view  of the  above, this writ  petition  having  no force  is  hereby 

dismissed. 

-enmsm  Azam Q~rani 

Judge 

Announced  in Open Court, on this 7th day of August, 2020. 

S.Akhtar 

