ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT
ISLAMABAD

Crl.Misc.No.806-B  12019

Ali Haider
VS
The  State etc.

S.No. of order/
Proceeding

Date  of
hearing
3t.12.2019. Ch.M.Abdul Latif Gujjar  & Mr.Ali Hussain  Bhatti,  Advocates  for

Order  with  signature  of Judge,  and  that  of parties  or counsel,
where  necessary.

Petitioner.
Barrister Ayesha  Siddique  Khan, State Counsel.
Mr.Khalid  Inspector,  Mr.Mumtaz S.I and  Safdar Hussain, ASI.

Through this Criminal Miscellaneous  application,  the

Petitioner  has prayed for his post  arrest  bail in Case  FIR  No.435

dated 03.09.2019 under Section  365-8  PPC  registered at Police

Station  Golra Shariq  Islamabad.

2. 

The brief facts as referred  in this case registered on the

complaint  of respondent  No.2/Amna  Bibi are that her daughter

namely  Nadia aged about l7l18 years  had gone  to her daily routine

work on 02.09.2019 and when  she did not come back, she received

a telephone call from two unknown  numbers, who  extended  life

threats and it has been alleged that her daughter  has been

kidnapped  for the purpose of committingZina.

3. 

Learned counsel  for the petitioner contends  that petitioner

is innocent  and  has falsely  been  implicated  in this case; that as per

medical  evidence  no mark of violence  has been observed  by the

doctor  on the body  of the alleged abductee  and even  no rape  has

been committed  with the alleged  abductee;  that  sixteen  (16)  cases

of different  nature have  been registered  against the family of

complainant  which  shows  their state of mind to involve the

petitioner  without  any basis; that the doctor has neither taken into

possession  the last worn  clothes  of the victim  nor there is any

chemical examiner report,  through  which it could be verified that

rape has been committed with the alleged  abductee; that DNA test

-2-

Crl. Misc. No. E0 6 B/2 0 I 9.

report has  been  received  which is negative; that  statement u/s 164

Cr.P.C  recorded by the Judicial Magistrate has to be appreciated at

the time of trial as such there  is no corroborative  evidence to link

the petitioner with the crime.

4. 

Conversely learned State Counsel contends  that  petitioner

has been nominated in the instant case with specific role of

commission  of Zina with the alleged abductee and as such the

petitioner  is not entitled for concession of bail.

5. 

6. 

Arguments  heard.  Record perused.

Perusal  of record reveals  that petitioner  has been nominated

as accused  in case FIR No.435  dated 03.09.2019 under section

365-8  PPC  PS Golra  Sharif, Islamabad  and  petitioner  has been

involved  in this case through  supplementary statement  of alleged

abductee  Nadia Bibi who has been  allegedly abducted  and  raped

by the petitioner and other co-accused  persons.  The tentative

assessment of the record reveals that respondent No.2/complainant

Iodged the FIR with the allegation  that her daughter Nadia Bibi

aged about  17ll8  years was  got missing  on 02.09.2019,  when she

went to her daily routine work. The alleged  abductee  was

recovered on 06.09.2019, who reached at Police Station and

recorded  her statement in which she did not nominate  any

individual except  four unknown persons, who have allegedly

committed Zina with her.

7.  This is the second post arrest bail application  of the

petitioner as earlier  post arrest  bail application  was dismissed  by

this Court on merit  vide order  dated 21.10.2019.  Although  the new

ground  raised  by the petitioner is the negative  result  of DNA  which

was  not available at the time of filing of previous post arrest bail

application of the petitioner. There is no denial  on record that DNA

G

-J-

C rl. Misc.  No. I 0 G B/2 0 I 9.

test report is negative  and  as such at this stage it is diffrcult  to

ascertain as per the said report that petitioner is involved  in the

heinous crime of abduction  and he has committed  rape with the

alleged victim  or not.  However, the conduct of the I.O as well as

doctor was recorded by this Court  in the previous order which

reproduced hereunder for reference.

The  statement  of alleged  abductee  reveals  the role of

the present petitioner as well  as others,  even she has

stated in categorical  terms that the LO took her to the
marlcet and got new clothes  for her, which  were
changed  in the car of the police inspector  and stained
clothes  were removed. This Court called  SP

Investigation  as well  as concerned doctor alongwith

I.O, which further  substantiate  that lqbal Gujjar, S.l
has not investigated  the matter  in proper manner,  even

he retained the alleged  abductee with  some  lady for two
days,  thereafier  the alleged abductee  has been

produced  in Police  Station and later  on in the hospital

for medical,  even  the doctor  Nasreen  Butt did not take
notice of clothes  of the alleged abductee neither  she

asked about the clothes for the purpose ofevidence  and
as such the LO and  one  of the alleged S.I have misused

their  authority,  which is apparent on record.

8. 

The above referred  position available on record clearly

reflects the inefficiency on the part of Iqbal Gujjar, S.I as well

as Dr.Nasreen  Butt due to which DNA  sampling  was not taken

at the earliest  stage..  Even  the clothes  which were worn  by the

victim at the time of occurrence  were not available. Even

otherwise DNA report is a corroborative piece of evidence

which  could not replace  direct evidence and in these peculiar

circumstances  referred  above, any benefit to the petitioner

cannot  be granted, especially  when the statement  u/s 164

-4-

Crl.  M is c. No. E 0 6 B/2 0 1 9.

Cr.P.C  recorded  by the petitioner  before  the Magistrate clearly

spells out the abduction  and gang  rape by the petitioner  and his

co-accused. In such circumstances,  tentative assessment  of

record  primafacie  connects the petitioner  with the crime which

otherwise  falls within  the ambit of prohibitory  clause  of

Section 497 Cr.P.C,  therefore,  instant post arrest  bail

application  is not made out on merit  and  same is hereby

dismissed.

9. 

The leamed  trial Court  is directed to conclude  the trial

of this case  within a period of six months  and SP Investigation

shall ensure  the completion  of investigation  qua  the other co-

accused.

M.S..ZAKI.

(MOHSTN AKHTAR

JUDGE

