ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 

W.P. No. 3468 of 2020 

Sohail Safdar 
VS 
Abeer Iftikhar, etc. 

S. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings  

Date of order/ 
proceedings  

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel where necessary. 

13.03.2023.  Mr Azhar Yousaf Advocate for the Petitioner.  

Syed Gohar Ali Zaidi Advocate for the Respondents 
No. 1 and 2.  

1. 

 The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has 

apprised  this  Court  regarding  case  history  of  the  instant 

matter whereby Respondent No. 1 filed a suit for recovery of 

maintenance  allowance  claiming  Rs.15,000/  for  herself  and 

Rs.15,000/-  for  the  Respondent  No.  2  as  well  as  her  dower 

amount of Rs.500,000/-. The learned Family Court dismissed 

the suit to the extent of dower by holding that admittedly the 

Respondent  No.  1  had  relinquished  her  entitlement  to  the 

dower amount as per an affidavit. It also dismissed the claim 

of  maintenance  allowance  for  the  minor  in  view  of  the  fact 

that the minor is admittedly not the real son of the Petitioner 

and  also  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  minor  is  receiving 

maintenance allowance from his biological father. However, 

the suit was allowed to the extent of maintenance allowance 

of  Rs.15,000/-  to  the  Respondent    No.  1  from  the  date  of 

marriage  till  the  date  of  divorce.  Both  the  parties  filed 

appeals. The Petitioner’s appeal to the extent of maintenance 

allowance  of  Rs.15,000/-  granted  to  the  Respondent  No.  1 

was dismissed. Whereas, the appeal filed by the Respondent 

No.  1  to  the  extent  of  claim  of  maintenance  of  the 

Respondent  No.  2  as  well  as  dower  was  allowed  on  the 

ground  that  the  Petitioner  had  knowingly  agreed  by  way  of 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Page - 2 
W.P. No.3468/2020. 

Nikah Nama to provide maintenance to the Respondent No. 2 

and  that  the  affidavit  of  relinquishment  of  dower  did  not 

inspire  confidence  and  as  such  is  not  believable  in  the 

circumstances of the case.  

2. 

The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  submits  that 

such findings of the learned Appellate Court are perverse to 

the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  as  the  affidavit  of 

relinquishment  has  never  been  denied  by  the  Respondent  

No.  1,  which  is  also  evident  from  the  fact  the  Respondent 

No.  1  filed  a  suit  for  cancellation  of  the  affidavit  which, 

however,  was  dismissed  for  lack  of  evidence.  He  further 

highlights  that  the  affidavit  was  executed  soon  after  the 

marriage when the relations between the parties were cordial 

and as such there is no reason to doubt that the affidavit was 

executed by the Respondent  No. 1 of her  own  free  will.  He 

submitted that  it  is  also  noteworthy  that the  claim  of dower 

was filed only after divorce and never during the subsistence 

of  the  marriage  even  though  she  could  have  in  case  the 

relinquishment was not of her own free will. With regard to 

the maintenance  of the  minor/Respondent  No.  2 the learned 

counsel has drawn attention of this Court to the suit filed by 

the  Respondent  No.  2  against  his  biological  father  and  also 

the  agreement  executed  between  the  parties  pursuant  to 

which  the  minor  is  getting  maintenance  allowance  from  his 

biological  father.  In  any  event  he  has  pointed  out  that  the 

Impugned Judgment and Decree has allowed the Respondent 

No. 2’s claim for maintenance from the date of desertion till 

the date of divorce. However, the date of desertion is same as 

the  date  of  divorce  which  may  be  seen  from  the  Divorce 

Effectiveness Certificate which is also available on record. 

3. 

He, however, seeks time to assist this Court by relying 

upon the relevant case law to shed light upon the sanctity of 

 
 
Page - 3 
W.P. No.3468/2020. 

the clause of the Nikah Nama and its effectiveness whereby 

the Petitioner had agreed to maintain the Respondent No. 2.  

4. 

Since the matter is now part heard, therefore, in 

order  not  to  complicate  the  matter  and  in  the  interest  of 

justice  the  Impugned  Judgment  and  Decree  shall  remain 

suspended till the next date of hearing. 

5. 

Relist  on  06.04.2023  for  further  arguments  of 

the  Petitioner’s  side  as  well  as  the  arguments  of  the 

Respondents and rebuttal if any.  

Tanveer  Ahmed/* 

                                                            JUDGE 

(SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ) 

 
 
 
 
  
    
     
                                 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
