l

ORDER SHEET

tN TFD ISLAMABAD  FilGH  COURT. ISLAMABAD.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

CrI. Misc. No.625tBl20l9.

Zahid

VS

The  State

S. No. of
order/
proceedings

Date of order/
Proceedings

Order with  signature of Judge  and  that of parties or counsel
where necessarT.

22.10.2019.

Raja Muhammad  Farooq, Advocate for the petitioner.
Barrister Ayesha  Siddique  Khan, State Counsel.
Abdul Waheed, S.I alongwith  record.

Through  instant  petition, the petitioner  has prayed for post

arrest bail in case FIR No.188,  dated l4.l0.20l3,lJlS  302,397,

201,412,  148, 149 PPC,  P.S Lohi Bhair,  Islamabad.

2.  Brief facts referred  in the FIR  are that dead bodies of a man

and woman  were lying in parachute  cloth near link road of

Dhoke Kala  Khan. Similarly,  four dead bodies were  also

recovered  from the territorial jurisdiction of P.S Sihala  and FIR

No.243l13  was registered. Both the criminal  cases have  been

investigated  by the I.O of instant  case  i.e. FIR No.188/13.
3.  Learned  counsel for the petitioner  contend  that  the

petitioner  is not nominated in the FIR and he was arrested from

Peshawar  in some other  case  despite  the fact that he has no

relationship or link with instant matter and he has been

nominated on the statement of co-accused, who was earlier

arrested  in the instant matter;  that the petitioner  has not been

informed regarding pendency of the instant  matter, even

proceedings  U/S 512, Cr.P.C  are without jruisdiction as

requirements  of law have  not been fulfilled;  that no incriminating

2

Crl. Misc. No.625-Bl2019.

evidence  has been recovered  against  the petitioner  nor the same

has been brought  on record.

4.  Conversely, learned  State Counsel  contends  that  the

petitioner  has been nominated after recovery  of six dead bodies

from the jurisdiction of two police stations when the other

accused  have  been  arrested in 2013 in which it has  been

disclosed  that  more  than 6 persons were  involved in commission

of murder of entire family  by hiring assassin  by the principal

accused Sakandar  Zia; that the principal  accused  has already

been awarded death sentence by Trial Court  and his appeal  is

pending before Division Bench of this Court;  that the petitioner

remained absconder  for five years, therefore,  he is not entitled

for concession  ofbail.

5.  Perusal of record  reveals  that dead  bodies of two

individuals  i.e. a woman and a man were recovered  from the

territorial jurisdiction  of Police Station Lohi Bher on 14.10.2013

and similarly four dead  bodies have  separately  been  recovered

from the territorial  jurisdiction  of Police  Station Sihala on the

same day and separate FIR No.243/2013 was registered.  During

the course  of investigation, it revealed that all six dead bodies are

from same  house, whereby Nadia  Aamir,  Aamir Ullah Khan,

Adam,  Haider, Roman and Asghar (servant)  have  been

identified.  Principal  accused  Sakandar  Zia is nephew of Nadia

Aamir,  who arranged the alleged  crime/murder  of six persons in

one family in order to grab the property. Principal accused

Sakandar Zia  and his two co-accused  were initially arrested by

local  police,  who  during  interrogation  revealed  the planning  and

style of crime, in which  all six persons  were brutally  murdered.

3

Crl. Misc. No.625-Bl2019.

6.  It is also  reflected from  the record  that six different  persons

were hired including  the present petitioner  for murder of the

family. The petitioner  remained absconder  from the date of the

incident till his arrest on 18.07.2019, that is approximately 5

years and 10 months and he has been declared absconder  after

completing  the process  by Trial  Court,  whereas co-accused

Sakandar Ziahas been  convicted and awarded death sentence by

the Trial Court, whose  criminal  appeal is pending before

Division  Bench  of this Court.  The tentative assessment  of the

record  reveals  that  the petitioner is prima  facie connected  with

hideous  offence of murder of six innocent  persons,  who have

been killed for lust of illegal  gain and at this stage granting bail

to the petitioner would amount  to trivialize  the gravity of the

offence  allegedly committed by the petitioner.

7.  The I.O in attendance contends that challan has been

submitted  before the Court. Charge has been  framed  and the trial

is in progress  on fast track as the trial is pending before Model

Criminal  Trial  Court and as per observation of Trial  Court,  the

trial would  be concluded  within  next  three  months.

8.  For what  has been discussed  above, the petitioner is not

entitled  for grant of post arrest bail, therefore, instant petition is

dismissed. However,  relying  upon 2011 SCMR 1332 (Rehmat

Ullah VS The State  and anotherl,  learned Model Criminal Trial

Court is directed to conclude  the trial  on or before 31.12.2019.

R.Arjrm

(M

JUDGE

