ORDER SHEET 

IN THE ISLAMABADHIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

       CRIMINAL REVISION NO. 54 of 2021 

Abdul Farooq and another  

VS 

  Mst. Maryam Farooq and others    

 PETITIONERS BY:       Syed  Javed  Akbar  Shah  and  Hafiz  Syed 

Afzal Ahmed, Advocates.   

 RESPONDENTS BY: 

Raja  Nisar  ul  Haq  Abbasi,  Advocate  for 
respondents No. 1 and 2.    
Parties in person.  

DATE OF HEARING: 

15.11.2021. 

========================================  

BABAR  SATTAR,  J.-  The  petitioners  have  challenged 

the  order  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 

West-Islamabad  dated  10.09.2021  pursuant  to  which  petition 

under section 491  Cr.P.C filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 was 

allowed and custody of minors was handed to said respondents.   

2. 

The  petitioners  and  respondents  No.  1  and  2  are 

spouses and their marriages are still intact. Petitioner No.1 and 

respondent  No.1  were  married  on  15.11.2011  and  have  three 

children. It is the petitioner’s case that respondent No.1 left her 

marital  home  on  14.06.2021  leaving  behind  three  children  and 

did  not  return  to  her  matrimonial  home.  Petitioner  No.2  and 

respondent  No.  2  were  also  married  on  15.11.2011  and  have 

four children. It is the petitioner’s case that respondent No.2 left 

her marital home on 14.08.2021 along with her daughters, Dua 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 2 

Fatima and Hayat Zahra, and did not return to her matrimonial 

home thereafter. 

3. 

After the learned Additional Sessions Judge allowed the 

petition  of  respondents  No.  1  and  2  under  section  491  Cr.P.C 

and  ordered  that  the  custody  of  minor  children  of  respondents 

No. 1 and 2 be handed over to the said respondents (except the 

custody of Hayat Zahra who is a suckling baby and was already 

in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.1).  The  order  of  the  learned 

Additional Sessions Judge was not implemented and the minors 

are still in the custody of the petitioners.    

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted  that 

respondents No. 1 and 2 are real sisters and are married to the 

petitioners, who are brothers and that respondents No. 1 and 2 

are also first cousins of the petitioners. That respondents No. 1 

and  2  left  their  matrimonial  homes  without  any  cause 

abandoning  their  children,  except  Hayat  Zahra  who  remains  in 

the custody of respondent No.2 being a suckling baby. That on 

16.08.2021  petitioner  No.  2  became  aware  that  respondent 

No.2 had taken away with  her Rs. 300,000/- along with  a gold 

necklace  set  and  gold  rings  of  the  children  and  handed  over 

these valuable articles to her father who is a “notorious gambler 

and  a  drug  addict”  and  consequently  petitioner  No.2  filed  a 

criminal complaint of the incident with respondent No.3 and that 

in view of such criminal complaint respondents No.1 and 2 filed 

their  petition  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  as  a  counter  measure. 

He contended that  the order  of the learned Additional Sessions 

Judge  could  not  be  implemented  as  the  children  refused  to  go 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 3 

along  with  their  mothers  and  returned  to  their  father  outside 

the court on the day when the impugned order was passed. He 

submitted  that  remedy  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  was  an 

exceptional remedy and was to be used sparingly. That none of 

the children were suckling babies, other  than Hayat Zahra who 

was  already 

in  the  custody  of  respondent  No.2.  That 

respondents  No.  1  and  2  left  their  matrimonial  homes  and  the 

children were not illegally snatched and consequently custody of 

the  children  with  their  fathers  were  not  illegal.  He  contended 

that it has been held by the august Supreme Court that in cases 

of  real  urgency  and  determination  of  illegality  of  continuing 

custody of children that powers under section 491 Cr.P.C could 

be  exercised.  He  relied  on  Naziha  Ghazali  VS  The  State 

(2001  SCMR  1782),  Mst.  Nadia  Perveen  VS  Mst.  Almas 

Noreen  and  others  (PLD  2012  SC  758),  Mst.  Seema  VS 

Aftab  Ahmed  and  others  (2013  YLR  583)  and  Jahan  Ara 

VS  Province  of  Sindh 

through  Secretary  Home 

Department,  Karachi  and  others  (2019  MLD  1722).  The 

learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the impugned 

order  was  a  non-speaking  order  and  it  was  for  welfare  of  the 

children that their custody remains with their fathers.   

4. 

Learned counsel for respondents No. 1 and 2 submitted 

that cause of action arose on 13.08.2021 and 14.08.2021 when 

matrimonial dispute arose between the parties. But the petition 

was  filed  on  07.09.2021  because  given  that  marriages  of 

respondents  No.  1  and  2  with  the  petitioners  were  still 

subsisting,  and  there  was  an  effort  to  resolve  the  matter 

amicably  through  counseling  of  elders  in  the  family.  He 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 4 

submitted that respondents No. 1 and 2 were driven out of their 

matrimonial  homes  by  the  petitioners  due  to  the  abusive 

behavior  and  it  was  in  view  of  the  domestic  abuse  suffered  by 

respondents  No.  1  and  2  that  they  decided  that  they  could  no 

longer live in their matrimonial homes. That the children are still 

young and dependent on their mothers, who took care of them 

while living in their matrimonial homes, and it was the mothers 

who  were  entitled  to  the  legal  custody  even  if  they  were  not 

living  in  their  matrimonial  homes.  He  submitted  that  ages  of 

children  ranged  from  less  than  three  years  up  to  eight  years 

and it was in the interest of the children that they stay together 

with other siblings. He submitted that respondents No. 1 and 2 

were  lodging  at  the  house  of  their  father,  which  was  a  short 

distance  away  from  the  house  of  the  petitioners  and  also  from 

the  school  in  which  the  children  are  admitted,  and  the  custody 

of  the  children  being  handed  over  to  respondents  No.  1  and  2 

would  further  the  welfare  of  the  children  and  would  not 

undermine and disrupt the life of the children in any manner. He 

submitted  that  the  unlawful  conduct  of  the  petitioners  was 

obvious  from  the  fact  that  despite  a  clear  order  passed  by  the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Court,  the  custody  of  the  children 

was not handed over to respondents No. 1 and 2.      

5. 

While  allowing  petition  of  respondents  No.  1  and  2 

under section 491 Cr.P.C, the learned Additional Sessions Judge 

recorded the following reasons.  

“Petitioners  are  real  mothers  of  the  minors  and  there  is  no 

substitute of real mother. Two minors namely Ayyan Haider 

and  Shayan  Haider  are  beyond  age  of  ‘Hazanat’  as  per 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 5 

entitlement  of  their  mothers  whereas  other  minors  are 

within  the  ‘hazanat’  of  their  mothers.  A  daughter  namely 

Hayat Zohra is already in custody of her mother. The minors 

except Ayyan Haider and Shayan Haider are of tender ages 

and  they  require  company  of  their  mothers.  Undoubtedly, 

lap of mother is God’s cradle. As far as minors Ayyan Haider 

and  Shayan  Haider  are  concerned,  it  is  in  their  welfare  to 

live jointly with their other siblings.“ 

6. 

Section 491 of Cr.P.C states the following:   

491.  Power  to  issue  directions  of  the  nature  of  a 

habeas  corpus:  (1)  Any  High  Court  may,  whenever  it 

thinks fit, direct— 

(a)  that  a  person  within  the  limits  of  its  appellate 

criminal jurisdiction be brought up before the Court to be 

dealt with according to law;  

(b)  that  a  person  illegally  or  improperly  detained  in 

public  or  private  custody  within  such  limits  be  set  at 

liberty ;  

(c)  that  a  prisoner  detained  in  any  Jail  situated  within 

such  limits  be  brought  before  the  Court  to  be  there 

examined  as  a  witness  in  any  matter  pending  or  to  be 

inquired into in such Court;  

(d)  that  a  prisoner  detained  as  aforesaid  be  brought 

before a Court martial or any Commissioners for trial or 

to be examined touching any matter pending before such 

Court martial or Commissioners respectively ;  

(e)  that  a  prisoner  within  such  limits  be  removed  from 

one custody to another for the purpose of trial; and 

 (f)  that  the  body  of  a  defendant  within  such  limits  be 

brought in on the Sheriff's return of Cepi Corpus to a writ 

of attachment.  

(1A)  The  High  Court  may,  by  general  or  special  order 

published in the official Gazette, direct that all or any of 

its  powers specified  in clauses (a)  and (b)  of subsection 

(1)  shall,  subject  to  such  conditions,  if  any,  as  may  be 

specified in the order, be exercisable also by- 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 6 

(a) 

a Sessions Judge; or  

(b) 

an Additional Sessions Judge,  

within the territorial limits of Sessions Division. 

(2) The High Court may, from time to time, frame rules 

to regulate the procedure in cases under this section.  

(3)  Nothing  in  this  section  applies  to  persons  detained 

under any law providing for preventive detention. 

7. 

The jurisdiction of a court adjudicating a habeas corpus 

petition  in  relation  to  a  child  cannot  be  confused  with  an 

ordinary habeas corpus petition where the focus of the court is 

on  the  recovery  of  the  person  illegally  detained  in  order  to 

uphold his Article 9 rights to life and liberty. In case of a minor, 

his  right  to  liberty  under  Article  9  of  the  Constitution  entails  a 

right to be in the custody of the person who ought to have the 

custody  of  the  minor  in  accordance  with  law,  as  till  such  time 

that the minor attains the age of majority he/she has a right to 

be  taken  care  of  whether  by  parents  or  relatives  or  the  State. 

And  consequently  the  focus  of  the  court  in  a  habeas  corpus 

petition filed on behalf of a child is not just on illegal detention 

but  on  ensuring  that  the  interim  custody  of  the  minor  pending 

its  determination  by  a  Guardian  Court  is  being  dealt  with  in 

accordance with law.  

8. 

That  a  habeas  corpus  petition  filed  for  the  lawful 

treatment  of  a  minor  is  not  to  be  confused  with  abduction  or 

illegal detention of an adult and the consideration to be borne in 

mind  in  such  matter  is  the  welfare  of  the  minor  as  recognized 

across common law jurisdictions.   

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 7 

(i)  

It is stated in the Halsbury’s Laws of England, 

Fourth Edition, Vol.24 (para 511) that:  

“511. …Where in any proceedings before any court 

the  custody  or  upbringing  of  a  minor  is  in 

question, then, in deciding that question, the court 

must  regard  the  minor’s  welfare  as  the  first  and 

paramount  consideration,  and  may  not  take  into 

consideration  whether  from  any  other  point  of 

view  the  father’s  claim  in  respect  of  that  custody 

or upbringing is superior to that of the mother, or 

the  mother’s  claim  is  superior  to  that  of  the 

father.” 

(ii)  

Baily states in Habeas Corpus, Vol. I, (PP.581) 

that: 

“The  reputation  of  the  father  may  be  as  stainless 

as  crystal;  he  may  not  be  afflicted  with  the 

slightest 

mental, 

moral 

or 

physical 

disqualifications  from  superintending  the  general 

welfare  of  the  infant;  the  mother  may  have  been 

separated  from  him  without  the  shadow  of  a 

pretence  of  justification;  and  yet  the  interests  of 

the  child  may  imperatively  demand  the  denial  of 

the  father’s  right  and  its  continuance  with  the 

mother.”  

(iii) 

In  McGrath,  Re,  (1893)  1  Ch  143,  it  was 

observed that: 

“The dominant matter for the consideration of the 

Court is the welfare of the child. But the welfare of 

the child is not to be measured by money only nor 

merely  physical  comfort.  The  word  ‘welfare’  must 

be taken in its widest sense. The moral or religious 

welfare of the child must be considered as well as 

its physical well-being. Nor can the tie of affection 

be disregarded.” 

(iv) 

American  Jurisprudence,  Second  Edition,  Vol. 

39 (para 148) notes that: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 8 

“Generally,  where  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  is 

prosecuted  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the 

right  to  custody  of  a  child,  the  controversy  does 

not  involve  the  question  of  personal  freedom, 

because  an  infant  is  presumed  to  be  in  the 

custody  of  someone  until  it  attains  its  majority. 

The  Court,  in  passing  on  the  writ  in  a  child  

custody  case,  deals  with  a  matter  of  an  equitable 

nature,  it  is  not  bound by  any  mere  legal  right of 

parent or guardian, but is to give his or her claim 

to  the  custody  of  the  child  due  weight  as  a  claim 

founded on human nature and  generally equitable 

and  just.  Therefore,  these  cases  are  decided,  not 

on  the  legal  right  of  the  petitioner  to  be  relieved 

from unlawful imprisonment or detention, as in the 

case  of  an  adult,  but  on  the  Court’s  view  of  the 

best interests of those whose welfare requires that 

they be in  custody of one  person or another;  and 

hence, a court is not bound to deliver a child into 

the custody of any claimant or of any person, but 

should, in the exercise of a sound discretion, after 

careful  consideration  of  the  facts,  leave  it  in  such 

custody  as  its  welfare  at  the  time  appears  to 

require.  In  short,  the  child’s  welfare  is  the 

supreme  consideration,  irrespective  of  the  rights 

and  wrongs  of  its  contending  parents,  although 

the  natural  rights  of  the  parent  are  entitled  to 

consideration.”  

(v) 

In Howarth V. Northcott (152 Conn. 460), the 

Supreme Court of Connecticut held that: 

“The employment of the forms of habeas corpus in 

a  child  custody  case  is  not  for  the  purpose  of 

testing the legality of a confinement or restraint as 

contemplated by the ancient common law writ, or 

by statue, but the primary purpose is to furnish a 

means  by  which  the  court,  in  the  exercise  of  its 

judicial discretion, may determine what is best for 

the  welfare  of  the  child,  and  the  decision  is 

reached by a consideration of the equities involved 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 9 

in the welfare of the child, against which the legal 

rights of no one, including the parents, are allowed 

to militate.” 

The law laid down  in Pakistan  is in sync with the jurisprudence 

referred  to  above  as  it  is  now  settled  that  in  exercise  of 

jurisdiction under section 491 of Cr.P.C, the welfare of the child 

is the primary and predominant consideration.  

9. 

It  is  settled  by  now  that  jurisdiction  of  a  court  under 

section  491  Cr.P.C  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the  jurisdiction 

vested  in  the  guardian  court  under  the  Guardians  and  Wards 

Act,  1890  and  consequently  it  is  not  for  the  court  while 

exercising  jurisdiction  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  to  determine 

the entitlement of the parent to retain the custody of a minor on 

a permanent basis. 

10. 

 It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court 

in 

Muhammad  Javed  Umrao VS Miss  Uzma  Vahid  (1988 

SCMR  1891)  that  section  491  Cr.P.C  and  the  provisions  of 

Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890  are  neither  mutually  exclusive 

nor  overlap  or  destroy  one  another.  Thus  to  the  extent  of 

question  of  permanent  custody  of  a  minor,  the  matter  falls 

within  the  domain  of  the  guardian  court  pursuant  to  the 

provisions  of  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act,  1890.  And  the 

remedy  available  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  is  not  a  remedy 

available for declaring or determining the question of custody of 

a  minor  on  a  permanent  basis.  However,  courts  are  obliged  to 

exercise  their  jurisdiction  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  in  a  proper 

case where the question of treatment of a minor in accordance 

 
 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 10 

with  law  comes  before  the  court,  pending  determination  of 

custody by the guardian court.  

11. 

It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Nisar 

Muhammad VS Sultan  Zari  (PLD  1997  SC  852)  that 

availability  of  a  remedy  under  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act, 

1890  is  no  bar  to  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under  section  491 

Cr.P.C and the availability of such remedy is not in and of itself 

a  valid  ground  for  refusing  to  interfere  in  the  custody  of  minor 

by  a  parent  who  is  otherwise  not  entitled  to  such  custody.  In 

para. 9 of the said judgment, the following was held:  

“In  the  judgment  of  Mst.  Rizwana  Bokhari's  case  (supra), 

Muhammad  Munir  Khan.  J.  (as  his  Lordship  then  was)  had 

rightly  laid  down  the  law  which  we  are  inclined  to  approve 

that  on  examination  of  the  various  provisions  of  Muslim 

Law,  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  particularly  its  section 

491, Cr.P.C. and sections 361 and 363 of the P.P.C. indicate 

that  mother  is  entitled  to  'hizanat'  of  her  male  child  below 

the age of 7 years, failing that the mother's relations under 

Muslim  Personal  Law  are  entitled  to  the  custody  of  the 

minor.  Since  the  two  male  minors  in  this  case  are 

admittedly below 7 years in age and the three females have 

not  yet  attained  puberty  all  the  three  being  less  than  8 

years,  the  respondent  is,  therefore,  prima  facie  entitled  to 

'hizanat' of all the 5 for the limited purpose of section 491, 

Cr.P.C.  at  the  moment  and  the  rights  of  the  petitioners  to 

the custody of the aforesaid minors has not accrued so far. 

In these circumstances, the custody of the aforesaid minors 

with the petitioners was, therefore, rightly declared illegal or 

at  least  improper  by  the  learned  Chief  Justice  of  the 

Peshawar  High  Court.  The  learned  Chief  Justice  was  also 

justified  to  have  expressed  more  than  once  that  ultimate 

determination  of  entitlement  of  the  custody  shall  of  course 

lie  with  the  Guardian  Judge  to  whom  the  parties  were 

directed to approach, if they so desired. 

 
 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 11 

12. 

In  Naziha  Ghazali  VS  The  State  (2001  SCMR 

1782)  a  petition  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  was  filed  by  the 

mother  after  almost  six  months  of  the  accrual  of  the  cause  of 

action.  The  august  Supreme  Court  held  that  there  was  no 

explanation for delay in reporting the removal of the minor from 

the  custody  of  the  mother.  The  custody  of  the  minor  with  the 

father was found not to be illegal, especially as no proceedings 

for determination of custody of the minor on a permanent basis 

were pending before the guardian court either.   

13. 

It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Khalida 

Parveen  VS  Muhammad  Sultan  Mehmood  (PLD  2004  SC 

1)  that  in  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under  section  491  Cr.P.C  the 

court  should  not  to  go  into  technicalities  of  law  and  should 

decide the matter before it in view mainly of the welfare of the 

child  and  also  “ensure  that  the  rights  conferred  upon  the  child 

are fully protected in a suitable manner”.  

14. 

It  was  held  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  Mst. 

Nadia  Perveen  VS  Mst.  Almas  Noreen  and  others  (PLD 

2012 SC 758) that jurisdiction under section 491 Cr.P.C is only 

to be exercised where the children of very tender age and have 

been  snatched  away  from  lawful  custody  quite  recently  and 

there is real urgency in the matter. In the said case the children 

were  neither  found  to  be  of  tender  ages  nor  snatched  away 

from  the  mother  and  it  was  held  that  the  case  was  not  made 

out for exercise of jurisdiction under section 491 of Cr.P.C.   

15. 

The  latest  view  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  was 

recorded  in  Mirjam  Abberras  Lehdeaho  VS  SHO,  Police 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 12 

Station  Chung,  Lahore  and  others  (2018  SCMR  427), 

wherein it was held that:  

“22. The Guardian Court is the final Arbiter for adjudicating 

the  question  of  custody  of  children.  However,  where  a 

parent  holding  custody  of  a  minor  lawfully  has  been 

deprived of such custody, such parent cannot be deprived of 

a  remedy  to  regain  the  custody  while  the  matter  is  sub 

judice  before  a  Guardian  Court.  Therefore,  in  exceptional 

cases  (like  the  instant  case),  where  the  High  Court  finds 

that the best interest and welfare of the minor demand that 

his/her custody be immediately restored to the person who 

was  lawfully  holding  such  custody  before  being  deprived  of 

the  same,  the  Court  is  not  denuded  of  jurisdiction  to  pass 

appropriate orders under section 491, Cr.P.C. directing that 

custody  be  restored  to  that  person  as  an  interim  measure 

pending  final  decision  of  the  Guardian  Court.  While  the 

tender  age  of  the  minor  is  always  a  material  consideration 

but it is not the only consideration to be kept in mind by the 

High  Court.  Other  factors  like  best  interest  and  welfare  of 

the  minor,  the  procedural  hurdles  and  lethargy  of  the 

system, delays in finalization of such matters, the handicaps 

that  the  mother  suffers  owing  to  her  gender  and  financial 

position,  and  above  all  the  urgency  to  take  appropriate 

measures  to  minimize  the  trauma,  emotional  stress  and 

educational loss of the minor are equally important and also 

need to be kept in mind while granting or refusing an order 

to  restore  interim  custody  by  the  High  Court.  The  two 

provisions of law namely section 491, Cr.P.C. and section 25 

of  the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act  deal  with  two  different 

situations.  As  such,  the question of ouster  of jurisdiction  of 

the High Court on account of provisions of sections 12 or 25 

of the Guardians and Wards Act or pendency of proceedings 

under the said provisions does not arise. There is no overlap 

between  the  two  provisions  as  both  are  meant  to  cater  for 

different  situations,  the  first  to  cater  for  an  emergent 

situation,  while  the  latter  to  give  more  long  term  decisions 

regarding  questions  relating  to  guardianship  of  minors 

keeping  in  view  all  factors  including  their  best  interest  and 

welfare. 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 13 

16. 

In  a  matter  involving  the  right  of  a  minor  to  be  dealt 

with  in  accordance  with  law  under  section  491  of  Cr.P.C,  the 

question  before  the  Court  is  not  whether  a  child  has  been 

abducted  by  a  parent  in  the  ordinary  sense.  During  the 

subsistence of marriage both parents have joint custody of their 

minor  children.  In  the  case  of  a  matrimonial  dispute  or 

altercation  between  the  spouses,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the 

children  must  be  physically  snatched  from  one  parent  to  bring 

the  matter  within  the  scope  of  section  491  of  Cr.P.C.  In  the 

event  that  a  husband  subjects  his  wife  to  abuse  forcing  her  to 

leave  the  matrimonial  home,  the  court  cannot  turn  a  blind  eye 

to the circumstances in which the shared custody of the children 

was  transformed  into  sole  custody.  In  such  circumstances,  for 

purposes  of  section  491  Cr.P.C,  it  is  not  for  the  court  to  sit  in 

judgment  over  who  is  at  fault  in  the  matrimonial  dispute,  but 

how  would  the  welfare  of  a  child  be  best  preserved,  in  the 

interim, when joint custody of the child shared by both parents 

is not an option.    

17. 

For  a  considerable  period  the  “Tender  Years  Doctrine” 

has  guided  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  courts  in  custody 

matters,  where  courts  assumed  that  healthy  development 

occurred  when  young  children  were  raised  by  their  mothers.  

However, 

contemporary  psychological  and 

sociologically 

research  questions 

the  assumption 

that 

the  mother 

is 

necessarily 

the  best  parent 

for  raising  a  child 

in  all 

circumstances  (see  for  example  Santrock  &  Warshak,  Father 

Custody  and  social  Development  in  Boys  and  Girls,  35  J.  Soc. 

Issues  112  (1979);  Watts  V.  Watts,  77  Misc.2d  178,  181-182, 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 14 

350  N.Y.S.2d  285,  289-90,  (Fam.Ct.1973)).  Research  is  now 

pointing  to  the  need  for  evolving  a  more  gender-neutral 

approach  to  child  welfare  given  changing  social  structures  and 

two-career  families  etc.  One  of  the  questions  to  ask  while 

considering  the  child’s  welfare  in  a  custody  matter  in  order  to 

accord continuity  to such welfare is which of the parents is the 

primary  caregiver.  The  parent  who  maintains  the  strongest 

bond  with  the  child  as  a  result  of  daily  attention  to  the  child’s 

physical  and  psychological  needs 

is 

regarded  as 

the 

psychological  parent  (see  J.  Goldstein,  A.  Freud  &  A.  Solnit, 

Beyond  the  best  interests  of  child  (1979)).  In  a  nut  shell,  an 

important  consideration  for  the  court  while  addressing  the 

question of interim custody in the child’s welfare is ensuring the 

continuity  of  care  for  his/her  physical  and  psychological  needs 

by the parent who customarily provides such care.   

18. 

In  the  instant  case  the  respondents  No.  1  and  2 

appeared before the Court and submitted that they were on the 

receiving end of  domestic abuse and  when such abuse became 

insufferable they had no option but to seek refuge in the house 

of  their  parents.  In  their  pleadings  and  submissions  the 

petitioners  have  alleged  that  the  maternal  grandfather  of  the 

children  (who  is  also  the  uncle  of  the  petitioners)  is  a  gambler 

and drug addict, without any record produced before the Court 

to  substantiate  such  serious  allegations  against  the  father  of 

respondents  No.  1  and  2  and  the  father-in-law  of  the 

petitioners.  The  children  were  produced  before  the  Court  and 

they  were  interviewed  in  Chambers  and  were  found  by  this 

Court  to  have  been  tutored,  with  the  older  children  dissuading 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 15 

their  younger  siblings  from  speaking.  The  children  narrated 

what  appeared  to  be  a  tutored  lesson  that  their  mothers  were 

not nice persons and did not behave well with their fathers. The 

attitude  of  the  children  was  clearly  different  when  they  were 

interviewed  in  the  Chambers  along  with  their  mothers,  as  they 

seemed to interact well with their mothers in the absence of the 

petitioners. This Court has found that the brainwashing of minor 

children instilling ill-will against their mothers and using them as 

a  tool  in  the  matrimonial  dispute  between  parents  by  their 

fathers cannot be in the welfare of the children. Notwithstanding  

any  strain  in  the  relationship  between  the  parents,  inciting 

resentment  for  the  mother  does  not  promote  the  welfare  of  a 

child  and  an  environment  in  which  rancor  for  a  parent  is  being 

nurtured  is  not  the  best  environment  for  the  emotional  and 

moral welfare of the child.  

19. 

This  Court  also  finds  no  infirmity  in  the  reasoning  of 

the learned Additional Sessions Judge recorded in the impugned 

order,  which  held  that  it  was  in  the  welfare  of  the  siblings  to 

stay  together.  Given  that  the  younger  children  are  more 

dependent  on  their  mothers  who  have  remained  the  primary 

caregivers  to  the  children  for  their  physical  and  psychological 

needs, the learned Additional District Judge rightly came to the 

conclusion  that  the  children  ought  to  be  stay  together  in  the 

custody  of  the  mothers  for  the  time  being.  Admittedly,  a 

guardian  petition  has  been  filed  by  the  petitioners  before  the 

guardian  court  and  it  was  for  such  court  to  determine  wherein 

the welfare of the children lies for granting custody in the event 

 
Criminal Revision No. 54/2021 

P a g e  | 16 

that the petitioners and respondents are unable to resolve their 

matrimonial disputes.  

20. 

It  is  expected  that  the  learned  Guardian  Court  will 

decide the question of custody within  a period of sixty days, in 

accordance with law, without being influenced in any manner by 

the observations of this Court in the instant judgment. Further, 

in order to ensure that the petitioners have parenting time with 

the  children  pending  adjudication  of  custody  on  a  permanent 

basis by the learned Guardian Court, the petitioners may collect 

the children from the lodging of respondents  No. 1 and 2 every 

Saturday  at  3.00  pm  and  drop  them  back  by  3.00  p.m  on 

Sunday.   

21. 

The  revision  petition  is  disposed  off  in  the  above 

terms. 

        (BABAR SATTAR) 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting  

Saeed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
