ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P No.3178-2016 

Abdul Jabbar Khan Bangash 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan and another.  

Petitioner by: 

Mohkam  Bajwa  and  Mr.  Haider  Omer  Hayat, 
Advocates. 

Respondents by: 

Mr. Usman Rasool Ghuman, AAG.  

Ch.  Kamil  Hayat,  Advocate  for  respondent 
No.2. 

Date of Hearing: 

14.02.2023. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  Through  the  instant  writ  petition, 

the petitioner has prayed for the following relief:- 

i. 

ii. 

childcare  centers  be  declared  as  an  activity  that  offer  essential 

home based public service; 

the Respondents be directed to classify childcare centers as public 

service,  within  regulation  3  of  the  Land  Disposal  Regulations, 

and allot plots for childcare centers, within ICT, under the head of 

Community  and  Facilities  Plots,  and  dispose 

them  off 

accordingly; 

iii. 

the Respondents  be  directed  to  authorize  and permit childcare  to 

be  located  in  residential  premises  within  the  aforementioned 

zoning regulations;  

iv.  Home  Occupation  be  declared  to  include  the  establishment, 

running and management of childcare centers; 

Any  other  and  better  relief  that  the  honorable  Court  deems 

appropriate may also be granted. 

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  petitioner  is 

aggrieved with the prohibition on the establishment of daycare center within 

the  residential  premises  on  the  ground  that  it  is  a  fundamental  right  to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 2 

establish  such  kind  of  business  in  the  residential  area,  therefore,  he  prayed 

for issuance of writ to grant permission for establishment of childcare center 

to provide home based services and public service within Islamabad Capital 

Territory.  He  further  contends  that  the  childcare  center  is  required  within 

closest residential community and provision of Building Control Regulation, 

2005,  Islamabad  Land  Disposal  Regulation,  2005,  CDA  Ordinance,  1960  as 

well  as  provisions  of  Sections  3(3)  3(4),  71  and  73  of  the  Islamabad  Capital 

Territory  Local  Government  Act,  2015  are  to  be  declared  ultra  vires  to  the 

constitutional guarantees. 

3. 

Conversely,  respondents  have  not  filed  any  comments  in  this  case, 

despite elapse  of seven (07) years, such  conduct demonstrates that they  are 

not  interested  to  argue  this  case,  even  on  the  date  fixed,  they  were  not 

interested  to  argue  the  case,  whereby  they  were  directed  to  file  para-wise 

their comments within two (02) days, but no such comments have been filed 

on record, therefore, this Court has left with no other option, but to proceed 

under the law. 

4. 

Notices  were  also  issued  to  learned  Attorney  General  of  Pakistan 

under Section XXVII-A CPC, whereby learned AAG in attendance has raised 

the  question  of  maintainability  on  the  ground  that  the  prayer  made  in  the 

instant writ petition falls within the policy domain of Municipal Corporation 

Islamabad under ICT Local Government Act, 2015. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard and record perused.  

Perusal of record reveals that petitioner is managing a childcare center 

under the name and style of ―Nigran Care‖, a Company incorporated under 

the Companies Ordinance, 1984,  which offers daytime childcare facilities to 

the residents of Islamabad Capital Territory and it has been  claimed by the 

petitioner that it is neither operated by or connected to any school system or 

any  Montessori,  nor  does  it  have  any  connection  with  other  any  business 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 3 

establishment  or  professional  office.  The  Nigran  Care  solely  functions  as  a 

daytime childcare center, and offers working parents and employees with a 

safe,  secure  and  hassle-free  facility  to  meet  their  core  childcare  issues,  but 

they have not been given permission to run the business.  

7. 

The  petitioner  has  also  challenged  the  vires  of  Sections  3(3),  3(4),  71 

and 73 of the Islamabad Capital Territory Local Government Act, 2015 to be 

declared  illegal  and  unconstitutional  for  being  against  the  spirit  of  Article 

140A  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  as  well  as 

against  the  spirit  of  ICT  Local  Government  Act,  2015  reflected  in  the 

preamble.  

8. 

In order to resolve the issue, it is necessary to go through the Sections 

3(3),  3(4),  71  and  73  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Local  Government 

Act, 2015, which are as under:- 

(3) The development, planning and overall maintenance of the Master 

plan  within  the  specified  area  of  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  will 

continue  to  vest  with  Capital  Development  Authority  and  thus  the 

overall Master Plan shall apply and no action by any authority, body 

or  corporation  shall  be 

initiated 

in  violation  of  the  Capital 

Development Authority Ordinance, 1960 and the Zoning regulations 

duly  approved  by  the  Government.  All  powers  to  be  exercised  and 

rules to be enforced shall be subject to the planning framework already 

set in the aforementioned laws, rules and regulations.  

(4) This legal framework shall without derogation to the existing laws 

and  regulations  of  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  and  Capital 

Development  Authority  and  segments  not  covered  by  the  prevalent 

law shall be covered by the respective local Government, as determined 

by the Government. Wherever there is a clash between the existing law 

and provisions of this Act, the existing law shall prevail unless clearly 

specified or repealed. 

71. Functions of the Union Council.– (1) A Union Council shall, subject 

to  the  provisions  of  the  Capital  Development  Authority  Ordinance  1960, 

perform functions specified in the Second Schedule. 

73.  Functions  of  Metropolitan  Corporation.—  (1)  The  Metropolitan 

Corporation  shall,  subject  to  the  provisions  of  Capital  Development 

 
 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 4 

Authority  Ordinance  1960  and  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Zoning 

Regulations 1992 perform functions mentioned in Third Schedule 

9.  While  going  through  the  said  provisions  of  law,  it  appears  that  ICT 

Local  Government  Act,  2015  extracted  major 

functions  of  Capital 

Development  Authority  and  curtailed  the  powers  of  the  CDA,  which  are 

now confined to the extent of Sections 11 and 12 of the CDA Ordinance, 1960, 

where Master Regulator CDA can only plan and prepare a scheme within the 

specified  area  of  ICT.  Similarly  regulations  framed  under  the  CDA 

Ordinance  have also been covered in terms of Section 3(4) of the ICT Local 

Government  Act,  2015,  where  all  prevalent  laws  were  given  complete 

protection  unless  there  is  clash  between  the  existing  law  and  provision  of 

this  Act,  in  such  eventuality,  the  existing  law  shall  prevail  unless  clearly 

specified or repealed.  

10.  No  doubt  the  petitioner’s  case  falls  within  the  domain  of  Municipal 

Corporation,  Islamabad  in  terms  of  ICT  Local  Government  Act,  2015,  in 

which MCI can perform its functions and powers provided in 3rd Schedule of 

the  Act.  Similarly,  functions  of  the  Union  Council  have  been  defined  in 

Sections 71 of the Act also explained in 2nd Schedule, but surprisingly there is 

no  specific  provision  or  subject,  which  gives  an  extensive  powers  to  the 

Union Councils or MCI or as the case may be to allow the childcare set up as 

an occupation to be registered within the residential area as Sections 71 and 

73 of the Act are subject to the provisions of CDA Ordinance, 1960 as well as 

ICT Zoning Regulation, 1992, such aspect minimize and curtail the Authority 

of MCI, rather placed a limit upon the representative institution of public i.e. 

MCI not to perform those functions, which are within the domain of CDA. 

11. 

This  Court  is  mindful  of  the  fact  that  legislative  intent  has  to  be 

considered  on  the  plain  reading  of  Sections  71  and  73  of  the  ICT  Local 

Government  Act,  2015,  which  was 

incorporated  by  the  Legislature 

 
 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 5 

intentionally  to  supervise  the  MCI  under  the  umbrella  of  CDA  in  terms  of 

CDA Ordinance, 1960, though transitory provision in terms of Chapter-XV of 

the  Act  provided  the  mechanism,  where  powers  have  been  transmitted  to 

Municipal  Corporation  including  the  financial  powers  in  terms  of  Sections 

127,  128,  129  within  a  specified  timeline.  Section  130  deals  with  the 

succession,  where  timeline  of  180  days  has  been  fixed  to  divide  the  rights, 

assets  and  liability  of  the  Local  Government  and  even  the  Government  has 

been  empowered  to  bring  ―all  bylaws,  rules,  regulations,  notifications  or  any 

other legal instrument, issued under any law in force on the date of commencement 

of this Act, in conformity with this Act within a period of two years from the date of 

commencement  of  this  Act‖.  In  terms  of  Sub-Section  3  of  Section  130,  all 

existing  bye-laws,  rules,  regulations,  notification  or  any  other 

legal 

instrument shall, subject to this Act, continue in force, so far as applicable and 

with  the  necessary  adaptations  until  altered,  repealed  or  amended  by  the 

Government”. The Federal Government has also been extended with powers 

to amend the schedule in terms of Section 134 of the Act, such aspect reveals 

that  ICT  Building  Zoning  Regulation,  1992  and  CDA  Ordinance,  1960  are 

alive  legal  instruments,  restrict  the  functionality  of  MCI,  which  is  indeed 

against  the  spirit  of  Article  140A  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 

Pakistan, 1973 that is a constitutional mandate to establish Local Government 

system  and  devolve  political,  administrative  and  financial  responsibility  and 

authority to the elected representative of the Local Government‖ however, if such 

autonomy  has  not  been  extended  in  the  literal  sense,  it  will  defeat  the very 

purpose  of  the  Local  Government  and  it  has  to  be  established  to  devolve 

these  three  major  components  i.e.  political,  administrative  and  financial 

responsibility  and  authority  to  the  elected  representatives  of  the  Local 

Government;  ―to  promote  good  governance,  effective  delivery  of  services  and 

transparent decision making through institutionalized participation of the people at 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 6 

local  level‖  in  this  regard  I  have  been  guided  by  the  principles  set-out  in  

PLD 2021 Islamabad 144 (MCI VS Chairman, CDA).  

12.  While considering the arguments of the petitioner’s side the principle 

of  interpretation  expresses  the  application  of  literal  rule,  where  the  words 

and  phrases  used  in  the  statute  should  be  read  keeping  in  view  their  plain 

meaning as held in PLD 2012 SC 923 (Baz Muhammad Kakar VS Federation 

of  Pakistan  through  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice).  It  is  also  settled 

proposition  of  law  that  literal  rule of  interpretation  of  the  Constitution  and 

statutes was that the words and phrases used therein should be read keeping 

in view their plain meaning as held in PLD 2012 SC 501 (Ghulam Haider VS 

Murad 

through  Legal  Representatives), 

therefore, 

the  plain  and 

unambiguous words must be expounded in their natural and ordinary sense 

as  provided  in  Sections  71  and  73  as  well  as  Section  3(3),  3(4)  of  the  Local 

Government  Act,  2015  as  held  1998  SCMR  841  (Pakistan  International 

Airlines  Corporation, Karachi  VS  Wafaqi Mohtasib).  No  doubt Courts  can 

interpret the provision of law, but cannot change or substitute said provision 

and also cannot go beyond the wisdom of law, therefore, while interpreting a 

statue, Courts are bound to follow intention of legislature and are prohibited 

to interpret law in a manner, contrary to the legislature as held in PLD 2007 

SC 447 (Muhammad Akhtar alias Hussain VS The State).  

13.  While  considering  the  above  discussion,  it  is  apparently  clear  that 

Local  Government  system  established  under  ICT  Local  Government  Act, 

2015  is  subservient  to  CDA  Ordinance,  1960  and  as  such  majority  of  the 

functions of CDA still holds the field and in order to resolve certain issues of 

powers matrix, the CDA VSLocal Government system, it is necessary to 

transmit  all  the  administrative,  financial  and  political  authorities  to  the 

representatives of the Local Government system, the transitory provisions as 

well  as  amendment  in  schedule,  has  to  be  considered  by  the  Government, 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 7 

who is empowered to amend any rules, regulations in terms of Section 134 of 

the  ICT  Local  Government  Act,  2015.  This  Court  comes  to  an  irresistible 

conclusion  that  the  arguments  rendered  by  the  petitioner  side  where 

question of vires has been raised to the extent of ICT, Local Government Act, 

2015,  is  not  made  out  as  all  those  provisos  referred  in  the  prayer  clause  of 

this petition  are  not contrary to the constitutional framework, even abstract 

constitutional  review  of  some  provisions  are  not  permissible,  especially, 

when  no  constitutional  defect  or  fundamental  rights  have  been  violated  in 

those  provisions,  therefore,  the  challenge  thrown  by  the  petitioner  to  the 

extent of sec 3 (3), 3(4), 71 and 73 of the ICT, Local Government Act, 2015 is 

not  made  out,  rather  only  a  proposed  amendment  in  the  schedule  of  ICT, 

Local Government Act, 2015, is required to acknowledge the daycare facility 

being a state obligation. 

14. 

In order to deal with the issue of daycare centers, the Government of 

Pakistan  has  introduced  Labour  Policy,  2010,  where  Women  Workers  will  

benefit from the application of ILO Convention on Equal Remuneration, 1951 

(No.100), ratified by Pakistan in 2001. Minimum and above-minimum wages 

will be ensured on the basis of equal pay for equal work, and equal pay for 

work  of  equal  value,  as  between  men  and  women,  in  accordance  with 

Pakistan’s  obligations  under  ILO  Conventions  100  and  111  concerned  with 

equality and non-discrimination respectively. Women will also benefit from 

better information concerning their working conditions and arrangements in 

the  informal  economy,  from  improved  maternity  arrangements,  codes  of 

conduct  relating  to  sexual  harassment  and,  where  possible,  day  care 

arrangements for their children. Similarly, the Government is also committed 

with  providing  women  with  equal  opportunities  for  employment  and  will 

re-examine existing legislation to ensure that women are not denied access to 

suitable jobs that are arising due to Pakistan’s changing labour markets. 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 8 

15.  While  considering  the  above  policy  this  Court  is  also  obliged  to 

appreciate the international standards provided in different conventions. The 

details of same are as under: 

01. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC): 

Adopted on 20th November, 1989. 

Pakistan has ratified CRC on 12th November, 1990. 

Article 18: 

1. 

States  Parties  shall  use  their  best  efforts  to  ensure 

recognition  of  the  principle  that  both  parents  have 

common  responsibilities  for  the  upbringing  and 

development of the child. Parents or, as the case may 

be,  legal  guardians,  have  the  primary  responsibility 

for the upbringing and development of the child. The 

best interests of the child will be their basic concern. 

2. 

For  the  purpose  of  guaranteeing  and  promoting  the 

rights  set  forth  in  the  present  Convention,  States 

Parties shall render appropriate assistance to parents 

and legal guardians in the performance of their child-

rearing 

responsibilities  and 

shall 

ensure 

the 

development  of  institutions,  facilities  and  services 

for the care of children. 

3. 

States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to 

ensure  that  children  of  working  parents  have  the 

right to benefit from child-care services and facilities 

for which they are eligible. 

02. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR):  

proclaimed  by  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  in  Paris 

on 10 December 1948 (General Assembly resolution 217 A). 

Article 25: 

1. 

Everyone  has  the  right  to  a  standard  of  living 

adequate  for  the  health  and  well-being  of  himself 

and  of  his  family,  including  food,  clothing,  housing 

and  medical  care  and  necessary  social  services,  and 

the  right  to  security  in  the  event  of  unemployment, 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 9 

sickness,  disability,  widowhood,  old  age  or  other 

lack  of  livelihood  in  circumstances  beyond  his 

control. 

2.  Motherhood  and  childhood  are  entitled  to  special 

care and assistance. All children, whether born in or 

out  of  wedlock,  shall  enjoy 

the  same  social 

protection. 

3.  International  Covenant  on  Economics,  Social  and  Cultural 

Rights (ICCPR):  

Adopted  on  16th  December,  1966,  by  General  Assembly 

resolution 2200A (XXI) 

Pakistan has ratified ICCPR on June 23, 2010. 

Article 10: 

The  States  Parties  to  the  present  Covenant  recognize 

that: 

1.  The widest possible protection and assistance should 

be  accorded  to  the  family,  which  is  the  natural  and 

fundamental group unit of society, particularly for its 

establishment and while it is responsible for the care 

and education of dependent children. Marriage must 

be entered into with the free consent of the intending 

spouses. 

2. 

Special  protection  should  be  accorded  to  mothers 

during  a  reasonable  period  before  and  after 

childbirth.  During  such  period  working  mothers 

should  be  accorded  paid 

leave  or 

leave  with 

adequate social security benefits. 

3. 

Special measures of protection and assistance should 

be taken on behalf of all children and young persons 

without  any  discrimination  for  reasons  of  parentage 

or  other  conditions.  Children  and  young  persons 

should  be  protected  from  economic  and  social 

exploitation.  Their  employment  in  work  harmful  to 

their morals or health or dangerous to life or likely to 

hamper 

their  normal  development  should  be 

punishable  by  law.  States  should  also  set  age  limits 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 10 

below  which  the  paid  employment  of  child  labour 

should be prohibited and punishable by law. 

4. 

Convention  on 

the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of 

Discrimination against Women (CEDAW): 

Adopted  on  18th  of  December,  1979,  by  United  Nationals 

General Assembly. 

Pakistan has ratified CEDAW on 3rd December, 1996. 

Article 11 

1. 

States  Parties  shall  take  all  appropriate  measures  to 

eliminate  discrimination  against  women  in  the  field 

of  employment  in  order  to  ensure,  on  a  basis  of 

equality  of  men  and  women,  the  same  rights,  in 

particular:  (a)  The  right  to  work  as  an  inalienable 

right of all human beings; 

b.  The 

right 

to 

the 

same 

employment 

opportunities,  including  the  application  of  the 

same  criteria  for  selection 

in  matters  of 

employment; 

c. 

The  right  to  free  choice  of  profession  and 

employment,  the  right  to  promotion, 

job 

security  and  all  benefits  and  conditions  of 

service  and  the  right  to  receive  vocational 

training 

and 

retraining, 

including 

apprenticeships,  advanced  vocational  training 

and recurrent training; 

d.  The  right  to  equal  remuneration,  including 

benefits,  and  to  equal  treatment  in  respect  of 

work  of  equal  value,  as  well  as  equality  of 

treatment  in  the  evaluation  of  the  quality  of 

work; 

e. 

The right to social security, particularly in cases 

of 

retirement, 

unemployment, 

sickness, 

invalidity  and  old  age  and  other  incapacity  to 

work, as well as the right to paid leave; 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 11 

f. 

The  right  to  protection  of  health  and  to  safety 

in  working 

conditions, 

including 

the 

safeguarding of the function of reproduction. 

2. 

In order to prevent discrimination against women on 

the  grounds  of  marriage  or  maternity  and  to  ensure 

their effective right to work, States Parties shall take 

appropriate  measures:  (a)  To  prohibit,  subject  to  the 

imposition of sanctions, dismissal on the grounds of 

pregnancy  or  of  maternity  leave  and  discrimination 

in dismissals on the basis of marital status; 

b.  To introduce maternity leave with pay or with 

comparable  social  benefits  without  loss  of 

former 

employment, 

seniority  or 

social 

allowances; 

c. 

To  encourage  the  provision  of  the  necessary 

supporting  social  services  to  enable  parents  to 

combine 

family 

obligations 

with 

work 

responsibilities  and  participation  in  public  life,  in 

particular 

through 

promoting 

the 

establishment  and  development  of  a  network 

of child-care facilities; 

d.  To provide special protection to women during 

pregnancy  in  types  of  work  proved  to  be 

harmful to them. 

3. 

Protective  legislation  relating  to  matters  covered  in 

this article shall be reviewed periodically in the light 

of  scientific  and  technological  knowledge  and  shall 

be revised, repealed or extended as necessary. 

16.  Now  adverting  towards  need  of  the  hour  qua  the  establishment  of 

child daycare center, which are essential for the working parents, who leave 

their children at the mercy of other family members or servants, who are not 

professionally trained to provide a care and to supervise the child. It is very 

difficult for the working mothers and even for fathers being a single parent 

to achieve his personal life goals for his betterment as well as for his family 

members while leaving the child at the mercy of others. In such scenario, the 

 
 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 12 

global practices allow recognition of childcare centers provided by the State 

as well as in a joint venture with private entities through an institutionalized 

manner, where high quality childcare service contributes the peace of mind 

to the employees/parents. In present times,  it is mandatory to establish the 

childcare  centers  in  every  vicinity  as  well  as  in  every  establishment  to 

provide  safeguard  and  to  ensure  the  protection  of  family,  mother  and  the 

child including the protection of marriage, which is the State responsibility, 

similarly  State  has  to  take  such  steps  for  full  participation  of  women  in  all 

spheres  of  life,  so  that  they  may  not  be  excluded  or  marginalized  from  all 

opportunities  at  national  and  regional  level  on  the  basis  that  they  are 

working mothers. 

17. 

It is also noted with great concern that state has to provide all facilities 

to working mothers or parents, who are not able to properly maintains their 

minor children due to non-availability of daycare facility for establishment of 

childcare center in different areas, establishment or institution due to the fact 

that plots have not been specified for childcare in Islamabad Land Disposal 

Regulation, 2005, despite the fact that those  regulations have been made by 

the CDA in terms of the powers conferred under Section 51 read with Section 

49 of the CDA ordinance, 1960 unless a land has been classified in Chapter II 

of  classification  of  plots  provided  in  the  Islamabad  Land  Disposal 

Regulation, 2005. The status of daycare facility on any residential building as 

well as its related business activity could not be considered legally justified 

to run such facility by any individual, though on plain reading of Regulation 

3(3)  of  the  Islamabad  Land  Disposal  Regulation,  2005,  the  daycare  facility 

falls within the concept of community buildings like Educational Institution, 

Hospitals,  Dispensaries,  Maternity  Homes  etc.,  therefore,  CDA  being  the 

custodian  of  any  scheme  under  Sections  11  and  12  of  the  Ordinance  is 

empowered  to  include  the  daycare  facility/center  in  the  Islamabad  Land 

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 13 

Disposal  Regulation,  2005  in  accordance  with  their  Board  decisions  by 

settling the criteria of such plot, if such plot has been provided by the CDA, 

thereafter,  the  next  step  should  have  been  taken  by  the  MCI  in  terms  of 

powers  conferred  under  Section  73,  which  deals  with  the  functions  of 

Metropolitan Corporation to recognize daycare service / facility / profession 

under ICT, Local Government Act, 2015, accordingly. 

18. 

The  above  referred  discussion  lead  to  irresistible  conclusion  that 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, acknowledges the concept 

of  promotion  of  social  justice  in  terms  of  Article  37  (e),  where  the  state  is 

under obligation to make provisions for securing just and humane conditions of 

work, ensuring that children and women are not employed in vocations unsuited to 

their  age  or  sex,  and  for  maternity  benefits  for  women  in  employment,  therefore, 

while  looking  from  different  angle  the  state  is  under  obligation  to  consider 

the  Conventions  on  the  Rights  of  Child  (CRC),  Universal  Declaration  of 

Human  Rights  (UDHR),  International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and 

Cultural  Rights  (ICCPR),  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of 

Discrimination  against  Women  (CEDAW),    whereby,  all  these  conventions 

have been ratified by the state of Pakistan and in this context Article 37 (e) of 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, has to give effect in shape 

of  separate  legislation  or  in  shape  of  policy  as  discussed  in  above  paras, 

where Labour Policy, 2010, acknowledges the application of ILO conventions 

in which international labor standards provides a daycare center / childcare 

facility 

in  every  residential  area,  establishment,  office,  organization, 

company as well as in the judicial hierarchy including District Courts, High 

Courts,  etc.  where  such  facility  has  to  be  provided  accordingly  so  that  all 

working  parents,  especially,  the  rights  of  mother  and  the  child  be  given 

protection.   

 
 
W.P.No.3178-2016 

Page | 14 

19. 

In  view  of  above,  instant  writ  petition  is  DISPOSED  OF  with  the 

observation  that  Federal  Government  shall  take  all  necessary  steps  for 

establishment of the childcare facility in public and private institution within 

ICT.  

20. 

The  Capital  Development  Authority  shall  initiate  a  study  on  the 

growing  needs  for  establishment  of  Daycare  Center  in  ICT  and  thereafter 

shall submit their proposals before the CDA Board for inclusion of childcare 

in the classification of plots under Islamabad Land Disposal Regulation, 2005 

and may also formulate the necessary regulations to deal with the facility in 

a proper manner.  

21. 

The  Metropolitan  Corporation,  Islamabad  shall  also  devise  a 

mechanism  and  study  for  childcare  center  facility  in  terms  of  Section  73  of 

the  ICT  Local  Government  Act,  2015  and  may  include  such  facility  in  the 

third  schedule  accordingly.  The  MCI  shall  also  notify  the  required  rules  to 

regulate  such  facility  within  every  residential  area,  establishment  in  ICT 

including but not limited to Government Offices, Private Companies, Courts, 

Chief Commissioner Offices, Schools, Factories etc.        

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 

         JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on  

RAMZAN 

JUDGE 

Approved for reporting. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
