ORDER SHEET

IN  THE  ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT.  151.AMABAD. 
(JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT) 

Criminal Appeal No. 178  /2015 

Aamir Qayyum Janjua 
VS
The State 

Appellant by: 

Adnan Qamar, Advocate. 

State by: 

Mr.  Nazar Hussain Shah, AAG with 
Shehryar Sl/F.l.A. 

Date of Hearing: 

21.08.2020 

Ghulam Azam  Qambrani. J.:  The  appellant,  through  the 

instant  Criminal  Appeal  has  assailed 

impugned 

judgment,  dated 

31.10.2015,  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-  IV  

West,  Islamabad,  in  case  F.l.R  No.22,  dated  24.06.2014  registered  at 

Police  Station  F.l.A  Cyber  Crime  Circle,  Islamabad,  for  the  offence 

under  Sections  36,  37  ETO  ,  2002  read  with  Section  419  P.P.C, 

whereby 

the  appellant  was  acquitted  under  Sections  36/37  ET0,2002, 

but  was  convicted  under  Section  419  PPC  and  sentenced  for  a  period 

of  three  years  with  fine  of  Rs.  25,000/-,  in  default  whereof  to  further 

undergo  S.I  for  one  month.  Benefit  of  Section  382-8  Cr.P.C  was  also 

given to the  accused/appellant. 

2. 

The 

brief 

facts 

of 

the 

prosecution 

case 

are 

that 

appellant/accused  Aamir  Qayyum  Janjua  illegally  and  un-authorizedly 

accessed 

the 

information  system 

in 

the  name  of  daughter  of 

complainant  namely  Shaheen  Akhtar  and  created  following  face-book 

profiles  with  malafide  intention  to  defame/harass  the  daughter  of  the 

complainant  Shaheen  Akhtar  and his family:- 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

www.facebook.com/janjua.  ?fref=ts 

www.facebook.com/profile.  php?id= 1000055455650098fref=ts 

www.facebook.com/paree.gul.5?fref=ts 

www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100008308787948  &fref=ts 

www.facebook.com/sofigee.94 

2 

Criminal  Appeal  No. 178  /2015 

(VI)  www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100008308787948  &  fref=ts 

(vii)  www.facebok.com/sheena.  pari.35 

The  accused  person  also  transmitted  vulgar  comments,  uploaded 

photos  and  audio  material  on the  said face  book  profiles,  hence,  above 

mentioned  FIR was  lodged against the appellant/accused. 

3. 

After  usual  investigation,  the  challan  was  submitted  before  the 

learned  Trial  Court. After  taking  cognizance,  and after  fulfilling  the  codal 

formalities,  charge  was  framed  against  the  appellant  under  Sections  36 

&  37  of  Electronic  Transaction  Ordinance,  2002  and  Section  419  PPC 

to which  the appellant/accused  pleaded  not guilty  and claimed  trial. 

4. 

In  order 

to  establish 

the  case, 

the  prosecution  examined 

following  six witnesses.- 

PW-1 

WasifWaseem  Shah, Constable 

PW-2 

lmran Haider, Senior Investigator Technical FIA, 

PW-3 

Fazal Din son of Muhammad Din (Complainant) 

PW-4 

Shaheen Akhtar d/o Fazal Din (  victim), 

PW-5 

PW-6 

Fazal  Mehmood s/o Abdul Khaliq SI, Cyber 
Crime Circle F.I.A 
Mehmood ul  Hassan, Deputy Director Forensic 

Laboratory F.I.A. 

5. 

After 

closure 

of 

the 

prosecution 

evidence, 

the 

appellant/accused  was  examined  u/s  342  Cr.P.C.,  wherein  he 

categorically  denied  the  accusation  and  stated  that  he  was  falsely 

implicated  in  this  case  by  F. I.A  in  connivance  with  the  complainant 

and  claimed  innocence.  The  accused  did  not  opt  to  record  his 

statement under Section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. 

6. 

After  hearing  the  final  arguments,  the  learned  trial  Court 

convicted  the  appellant  by  means  of  impugned  judgment  dated 

31.10.2015  and  observed" 

I  do  find  that  the  accused  is  not  guilty 

under  Section  36137  ETO,  2002  and  hence  he  is  acquitted  of 

these  two  charges.  However  the  accused  is  found  guilty  and,  I 

convict  him  under  Section  419  P.P.C  and  sentence  him  for  the 

term  of  three  years  with  fine  of  Rs.  25, 0001-  and  in  default  of 

payment  of  fine  he  will  further  undergo  S.I  for  one  month.  The 

benefit  of Section  382-B  Cr.P.C  is  given  to  the  accused".  Feeling 

3 

Criminal  Apeeal  No.178 

/2015 

aggrieved  from  the  impugned  judgment,  the  appellant/accused 

has filed  instant  appeal. 

7. 

Learned  counsel  for the  appellant  has contended  that  there  is  no 

evidence  on  record  to  connect  the  appellant  with  the  commission  of 

alleged  offence;  even the  IP  address  was  not confirmed;  that  during  the 

evidence  of the  prosecution,  it came  on  record  that  no facebook  profile 

in  the  name  of  Ms.Shaheen  Akhtar  was  mentioned  in  the  report  Ex.P3; 

that  no  offence 

is  made  out  against 

the  appelant/accused; 

that 

dishonest  improvements  were  made  by the  PWs  which  were  not taken 

into consideration  by the  learned Trial  Court  and nothing  was  recovered 

from  the  appellant/accused.  Lastly  prayed  for  setting  aside  of  the 

impugned judgment. 

8. 

Conversely,  Assistant  Attorney-General  opposed  the  contentions 

raised  by the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant/accused  and  contended 

that  the  prosecution  has  proved  its  case  against  the  appellant;  that 

computer  was  recovered  which  was  provided  by  the  brother  of  the 

appellant;  password  of  the  profile  was  given  by  the  appellant  himself 

and  technical  report  Ex.P3  and  forensic  report  Ex.P5/4  were  prepared 

and produced.  Lastly  urged for dismissal  of the appeal. 

9. 

I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsels  for  the 

parties  and  have  perused 

the  available 

record  with 

their  able 

assistance. 

10. 

Perusal  of  the  record  reveals  that  the  appellant  was  booked  for 

commission  of  offence  that  he  illegally  and  un-authorisidely  accessed 

the  information  system  in  the  name  of  daughter  of  complainant  namely 

Shaheen  Akhtar  and  created  seven  number  of  facebook  profile  on  her 

name  with  the  intention  to  defame  and  harass  her. 

It  has  also  been 

alleged  that  the  appellant  has  transmitted  vulgar  comments,  uploaded 

photos  and  audio  video  material  on  the  above-mentioned 

facebook 

profiles. 

11. 

It  is  evident  from  the  statement  of  PW.4  Ms.Shaheen  Akhtar  that 

she  was  well  acquainted  with  the  appellant  and  she,  with  her  consent 

had  delivered  her  educational  documents  and  photographs  to  him  and 

the  record  further  depicts  that  previously  there  was  also  criminal 

litigation 

in  between  them  registered  by  the  appellant  against  the 

complainant  party.  The  prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  prove  the 

4 

Criminal  Apoeal  No. 178  /2015 

allegation  against  the  appellant  that  he  un-authorizedly  accessed  the 

information  system  in  the  name of daughter  of  complainant  and  created 

face-book  profiles  in  the  name  of  Ms.  Shaheen  Akhtar.  The  learned 

Trial  Court  being  satisfied  that  there  was  no  such  evidence,  therefore, 

acquitted 

the  appellant  under  Section  36/37  of 

the  Electronics 

Transactions  Ordinance,  2002,  however  convicted  him  under  Section 

419  PPC for  cheating  by personation. 

12. 

I  have  carefully  gone  through  the  statements  of  the  witnesses. 

PW.2  lmran  Haider,  Senior  Investigator  Technical  FIA  Cyber  Crime 

Circle,  Rawalpindi,  during  his  cross-examination  has  admitted  that  in 

the 

facebook  profiles 

the  name  of  Ms.Shaheen  Akhtar  was  not 

mentioned  and  to  another  question,  he  has  also  admitted  that  the 

facebook  profiles  upon which  he submitted  the  technical  report  Ex.P3/2 

is  not  in  the  name  of  Ms.Shaheen  Akhtar.  He  has  also  admitted  that 

there  is  no naked  photos  and vulgar  comments  in  Ex.P3/5  and  Ex.P3/6. 

PW.6  Mehmood-ul-Hassan,  Deputy  Director  Forensic  Laboratory  FIA, in 

his statement  has deposed  that  on  10.07.2014  he received  a  letter from 

Deputy  Director  FIA,  Rawalpindi,  regarding  Forensic  Report  in  FIR  No. 

22/2014  and  then  he  prepared  such  report  consisting  upon  thirty  one 

pages.  He  has  produced  the  report  Ex.PW.5/4.  This  witness  has  not 

explained  anything  in  his  statement  and  only  has  produced  his  above 

mentioned  report.  Perusal  of  report  Ex.PW.5/4  consisting  upon  thirty 

one  pages  does  not  disclose  any  fact  suggesting  or  proving  that  the 

appellant  un-authorizedly  accessed  the  information  system  of the  ID  of 

Ms.Shaheen  Akhtar,  and  report  is  also  silent  that  the  appellant  has 

created  a 

facebook  account 

in 

the  name  of  Ms.Shaheen  Akhtar 

representing  himself  to  be  facebook  users  as  Ms.  Shaheen  Akhtar. 

There  are  material  dishonest  improvements  in  the  statements  of  the 

witnesses.  Further  more,  the  recovery  of  computer  and  modem  was 

made  through  Azhar  Hussain  vide  Ex.PW.5/3,  which 

is  un-dated. 

Admittedly,  the  appellant  was  at  Adiala  Jail,  Rawalpindi,  in  another 

case.  The  recovery  of  computer  through  undated  recovery  memo,  has 

caste  serious  doubt  in  the case of prosecution. 

13. 

For  the  forgoing  reasons,  I  am  of  the  considered  opinion  that 

there  is  no  evidence  on  record  that  the  appellant  has  created  any 

facebook  profile  in  the  name  of  Ms.  Shaheen  Akhtar,  therefore,  no 

case  under  Section  419  PPC  is  made  out  against  the  appellant.  The 

conviction  recorded  by  the  learned  Trial  Court  is  not  sustainable, 

5 

Criminal ApDeal No.178 

/2015 

therefore, 

this  appeal  is  accepted  and  the  impugned  judgment  dated 

31.10.2015, 

passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-  IV  

West,  Islamabad,  is  set  aside  and  the  accused  is  also  acquitted  of  the 

charge  under  Section  419  PPC.  The  sentence  of  appellant  was 

suspended  by 

this  Court  vide  order  dated  11.06.2019  and 

convicUappellant  was 

released  on  bail.  The  surety  shall  stand 

discharged  of his liability. 

~GHtntltlX°ZXM  QAMaR"fNI) 

JUDGE 

Announced  in  open Court on  this 2ih  day of August, 2020 . 

.. 

~E' 

S.Akhtar 

