Form  No: HCJD/C-121.

ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HI H COI IRT. ISLAMABAD
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020

Beenish Khalid
VS
Federation  of Pakistan

S. No. of
orderl
oroceedinos

Date of
orderl
proceedings

Order with signature of Judge and that of
parties or counsel where necessary.

02)  LB-04-2020.  Petitioner,  in person.

Syed Muhammad  Tayyab,  DAG.
Syed  Naseem  Ahmed Shah Advocate, for the D.C.
Office, ICT.
Sardar  Gohar  Zaman, A.C.  Saddar.

The petitioner  through the instant  petition has

sought a direction to the respondents  to release  his

brother namely, Waqas  Khalid. It is asserted  that he has

been detained  against his will at the quarantine  centre

established at the Haji Camp,  Islamabad.

2. 

The brother of the petitioner  returned from the

Kingdom of Thailand on a special flight on L4.04.2020.  On

his arrival at the International  Airport, Islamabad, all the

passengers  were taken to a hotel and later some were
shifted to  the Haji Camp. The respondents  have

established quarantine  centers at designated hotels  and

the Haji Camp at Islamabad. The petitioner asserts  that

her brother  has been kept in deplorable  conditions  at the

Haji Camp and that too against his will.

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

2

3

Sardar  Gohar Zaman,  Assistant  Commissioner

(Sadder),  Islamabad Capital Territory has appeared  in

response to notices issued  yesterday. He has submitted

copy of Standard Operating Procedures  (SOP), which  have

been  prescribed to deal with passengers  arriving from

abroad. He has stated that an option was given to all the

passengers  to stay at a hote! but the petitioner's  brother

preferred to be kept at the State expense  in the Haji

Camp. The relevant portions of the SOP's are reproduced

as below:

"26. All passengers  and crew will be
subjected to  a  minimum of  7-day
quarantine period upon arrival in Pakistan.
The quarantine  can be extended  to 14 days
based on the result of the passenger's
COVID  test, which will be conducted  during
the initial 7-day quarantine  period.

27.  The transportation to the quarantine
location shall  be arranged  by the concerned
authorities.  No meet and greet at the
airport shall be allowed for passengers
arriving by international  flights.

28.  Passengers will be responsible  for all
expenses of their stay if they choose to stay
in  a  hotel/paid facility. Government
quarantine  centres will be free of cost.
They will not be able to switch  facilities  once
their quarantine  begins unless deemed
necessary  by the authorities.

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

3

29,  While the government  will try its best
to accommodate passengers according to
their preferences,  paid facilities  are limited
and cannot be guaranteed.  The authorities
on the ground will have the final say on
where passengers  are quarantined. "

4. 

The petitioner has stated that the option  was

not given to her brother and that the latter was forced to

be quarantined  for seven days in the quarantine centre  at

the Haji Camp, Islamabad. She has alleged that

conditions at the Haji Camp are deplorable and that the

inmates are being dealt with as if they have committed

some criminal  offence. She has further asserted  that the

officials are not accessible  to the family members of the

detained passengers  nor adequate  information  is being

provided. Sardar Gohar Zaman,  Assistant  Commissioner

on the other hand has stated that utmost effort is being

made to ensure the welfare  and well being of all the

passengers during their stay in the quarantine  centres.

5. 

It is obvious from the above that pursuant  to

the policy of the Federal Governmentrthe citizens who

return  from abroad are kept in quarantine  centres for a

minimum  period of seven days. Those who can afford are

given the option to be quarantined  in one of the hotels

taken  over by the State for this purpose while others are

sent to the Haji Camp at Islamabad, The less privileged

who cannot afford to be detained in an acquired  hotel

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

4

definitely deserve  proper care because they are

completely  at the mercy of the State. They cannot be

treated less favourably than those who are privileged

enough to afford their stay at an acquired hotel. The

detention is not due to any fault on the part of the

returning  passengers who are already in distress.  It is the

exceptional  circumstances which deprives them of liberty

for a minimum  period  of seven days. It is, therefore,  the
duty of the State to ensure that conditions in the

quarantine centres meet the minimum threshold of the

constitutionally guaranteed  rights  under Articles 9 and 14

of the Constitution.  This duty is more onerous towards  the

less privileged  who cannot  afford to be detained  in the

quarantine  centres established in the designated hotels.

6

The concerns  of  the petitioner  regarding
treating the returning passengers  in a manner  that

stigmatizes the forced detention  also does not appear  to

be misplaced. The challenges are global  and not confined

to Pakistan. By no stretch  of the imagination,  the infliction

of COVID-19  or its challenges  can be treated  as a stigma.

The threat  of outbreak of the virus and its consequences

cannot be overstated.  The nation States across the globe

have taken the challenges seriously  that have arisen  due

to the invisible and deadlV viruTwhile those who did not

have regretted publically.  But nowhere has the virus or its

infliction been treated as a stigma.

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

5

On the contrary the will to  combat the
7. 
challenges  has united  nations across the globe. It  iS,

therefore,  a duty of the State and the political leadership

to build a narrative in order to dispel any impression that

stigmatizes  the infliction or measures  taken in meeting

the challenges.  It is also their duty to guide the nation

and make the citizens  aware of the consequences  of
taking the challenges  !ightly or dealing with lt in an
irresponsible manner.  It is a constitutionally  guaranteed

right of every citizen under Articles 19 and 19-A of the
Constitution  to  have access to  full and complete

information.  It is, therefore, the duty of the State and its

functionaries  to dispel any impression  of stigma  being

attached to the infliction or spread  of or measures taken

to meet the challenges in safeguarding the public at large

from the expected harm. Likewise,  it is also duty of the
functionaries to ensure that while implementing  its

policies in relation  to COVID-1?  the citizens are dealt with

humanely and with compassion having regard to their

guaranteed  rights.

In view of the above,  this petition is disposed

8. 
gtin the following terms:

i.  The respondents shall prescribe a
transparent  mechanism to seek options

from each returning passenger  regarding

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

6

the  quarantine  centres established

pursuant to the SOPs.

ii.  The respondents shall ensure that each
passenger  is treated in accordance  wifl
and the conditions at the quarantine

centres meet the minimum threshold of

the constitutionally  guaranteed rights
under Articles 9  and  14  of  the

Constitution.

iii.  The State and the functionaries owe a

duty of care towards every quarantined

passenger,  particularly  those  who cannot

afford to stay in the designated  hotels.

The respondents  shall, therefore,  ensure

that the conditions at the Haji Camp,

Islamabad are scrupulously monitored

and each quarantined  passenger is

treated in  accordance with  the

constitutionally guaranteed rights, inter-
alia, under Articles 9 and L4 of the

Constitution.

iv.  The respondents  are directed to develop a

mechanism  so that family  members of the

detained passengers have access to

information.

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

7

v.  The State and public  functionaries,
pursuant to the duty they owe to the
citizens under the Constitution,  are
required to  disseminate effective
information to  dispel the impression
which stigmatizes the  carriers or
suspected  carriers of  COVID-19  and
measures taken to meet its challenges,

e.g. putting returning passengers in

quarantine  centres for seven  days.

VI

The Deputy Commissioner,  Islamabad

Capital  Territory  shall nominate  an official

to visit the quarantine centre  established

at the Haji Camp, Islamabad  to meet the

quarantined inmates and ensure that the

living conditions are in conformity  with

the constitutionally  guaranteed  rights,

inter-alia, under Afticles  9 and 14 of the

Constitution  and that they are not treated

less favourably than those who are
privileged enough to  afford being

quarantined  in the acquired hotels. The

inspection report shall be submitted

before the Registrar of this Couft  within

W.P. No. 1156 of 2020.

8

three days from the date of receipt of this

order.

Tanvcr  Ahmed.
18-04-2020.

C

JUSTICE

