JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE ISI.ATAEAD HIGH COURT  ISLAT'IBAD.

(JUDTCTAL DEPARTMENTI

Writ Petition No.250 of 2020

Rashid  lnayat
VS
Learned  Sessions  Judge (West), lslamabad, etc.

Petitioner By:

Mr. Muham  mad Zafar Khokhar,  Advocate

State by:

Mr. Zohaib  Hassan Gondal, State  Counsel along
with Mian Khurram  Sub-lnspector, Police  Station
Shalimar, lslamabad.

Date  of Hearing: 21.02.2020.

GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI.J.:-  The petitioner  through  the

instant  Writ Petition,  filed under Article 199 of the Constitution of the

lslamic Republic of Pakistan,  1973, seeks  Superdari  of the vehicle,

Toyota Corolla, GLI bearing registration  No.AFD-507, Chassis

NZEl TOR-4127482,  Engine No.2501434, Model 2017 ,  being

recorded  owner of the same.

2.  Briefly stated facts of the case are that on 30.11.2019, on the

written report of one Nisar  Ahmed Khan  F.l.R No.399 of 2019, was

registered  at Police Station Shalimar, lslamabad,  under  Section

392134  P.P.C  with the averments  that on that day at about  12:30 am,

he along with his family was at E-11 Market, lslamabad;  ln the
meantime, a white colored Corolla Car bearing Registration

No.AMG-121  stop them, two persons deboarded  from the car,

stating themselves  as C.l.A  Officials  and asked  for the registration

book of vehicle;  ln the meantime, the other companion while aiming

pistol at the wife of complainant looted and deprived them from

2

W.PNo.250/2020

golden ornaments,  pistol of the complainant  and made  their good

escape  from the scene  towards Golra

3.  The petitioner filed an application  before the Court of learned

Judicial  Magistrate (West)  Islamabad,  for Superdari of vehicle which

was dismissed vide order dated 19.12.2019.  Feeling aggrieved from

the said order,  the petitioner  filed a Criminal  Revision before the

Court of learned Sessions Judge (West)  lslamabad, which was also

dismissed vide order  dated 13.01  .2020.  Hence, this petition.

4.  Learned  counsel  for the petitioner contended  that the

petitioner runs business  of "Rent a Car" in the name of WALEED
MOTORS having office at Block-C, near Tehzeeb  Bakers,

lslamabad,  and the same vehicle was rented out to one Fahad Bilal

on rent through an agreement;  Contended  that the vehicle in

question has been impounded by the police and the vehicle is

standing  in open sky where  the condition of the vehicle is being

deteriorated  day by day and there is apprehension of its being

damaged; Contended  that the vehicle in-question  is the source of

income of the petitioner and there is no other claimant of the vehicle

except the petitioner; Contended  that the Courts  below failed to

consider  the submission of the petitioner while dismissing the

application  for Superdari  of the vehicle  without any legaljustification

5.  Conversely,  learned counsel for the State opposed  the

arguments advanced by the learned counsel for petitioner on the

ground that the vehicle in question has been used in the commission

of offence  and the same has to be produced during  trial. Lastly,

prayed for dismissal of the petition

3

W.P No.250/2020

6. 

I have been heard arguments  of the Iearned counsel  for the

parties and have gone through  the available record  with their able

assistance.

7.  Perusal of record and the contents  of F.l.R reveal that at the

time of commission  of alleged offence, allegedly  the culprits were

having car bearing registration  number  AMC-121 who looted  them

and deprived them from their valuable articles. Perusal of the record

further  reveals that the S.H.O Police Station Shalimar, lslamabad,

vide report dated 17.12.2019  submitted  to the Judicial  Magistrate,

mentioning  therein the fact that the vehicle in-question  was rented

out to one Fahad Bilal by the petitioner on monthly  rent for

Rs.80,000/-. I have perused the original registration  book of the

vehicle in-question,  the petitioner is recorded owner  of the same,

therefore, he is entitled  to take the same  on Superdari.

8.  Keeping in view  the facts and circumstance of the case instant

petition is allowed  in favor of petitioner  subject  to furnishing  of his  .

surety bond in the sum of Rs.15,00,000/- (fifteen lac only) and PR of

the like amount to the satisfaction  of the learned trial Court. The

petitioner  is directed not to change  the condition or color of the

vehicle  in any manner and to produce it before the Court as and

when required.

*Rana.M.Ifi'

(GHULAtut MArut

RANr)

JUDGE

