JUDGMENT 

Before Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, J 

MARYAM NOOR and another---Petitioners 

VS

The STATE and another---Respondents 

W.P. No. 941 of 2018, decided on 4th May, 2018. 

SHAUKAT AZIZ SIDDIQUI, J.---Petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of 
this court by way of filing instant writ petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan with the following prayer:- 

"Wherefore in the premise, it is most respectfully prayed that: 

The FIR No. 17/ 2018 dated 12.01.2018 under sections 420, 468 and 471 Police 

a. 
Station Ramna may kindly be quashed. 

The legal actions may kindly be initiated against respondent No.2 for harassing, 

b. 
defaming and registering false FIRs against the petitioners. 

Directions  may  kindly  be  issued  to  the  police  officials  not  to  register  fake  FIRs 

c. 
against the petitioner and her brother. 

This Hon'ble Court may grant any other relief deemed appropriate in view of the facts and 
circumstances of the case." 

And presented the facts as under; 

2. 
That Nikah of petitioner No.1 with respondent No.2 was solemnized on 03.05.2007, out of 
this wedlock two daughters namely Rahima Nisar and Fatima Nisar, aged 10 years and 5 years 
were born. That respondent No.2 pronounced talaq upon petitioner No.1 on 24.09.2016, resultantly 
relationship of husband and wife terminated permanently. That respondent No.2 lodged an FIR 
No.17/2018 dated 12.01.2018 against the petitioners, wherein, it has been alleged that the original 
passports, birth certificates and family registration certificate of the minors are in his possession 
and petitioners have made a fake report of lost documents, on which stamp of police station Rata 
Amral is also fictitious. On the basis of this report petitioner No.1 obtained fresh passports of the 
minor girls and took them abroad on 20.12.2017, complainant further alleged that petitioners had 
threatened him that they would take his daughters abroad, forever. That the court has granted the 
interim  custody  of  the  minors  to  petitioner  No.1  being  real  mother  and  suits  for  jactitation  of 
marriage and Appointment of Guardian are also pending before the court of competent jurisdiction. 
That infact, petitioner No.1 went for performing 'Umrah' along with minors and this fact was well 
within the knowledge of respondent No.2. That petitioners claim is that alleged fake police report 
for obtaining fresh passports was provided to petitioner No.1 by respondent No.2 himself. 

 
 
 
 
 
Learned  counsel  for  Petitioners  contended  that  impugned  FIR  has  been  lodged  just  to 
3. 
blackmail, humiliate and harass petitioner No.1 and in order to defame her in the society, to compel 
petitioner No.1 to surrender the custody of minors and for waiving her accrued valuable rights. 
The  very  registration  of  case  is  tainted  with  mala  fide,  which  is  result  of  lucrative  influence 
exercised  by  respondent  No.2,  on  the  local  police.  Learned  counsel  further  contended  that 
petitioner No.1 had already informed the Superintendent of Police that passports of the minors are 
in the custody of respondent No.2 and also that she is not safe from the illegal and harmful designs 
of respondent No.2. Learned counsel added that another application for registration of FIR has 
also been filed by respondent No.2, wherein it has been alleged that petitioners have received an 
amount of Rs.20 million from him, all the complaints filed by respondent No. 2 are spurious and 
are  just  intended  to  initiate  false  criminal  proceedings  against  the  petitioners  to  settle  family 
matters.  Learned  counsel  lastly  contended  that  the  entire  proceedings  pending  against  the 
petitioners are totally misconceived as  from  the  collective reading of  FIR no criminal  intent  is 
found, therefore, the machinery of criminal law could not be set in motion and further continuation 
of trial would be a futile exercise. 

4. 
On the other hand learned counsel for respondent No.2 along with learned State counsel 
opposed the request of quashment of FIR and prayed for the dismissal of writ petition. Learned 
counsel  for  respondent  No.2  while  rebutting  the  contentions  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for 
petitioners contended that birth certificates and family registration certificate of the minors were 
in possession of respondent No.2 and the petitioners have made a fake report of lost documents 
without informing respondent No.2 who is the real father of the minors, with the intention to take 
them  abroad,  on  which  stamp  of  Police  Station  Rata  Amral  is  also  fake  and  this  act  of  the 
petitioners constitutes serious offence under the criminal law, therefore, present petitioners does 
not  deserve  any  leniency  and  they  must  be  tried  under  the  law.  That  respondent  No.2  denies 
pronouncement of divorce. 

I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  parties  and  have  gone  through  the  relevant  record 

available on file. 

5. 
The stand of complainant/respondent No.2 in the impugned FIR is that petitioners have 
taken  his  daughters  abroad  with  the  intention  to  keep  them  away  from  him  forever.  Whereas, 
perusal of record reveals this fact that petitioner No.1 along with minors proceeded to Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia to perform 'Umrah' and returned back to Pakistan, which by itself, prima facie, does 
not disclose any intent regarding taking the minors away rather negates the stance of complainant. 
The interim custody of the minors has been given to petitioner No.1 (real mother of the minors) 
by the court of competent jurisdiction. Moreover, it is observed that another petition under section 
22-A/B, Cr.P.C. was filed before learned Justice of Peace, against the petitioners, which has been 
dismissed, vide order dated 02.03.2018 on the ground that applicant has tried to convert a civil 
family dispute into a criminal case. In addition to that FIR bearing No.832/2016 was also lodged 
against  petitioner  No.2,  who  was  exonerated  by  the  local  police.  The  point  weather  accused 
petitioners are having any nexus with the allegations leveled against them in the impugned FIR 
regarding preparation of fake documents is concerned, no material has been collected by the local 
police to connect petitioners with the commission of alleged offence, even prima facie. 

6. 
Furthermore, petitioner No.1 has filed suit for jactitation/ dissolution of marriage on the 
basis of pronounced divorce, is pending before Judge Family Court Rawalpindi, in which next date 

 
 
 
of  hearing  is  14.05.2018  and  another  application  for  Appointment  of  Guardian  is  also  pending 
between the parties before the learned Guardian Judge Islamabad. Another, important fact is that 
present  petitioner  No.1  is  the  fourth  wife  of  respondent  No.2  and  latter  claims  that  he  did  not 
pronounce divorce upon petitioner No.1. This dispute can only be resolved by the learned Judge 
Family  Court.  In  order  to  probe  the  possibility  of  reconciliation  between  petitioner  No.1  and 
respondent No.2, this court provided opportunity of meeting but there seems, serious trust deficit, 
although respondent No.2 made a statement that he wants petitioner No.1 to join him and live as 
wife.  I  failed  to  understand  that  how  respondent  No.2  can  win  the  heart  of  petitioner  No.1  by 
lodging FIR's like one in hand. Respondent No.2 should have realized this fact that petitioner No.1, 
even  if  divorced,  shall  remain  mother  of  his  daughters  till  the  Day  of  Judgment  likewise, 
respondent No.2 shall remain father, although petitioner No.1 and respondent No.2 can be ex-wife 
and ex-husband. I am fully convinced that registration of FIR is tainted with mala fide, result of 
colourable exercise of authority, an abuse of the process of law, without commission of any offence 
and rarity in the eyes of law. Guidance in this regard has been sought from different authoritative 
pronouncements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, which are; 1993 SCMR 71, 2000 SCMR 
122 and 2012 SCMR 94. 

Judgments on the issue provides following situations wherein discretion of exercising the 

7. 
authority of quashment of FIR can be used. 

(i) 

If from the bare reading of the FIR it does not make out any cognizable offence. 

(ii) 

If the same has been registered without lawful authority and jurisdiction. 

(iii) 

If any civil liability is given the shape of criminal liability. 

Even in the Judgments through which exercise of such discretion has been dis-approved "door of 
extra ordinary circumstance" has been kept  open. Guidance in  this regard is  sought  from  1996 
SCMR 186, 2006 SCMR 276 and PLJ 2011 SC 1932(sic.). 

In  case  titled  as  "Sheikh  Muhammad  Tahir  v.  The  State  and  others"  reported  as  2012 

8. 
PCr.LJ 1075, this court held as under: 

"13.  The  High  Court  being  custodian  of  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens  is  under 
obligation to  provide shield against any invasion made on the guaranteed constitutional 
rights  and  protect  the  subject  from  discrimination,  exploitation,  colourable  exercise  of 
authority, bolted actions, mala fide and stinking proceedings." 

9. 
To protect citizens from malicious prosecution is the duty of constitutional courts and in 
light of the law laid down by the superior courts, instant matter is the fit case, where discretion 
needs to be exercised. 

Considering the aforenoted facts, writ petition in hand is allowed and as prayed for FIR 

10. 
No. 17/2018 dated 12.01.2018, is hereby, quashed. 

 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer: The content available In this document are just for Information. Users are advised not to depend 
on the information and use it for official purpose. Islamabad High Court, Islamabad is not responsible for 
any damages arising in contract from the use of the content of this documen 

Uploaded by IT department, IHC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
