ORDER SHEET 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Writ Petition No.3166  of 2020 

Aamir Munir Puri 
VS
Mst. Saima Naeem, etc. 

Petitioner by: 
Respondents No.1 to 4 by: Rao Shaheryar, Advocate. 

Mr. Mudassar Rizwan, Advocate. 

Date of hearing: 

01.02.2021 

GHULAM    AZAM    QAMBRANI,  J.:-  This  judgment  shall 

dispose  of  instant  writ  petition  bearing  No.3166  of  2020  as  well  as 

writ  petition  No.3878  of  2020,  as  these  have  been  arisen  out  of 

same  impugned  order  dated  03.10.2020,  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge,  Family  Court,  Islamabad-East,  whereby  on  the  basis  of 

tentative assessment, a sum of Rs.12000/- per month for each minor 

has been fixed as interim maintenance.  

2. 

Through  these  petitions,  the  petitioners  have  invoked  the 

jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of 

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, wherein, facts, in brief, relevant 

for 

their  disposal,  are 

that 

the  petitioner,  Aamir  Munir  Puri 

(hereinafter  be  referred  to  as  “petitioner”)  and  Saima  Munir  Puri/ 

respondent  (hereinafter  be  referred  to  as  “respondent”)  were 

married to each other on 15.10.1999, in accordance with Shariah-e-

Muhammadi.  Out  of  wedlock,  the  couple  was  blessed  with  three 

children,  respondents  No.2  to  4,  who  are  in  custody  of  respondent 

(Saima Naeem). It was added that the respondent was a disobedient 

and disloyal wife, who always tried to humiliate the petitioner and his 

parents but always the situation was compromised by the petitioner 

for the sake of minors; that the petitioner purchased a plot in Media 

Town  Islamabad  with  his  own  source  of  income  and  after  getting 

loan from HBL, constructed a house on the said plot and till date the 

respondents No.1 to 4 are living in the said house; that respondent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

“WP Nos.3166 and 3878 of 2020” 
 (Aamir Munir Puri V. Mst. Saima Naeem, etc.) 

filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  maintenance  against  the  petitioner  and 

upon  receipt  of  summons,  the  petitioner  appeared  in  the  court  and 

submitted  written  statement  on  03.10.2020;  that  on  the  same  day 

the learned trial court vide order dated 03.10.2020 fixed the monthly 

interim maintenance of each minor at the rate of Rs.12,000/-, feeling 

dissatisfied with the same, the petitioner, Aamir Munir Puri, has filed 

the instant writ petition against the respondents. 

3. 

That the respondent, Saima Aamir Puri, has filed  writ petition 

No.3878  of  2020,  against  the  petitioner  (her  husband)  with  the 

prayer for setting aside the impugned order dated 03.10.2020 on the 

ground  that  no  monthly  maintenance  has  been  fixed  for  the 

respondent,  herself,  and  that  the  interim  maintenance  fixed  for 

minors/  respondent  No.2  to  4  may  be  enhanced  @  Rs.30,000/-  for 

each.  

4. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  (Aamir  Munir  Puri)  argued 

that the interim maintenance ought to have been fixed proportionate 

to  the income  of  the  petitioner and the rate so  fixed  by  the learned 

Family Court is exorbitant and disproportionate to the sources of the 

income of the petitioner who was employed in Habib Bank Ltd., but 

unfortunately  his  services  were  terminated  in  December  2019  and 

since  then  he  is  jobless;  that  old  and  sick  widow  mother  of  the 

petitioner  is  also  dependent  upon  him,  who  mostly  remains 

hospitalized; that petitioner is unable to pay Rs.36,000/- per month; 

that the learned Family Court blindly fixed the maintenance of one of 

the  child  who  is  major  and  impugned  order  to  this  extent  is  totally 

unjustified  and  liable  to  be  reversed;  that  the  impugned  order  is 

unjust,  harsh  and  not  according  to  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 

case  and  economic  competence  of  the  petitioner,  hence  the  same 

may be set aside. 

5. 

Per  Contra,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  submitted 

that  payment  of  maintenance  to  the  minor  children  is  the  primary 

responsibility  of  their  father/  petitioner;  that  the  rate  of  interim 

maintenance  fixed  by  the  learned  trial  Court  is  not  in  accordance 

with  financial  position  of  the  petitioner  towards  his  minor  children 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

“WP Nos.3166 and 3878 of 2020” 
 (Aamir Munir Puri V. Mst. Saima Naeem, etc.) 

whereas,  the  petitioner  is  holding  valuable  assets,  therefore,  the 

learned trial Court failed to fix the maintenance of the minors as per 

their requirements; that the maintenance  allowance  to  the extent of 

respondent  No.1  is  against  the  facts  and  justice,  because  the 

petitioner is a billionaire, owned a lot of property and enjoying a high 

ranking  position;  that  the  petitioner  is  a  reputed  business  man  and 

has  residential  lands  inherited  from  his  late  father,  therefore,  the 

maintenance allowance fixed for the minors is not appropriate in any 

manner.    

6. 

I  have  considered  the  arguments  advanced  from  both  the 

sides and have gone through the material available on record, which 

reveals  that  the  petitioner  being  father  of  minors,  i.e.  respondents 

No.2 to 4, is aggrieved with the order dated 03.10.2020, passed by 

the 

learned  Family  Judge, 

Islamabad-East,  wherein 

interim 

maintenance  allowance  in  favour  of  minors  has  been  fixed  @ 

Rs.12000/- each per month, which is alleged to be disproportionate 

to the income of the petitioner/ father. 

7.  While  considering  the  divergent  claims  and  pleadings  of  the 

parties,  this  Court  has  to  address  the  proposition  that  what  were 

guiding  principles  to  fix  the  interim  maintenance  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court?  For  addressing  the  above  preposition,  it  is 

necessary to firstly consider the primary source of law being Muslim 

Citizen  of  Pakistan  i.e.  the  Holy  Quran,  wherein,  the  subject  has 

been dealt in detail particularly in Surah Baqrah, the Urdu version of 

which is reproduced hereunder:- 

ی 

روپ وج ےہ

یے 

ل ےک صخش سا مکح

یں ۔یہ 

ئلاپ ھدود لاس ود ےروپ وک ںوچب ےنپا

یں 

ئام روا

 ےک پاب قباطم ےک روتسد اڑپک روا اناھک اک ں ٗوام

ی 

لاو ےنلاپ ھدود روا ےہاچ اناولپ ھدود کت تدم

 ےچب ےک سا وک ںام وت ہن

تاجی 

یف ہنیں دی 

لکت

یہدا

ز ےس تقاط

ی 

ک سا وک صخش

ی 

سک اگوہ ہمز

 روا ےئاج

یا 

اچنہپ ناصقن ےس ہجو

ی 

ک دلاوا

ی 

ک سا وک پاب ہن روا ےئاج

یا 

اچنہپ ناصقن

ب 

بس ےک

 رپ مت وت وہاچ اناولپ ھدود وک دلاوا

ی 

نپا مت رگا روا ےہ ہمز ےک دلاو ےک ےچب ہقفن نان حرط سا

یان کیا 

د ےن مت وج قح اک نا قباطم ےک روتسد وک

یںو 

لاو ےنلاپ ھدود مت

یہک 

طرشب

یں 

ہن ہانگ ھچک

۔ود ےد اھت 

8. 

In  addition  to  the  above  guidance,  this  Court  has  also  gone 

through the reported judgment of the Lahore High Court titled as “Ali 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

“WP Nos.3166 and 3878 of 2020” 
 (Aamir Munir Puri V. Mst. Saima Naeem, etc.) 

Adnan  Dar  VS  Judge  Family  Court”  (PLD  2016  Lahore  72), 

wherein,  it  has  been  held  that  “Father  was  under  legal  as  well  as 

moral  obligation  to  maintain  and  support  his  minor  daughter  as  per 

injunctions of Islam and that Family  Court while passing the interim 

maintenance was required to give the bare minimum to the minor. It 

was  also  held  in  the  judgment  that  interim  maintenance  must  be 

sufficient to meet day to day expenses of minor. 

9. 

Same  view  was  taken  by  the  Hon’ble  Lahore  High  Court,  in 

another reported judgment titled as “Amir Mehmood Husain V. Niha 

Amir  Syed”  (2011  MLD  1105  Lahore),  wherein,  it  has  been  held 

that  the  interim  maintenance  has  been  fixed  only  after  tentative 

assessment  status  of  the  petitioner  and  expense  being  incurred  on 

the education and other necessities. The above proposition was also 

discussed by the Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court in case titled 

as  “Minhaaj  Saqib  V.  Najmul  Saqib  and  others”  (2018  CLC  506 

Islamabad),  wherein,  the  question  of  maintainability  of  writ  petition 

against interim order was settled by observing that High Court could 

not 

interfere  with 

interim  order  of 

lower  Court 

for  reducing 

maintenance allowance of minors.  

10.  The  impugned  order  is  an  interlocutory  in  nature,  as  it  does 

not  dispose  of  the  main  case.  Any  order  passed  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court  under  Section  17-A  of  the  Act  cannot  be 

challenged  being  an  interlocutory  orders  through  the  Constitutional 

petition  unless  the  Court,  passing  the  order  lacks  jurisdiction  or  the 

order  otherwise  is  illegal.  In  the  case  reported  as  “Ali  Adnan  Dar 

through  Attorney  VS  Judge  Family  Court  and  others”  (PLD  2016 

Lahore 73), it has been held as under:-  

“It is clear from the preamble of the West Pakistan Family 
Courts  Act,  1964  that  the  same  has  been  established  for 
protection and convenience of the weaker and vulnerable 
segments  of  the  society, 
i.e.  women  and  children. 
Therefore,  interpretation  of  any  and  every  provision  of 
West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  should  be 
construed to advance the above stated purpose of law i.e. 
the  convenience  and  protection  of  the  women  and 
children, so it would be  convenient and facilitative to the 
safe administration of justice in the family matters to add 
and  delineate  further  guidelines  in  addition  to  the  above 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

“WP Nos.3166 and 3878 of 2020” 
 (Aamir Munir Puri V. Mst. Saima Naeem, etc.) 

stated, which are as follows:-- 

I. Maintenance allowance is indispensable right 
of  the  mother  and  children,  so  the  order  for 
grant  of  maintenance  allowance  must  be 
passed  at  a  "convenient  stage"  of 
the 
proceedings. 

ibid  Act 
II.  Although  Section  17-A  of  the 
empowers  Family  Court  to  pass  an  order  for 
grant of interim maintenance allowance at any 
stage  of  the  proceedings,  in  the  normality  of 
the  circumstances,  it  must  be  passed  after 
hearing  "both  of  the,  parties"  unless  the 
attitude and conduct of the defendant/father is 
evasive. 
III.  The order for grant of interim maintenance 
is made on the basis of tentative assessment of 
the  material  available  on  file  and  keeping  in 
view  the  social  status  of  the  parties.  Further, 
both  the  above,  material  available  and  social 
status,  should  be  mentioned  in  the  order  for 
the  grata  of  interim  maintenance.  Further  the 
quantum  of  interim  maintenance  should  be 
"bare minimum" to meet the day to day needs 
of the recipient in the narrow context. 

sympathetic  or 

IV.  Although  the  family 
laws  have  been 
enacted  to  promote,  protect  and  advance  the 
rights of women and children yet at the interim 
stage, the version of the respondent/defendant 
be  given  a 
somewhat 
non-
preferable 
payment  of  interim  maintenance  allowance 
will cut throat of his invaluable right i.e. "right 
in  consequential  effects, 
to  defence"  and 
children/women  would  be  the 
losing  and 
deprived parties. 

consideration 

because, 

V. Further, if the case is not decided within the 
statutory period as given in Section 12-A of the 
West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  either 
party  may  apply  to  the  High  Court  for 
appropriate  direction.  However,  the  order  for 
grant  of  interim  maintenance  shall  hold  the 
field  unless  reviewed  by  High  Court  under 
section 12-A or Family Court itself reviews it at 
any stage as observed below.  

VI.  Family  Court,  according  to  section  12-A  of 
the  West  Pakistan  Family  Courts  Act,  1964,  is 
under  legislative  direction  to  decide  the  case 
within  six  months.  Although  this  provision  is 
directive  as  no  penalty/consequences  are 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
6 

“WP Nos.3166 and 3878 of 2020” 
 (Aamir Munir Puri V. Mst. Saima Naeem, etc.) 

mentioned  for  non-compliance  and 
in  this 
regard reference is made to (2001 SCMR 1001). 
But in case the matter is not decided within six 
months  and  the  delay  is  due  to  the  plaintiff 
party,  then  Family  Court  either  on  its  own 
motion  or  on 
the 
defendant/father  review  its  earlier  order  for 
grant of interim maintenance allowance. 

the  application  of 

11. 

In  view  of  above  discussion,  this  Court  is  of  the  view  that 

interim  orders  qua  fixation  of  monthly  maintenance  by  the  learned 

Judge  Family  Court  could  not  be  assailed 

in  constitutional 

jurisdiction,  even  though  in  some  of  cases  they  are  harsh  but  the 

determination  of  adequacy  or  inadequacy  of  the  quantum  of 

maintenance  would  certainly  require  factual  evidence  or  inquiry, 

which  cannot  be  made  in  the  proceedings  under  Article  199  of  the 

Constitution  of  Pakistan  as  held  in  reported  cases  titled  as 

“Shameneh  Haider  and  others  VS  Haider  Ali  Khan"  (2018  CLC 

Note 43), Amir Mehmood Hussain VS Niha Amir Syed (2011 MLD 

1105  Lahore),  Tahir  Ayub  Khan  VS  Miss  Alia  Anwar  (2015  YLR 

2364),  Ibrar  Hussain  VS  Mehwish  Ran  and  others  (PLD  2012 

Lahore  420)  and  Muhammad  Shahbaz  Khalid  VS  Judge  Family 

Court  Lahore)  (PLD  2013  Lahore  64).  Although  the  underlining 

legal  principles  to  consider  this  legal  aspect  is  the  intention  of  the 

legislature  who  has  specifically  prohibited  filing  of  appeal  against 

interim order. In view of the dictum laid down in the above citations, 

allowing constitutional petition would tantamount to defeat the intent 

of the legislature.  

12.  The  petitioner/  father  has  taken  the  plea  that  he  is  jobless 

owing to  which  unable to payment  of maintenance at the rate  fixed 

by  the  Court  is  beyond his economic  competence, but this  Court in 

constitutional jurisdiction, is not able to determine this factual aspect 

of adequacy or inadequacy of the interim maintenance allowance on 

the basis of principles laid down by superior courts where such order 

could not be assailed in constitutional jurisdiction. However, in order 

to  avoid  any  conflict,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  is  directed  to 

decide main suit within the period of one month while recording the 

evidence  on  day-to-day  basis.  At  the  time  of  final  disposal  of  the 

 
 
 
 
 
7 

“WP Nos.3166 and 3878 of 2020” 
 (Aamir Munir Puri V. Mst. Saima Naeem, etc.) 

case, the impugned order shall be merged into the final decision by 

the  learned  Trial  Court,  which  shall  be  passed  after  recording 

evidence of both the parties and keeping in view the financial status 

of the petitioner as well as the daily needs of the minor. 

13. 

In view of above, the instant writ petition as well as connected 

writ  petition  bearing  No.3878  of  2020,  are  hereby  dismissed  with 

the direction mentioned above. 

(GHULAM AZAM QAMBRANI) 
JUDGE 

Announced in open Court on this 25th day of February, 2021. 

M.Ift 

JUDGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
