W.P. No.3364 of 2013 

Akhtar Hussain Shah 

VS

Oil and Gas Development Company Limited and another 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
        W.P.No.575 of 2019 
Dr. Tahir Kaleem Siddiqui 

VS          

Federation of Pakistan and others 

Dates of Hearing: 

Petitioner by: 

Respondents by: 

14.01.2021, 29.03.2021, 03.03.2022,  
11.03.2022, 10.05.2022 and 03.11.2022   
Hafiz  Arfat  Ahmad  Ch.,  Mr.  Tariq  Zaman  Ch. 
and Mr. Izrar Ali, Advocates 

Mian  Faisal  Irfan,  learned  Deputy  Attorney-
General and Ch. Muhammad Tahir Mehmood, 
learned Assistant Attorney-General. 
M/s  Tahir  Mehmood  Abbasi  and  Qassim 
Duggal,  Advocates  for  W.W.F.  and  Faisal 
Tariq, Director, W.W.F. 
M/s  Rai  Akbar,  Deputy  Director,  Muhammad 
Bashir,  Assistant  Director,  D.W.E.,  and 
Muhammad  Arfan,  Section  Officer  (Lit-V), 
Establishment Division. 

_____________________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:-  Through  the  instant  writ 

petition    the  petitioner,  Dr.  Tahir  Kaleem  Siddiqui,  impugns  the  order 

dated  13.11.2017  passed  by  the  Secretary,  Workers  Welfare  Fund 

(“W.W.F.”) whereby his appointment as Assistant Director (BPS-17) in the 

W.W.F.  made  through  letter  dated  31.10.1998  was  declared  to  be  illegal 

and  void  ab-initio.  Furthermore,  the  petitioner  was  repatriated  to  his 

parent  department  i.e.,  Directorate  of  Workers  Education  (“D.W.E.”), 

Islamabad.  

2. 

The  record  shows  that  on  28.04.1993,  the  petitioner  was  offered 

appointment  as  Assistant  Director  (BPS-17)  in  D.W.E.  on  contract  basis 

for a period of two years. The petitioner accepted this offer on 02.05.1993 

and  assumed  the  charge  of  his  duties.  The  petitioner  continued  serving 

despite the expiry of the two-year contract period. Vide notification dated 

14.03.1996  issued  by  D.W.E.,  the  period  of  the  petitioner‟s  employment 

contract  was  extended  up  to  30.06.1996.  Notification  dated  29.09.1996 

issued  by  the  erstwhile  Labour,  Manpower  and  Overseas  Pakistanis 

Division  shows  that  pursuant  to  a  decision  taken  by  the  F.P.S.C.,  the 

 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2 

W.P. No.575/2019 

petitioner‟s  contract  appointment  was  extended  with  effect 

from 

01.07.1996.  

3. 

Apparently,  the  Establishment  Division  vide  Office  Memorandum 

(“O.M.”) dated 09.06.1997 had sought information regarding the petitioner 

from  the  Labour,  Manpower  and  Overseas  Pakistanis  Division  for  the 

purposes  of  sending  him  on  deputation  to  the  W.W.F.  Vide  letter  dated 

11.06.1997,  the  said  Division  provided  the  required  information  to  the 

Establishment  Division.  On  10.06.1997,  D.W.E.  as  well  as  the  W.W.F. 

issued  no-objection  certificates  for  the  transfer  of  the  petitioner‟s 

services  to  the  W.W.F.  Vide  notification  dated  18.06.1997  issued  by  the 

Establishment  Division,  the  petitioner‟s  services  were  transferred  and 

placed at the disposal of the Ministry of Labour, Manpower and Overseas 

Pakistanis  for  posting  as  Assistant  Director  (BPS-17)  in  W.W.F.  on 

deputation basis for a period of three years. On 23.06.1997, the petitioner 

was relieved of his duties in D.W.E. and on the same day he assumed the 

charge of the post of Assistant Director (BPS-17) in W.W.F.  

4. 

On  04.03.1998,  D.W.E.  issued  a  no  objection  certificate  for  the 

petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F.  Pursuant  to  the  decision  taken  by 

W.W.F.‟s  Governing  Body,  in  its  46th  meeting  held  on  19.10.1998,  the 

petitioner  was  absorbed  against  the  vacancy  of  Assistant  Director  (BPS-

17) in W.W.F. with effect from 27.10.1998.  

5. 

On  17.02.2003,  the  petitioner  was  promoted  to  the  post  of  Deputy 

Director  (BPS-18),  and  on  26.07.2008  he  was  promoted  to  the  post  of 

Director (BPS-19) with his name placed at serial No.2 in the seniority list of 

the  Directors  in  W.W.F.  The  petitioner  was  promoted  to  the  post  of 

Director General (BPS-20) in W.W.F. with effect from 13.06.2012.  

6. 

On 26.10.2017, a notice was issued to the petitioner by the Ministry 

of  Overseas  Pakistanis  and  Human  Resource  Development  calling  upon 

him to show cause as to why his absorption as Assistant Director (BPS-17) 

in  W.W.F.  should  not  be withdrawn  on the grounds  that  (i) his  absorption 

had  been  made  without  the  recommendation  of  the  Selection  Committee 

as  required  by  Rule  25(1)(iv)  of  the  W.W.F.  (Employees  Service)  Rules, 

1997  (“the  1997  Rules”),  (ii)  he  was  not  a  regular  employee  in  his  parent 

department, (iii) there was no record to show whether a vacancy for initial 

 
 
 
 
3 

W.P. No.575/2019 

appointment  was  available  for  the  post  against  which  the  petitioner  was 

absorbed,  and  (iv)  the  petitioner‟s  promotions  had  also  been  made  in 

violation of the rules. The petitioner was called for a personal hearing on 

30.10.2017 by the Secretary, W.W.F. On 30.10.2017, the petitioner filed a 

detailed reply to the show cause notice. The proceedings pursuant to the 

said  show  cause  notice  culminated 

in  the 

impugned  order  dated 

13.11.2017 whereby the petitioner‟s absorption in W.W.F. was declared by 

the  Secretary,  W.W.F.  to  be  illegal  and  void  ab-initio  and  he  was 

repatriated to D.W.E. The said order has been assailed by the petitioner in 

the instant writ petition.  

7. 

 Learned counsel for the petitioner, after narrating the facts leading 

to the filing of the instant petition, submitted that while serving as Director 

General (BPS-20), the petitioner was given the charge of human resource 

and  administration; 

that 

the  petitioner  had 

initiated  disciplinary 

proceedings  against  two  employees  namely  Zahid  Ali  and  Muhammad 

Waseem  Afzal;  that  after  the  initiation  of  the  disciplinary  proceedings, 

these  employees  had 

filed  a  contempt  petition  (criminal  original 

No.153/2016)  against  the  petitioner  before  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

alleging  that  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F.  was  not  lawful  and 

contrary  to  the  law  laid  down  in  the  judgments  reported  as  2013 SCMR 

1752 and 2015 SCMR 456; that the said petition is still pending before the 

Hon'ble  Supreme  Court;  that  as  a  consequence  of  the  Constitution 

(Eighteenth  Amendment)  Act,  2010,  D.W.E.  devolved  to  the  Provinces; 

that  after  the 

issuance  of  the 

impugned  repatriation  order  dated 

13.11.2017,  the  petitioner  approached  the  Establishment  Division  which 

refused  to  take  the  petitioner  in  employment  on  the  ground  that  he  was 

not a civil servant; and that ever since 13.11.2017, the petitioner has been 

jobless and is not receiving any salary.  

8. 

Furthermore, it was submitted that for all intents and purposes, the 

petitioner  was  treated  as  a  permanent  employee  while  in  service  at 

D.W.E.; that the petitioner‟s services in D.W.E. had been regularized since 

he  had  started  making  pension  contributions  and  had  also  made 

contributions  to  the  general  provident  fund;  that  a  Selection  Committee 

had  not  been  constituted  to  consider  the  petitioner  for  absorption  since 

 
 
 
4 

W.P. No.575/2019 

there was no permanent employee in W.W.F. of the required seniority who 

could have been made a part of the Selection Committee; that it is for this 

reason  that  the  petitioner‟s  case  for  absorption  was  placed  before  the 

highest body in W.W.F. i.e., the Governing Body; that the Governing Body, 

in its 46th meeting held on 19.10.1998, had considered a working paper in 

which  a  proposal  was  made  for  the  absorption  of  three  deputationists 

including the petitioner in W.W.F.; that the Governing Body, on 19.10.1998 

accorded  approval  for  the absorption  of two  deputationists  including  the 

petitioner but not the third deputationist namely Mahmood Khan since he 

was  a  contractual  employee  in  his  parent  department;  that  since  the 

petitioner  was  treated  as  a  regular  employee  in  his  parent  department 

that is why he was absorbed in W.W.F. with the approval of the Governing 

Body; and that it was most unfair for the petitioner to be repatriated to his 

parent  department  after  he  had  served  in  W.W.F.  as  a  duly  absorbed 

employee  for  a  period  of  nineteen  years  during  which  he  was  promoted  

up  to  the  post  of  Director  General  (BPS-20).  Learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner  prayed  for  the  writ  petition  to  be  allowed  in  terms  of  the  relief 

sought therein. 

9. 

On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  W.W.F.  submitted  that  the 

petitioner‟s  repatriation  to  his  parent  department  was  strictly 

in 

accordance  with  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  the 

judgments reported as 2013 SCMR 1752 and 2015 SCMR 456; that prior to 

the  petitioner‟s  appointment  as  a  deputationist  in  the  W.W.F.,  he  was  a 

contract employee in  D.W.E.; that  there  is nothing  on  the record to show 

that  the  petitioner‟s  services  had  been  regularized  while  serving  at 

D.W.E.; that a deputationist, whose services in his parent department are 

contractual  in  nature,  cannot  be  absorbed  as  a  permanent  employee  in 

the  borrowing  department;  that  Rule  25(1)(iv)  of  the  1997  Rules  clearly 

provides  that  a  deputationist  in  the  W.W.F.  can  be  appointed  on  regular 

basis  provided  he  is  recommended  by  the  Selection  Board  or  the 

appropriate Selection Committee; that there was nothing on the record to 

show that a Selection Committee had recommended that the petitioner be 

appointed on a regular basis in W.W.F.; that since the essential condition 

for appointment in W.W.F. in accordance with the 1997 Rules had not been 

 
 
 
5 

W.P. No.575/2019 

fulfilled  before  the  petitioner  was  appointed  as  Assistant  Director  (BPS-

17)  in  W.W.F.,  the  appointment  is  void  ab-initio;  that  even  though  at  the 

time  of  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F.  there  was  no  permanent 

employee  in  W.W.F.  who  could  have  been  made  a  part  of  the  Selection 

Committee,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  absorption  of  a  deputationist 

without the recommendation of a Selection Committee would be valid; that 

there is no  record  as to the petitioner‟s contributions towards pension in 

his  parent  department;  and  that  the  impugned  order  dated  13.11.2017 

passed  by  the Secretary,  W.W.F.,  whereby  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  as 

Assistant  Director  (BPS-17)  in  W.W.F.  was  declared  illegal  and  he  was 

repatriated  to  his  parent  department  does  not  suffer  from  any  legal 

infirmity.  Learned  counsel  for  W.W.F.  prayed  for  the  writ  petition  to  be 

dismissed. 

10.  On behalf  of respondent  No.1 /  Ministry  of Overseas  Pakistanis  and 

Human  Resource  Development,  it  was  submitted  that  the  petitioner  had 

admitted that his appointment as Assistant Director (BS-17) in D.W.E. was 

on  contract  basis;  that  the  contractual  nature  of  the  petitioner‟s 

employment  with  D.W.E.  came  to  an  end  when  he  proceeded  on 

deputation  to  W.W.F.;  that  the  tenure  of  the  petitioner‟s  employment 

contract along with three other similarly placed employees, namely Zakir 

Khan  (Assistant  Director),  Abdul  Rehman  (Assistant  Director)  and  Dr. 

Muhammad  Nawaz  Qaisarani  (Deputy  Director),  was  extended  vide 

notifications dated 14.03.1996 and 29.09.1996;  that since the petitioner‟s 

employment  with  D.W.E.  was  contractual  in  nature,  he  was  not  a  civil 

servant;  and  that  the  Establishment  Division,  vide  office  memorandum 

dated  17.01.2018, had  clarified  that the petitioner was  not a civil servant 

and  therefore  not  entitled  for  enlistment  in  the  surplus  pool  of  the 

Establishment  Division  after  having  been  relieved  by  W.W.F.  The  learned 

Deputy  Attorney-General  as  well  as  the  learned  Assistant  Attorney- 

General prayed for the writ petition to be dismissed. 

11. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 

contesting  parties  and  have  perused  the  record  with  their  able 

assistance. The facts leading to the filing of the instant writ petition have 

 
 
 
6 

W.P. No.575/2019 

been set out in sufficient detail in paragraphs 2 to 6 above and need not be 

recapitulated. 

12.  W.W.F. was established on 09.12.1971 pursuant to the provisions of 

the  Workers  Welfare  Fund  Ordinance,  1971  (“the  1971  Ordinance”)  for 

providing residential accommodation and other facilities for workers and 

for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Section 8(3) of the 

1971  Ordinance  provides  that  the  Governing  Body  of  W.W.F.  shall 

determine  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  the  Secretary  and  the 

employees  of  W.W.F.  with  the  previous  sanction  of  the  Federal 

Government.  The  Governing  Body  with  the  approval  of  the  Federal 

Government made the Workers‟ Welfare Fund (Employees Service) Rules, 

1997 (“the 1997 Rules”).  

13.  Rule  23(1)  of  the  1997  Rules  permits  appointment  on  deputation  to 

posts in W.W.F. to be made by the appointing authority in the interests of 

W.W.F. “Appointing Authority” is defined in Rule 2(1)(i)  as “the governing 

body or an officer or authority, authorized by the governing body in this 

behalf and specified in these rules regarding appointment in Workers‟ 

Welfare Fund.”  Rule 11(2) provides  that  the authority  competent to make 

appointments  to  posts  in  BS-19  shall  be  the  Chairman,  W.W.F.  and  to 

posts in BS-18 and below, the Secretary, W.W.F.  

14.  Rule 23(2) of the 1997 Rules sets out the procedure for appointment 

by  deputation  to  W.W.F.  For  the  purposes  of  clarity,  Rule  23(2)  is 

reproduced herein below:- 

“2.  Civil  servants,  Federal  or  Provincial,  and  employees  of  the 
corporations or other autonomous bodies set up, managed or controlled 
by the Federal Government or, as the case may be, any Provincial 
Government, holding appointment on regular basis may, with the consent 
of the Federal Government or, as the case may be, of the Provincial 
Government or other authority concerned, hereinafter called the lending 
authority,  be  appointed  by  the  appointing  authority  concerned  on 
deputation to appropriate posts in the Fund for such periods and on such 
terms and conditions, as may be determined by appointing authority in 
consultation with the concurrence of the lending authority.”   

15.  Perusal of Rule 23(2) shows that Federal or Provincial civil servants 

and  employees  of  corporations  and  other  autonomous  bodies  set  up, 

managed  or  controlled  by  the  Federal  Government  or  the  Provincial 

Government holding appointment on regular basis could be appointed on 

deputation in W.W.F. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

W.P. No.575/2019 

16.  The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Director (BS-17) in D.W.E. 

on  contract  basis  after  he  accepted  the  offer  of  appointment  dated 

28.04.1993. The petitioner  had been  appointed for a period of two years, 

but  subsequently,  his  contract  period  was  extended  from  time  to  time. 

Clause  3  of  the  petitioner‟s  employment  contract  provided inter alia  that 

the period of contract could be extended with the approval of the Federal 

Public  Service  Commission  (“F.P.S.C.”).  Clause  4  provided  that  the 

service  rendered  under  the  contract  shall  not  qualify  the  petitioner  for 

pension or gratuity whereas clause 11 provided that the petitioner would 

not be required to contribute to the general provident fund.  

17.  On  10.06.1997,  D.W.E.  as  well  as  the  W.W.F.  issued  no-objection 

certificates for the transfer of the petitioner‟s services to the W.W.F. Vide 

notification  dated  18.06.1997  issued  by  the  Establishment  Division,  the 

petitioner‟s  services  were  transferred  and  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the 

Ministry  of  Labour,  Manpower  and  Overseas  Pakistanis  for  posting  as 

Assistant Director  (BPS-17)  in  W.W.F. on deputation basis for a period of 

three years. On 23.06.1997, the petitioner assumed the charge of the post 

of Assistant Director (BPS-17) in W.W.F.  

18.  The 1997 Rules are set out in the notification (SRO 1193(I)/97) dated 

15.11.1997  issued  by  the  Labour,  Manpower  and  Overseas  Pakistanis 

Division. These rules were published in the official Gazette on 26.11.1997. 

By  this  time,  the  petitioner  had  already  been  appointed  to  the  post  of 

Assistant  Director  (BS-17)  in  W.W.F.  on  deputation  basis.  Had  W.W.F. 

bothered to act in accordance with the 1997 Rules it would have, upon the 

said  Rules  having  been  notified,  repatriated  the  petitioner  to  his  parent 

department. I say so since the petitioner was not “holding an appointment 

on regular basis” in his parent department, he could not have continued to 

serve as  a deputationist  in  W.W.F.  in  violation of the said  Rule 23(2).  It  is 

indeed  the  officials  in  W.W.F.  who  violated  the  1997  Rules  by  not 

repatriating  the  petitioner  to  his  parent  department  when  the  said  Rules 

were made. On his own, the petitioner could not have stopped working at 

W.W.F. and report back to D.W.E.  

19.  Let  alone  repatriating  the  petitioner  to  his  parent  department,  the 

Governing  Body  approved  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F.  and 

 
 
 
8 

W.P. No.575/2019 

thereby  gave  him  the  status  of  a  regular  employee  of  W.W.F.  The  mode 

and method for absorbing a deputationist in W.W.F. on permanent basis is 

provided in Rule 25 of the 1997 Rules, which reads thus:-  

“25. Conditions for absorption of deputationist to the Fund.—(1) A person 
serving on deputation to the Fund may be appointed to an equivalent post 
or above, if competent authority so desires, on regular basis subject to the 
following conditions, namely:-- 

(i) 

the person, serving on deputation, applies in writing for or gives his 
consent to such absorption; 

(ii)  his parent office agrees to such absorption; 
(iii)  he possesses the qualifications laid down for initial appointment to 

the post in Part-II of Appendix 2 of these rules; 

(vi)  he, in the opinion of the appointing authority, is suitable for such 
absorption and is recommended by the Selection Board or, as the 
case may be, by the appropriate Selection Committee constituted in 
accordance with rule 12; 

(v)  for the purpose of absorption, he seeks retirement from his parent 
office, if he has completed the required service for retirement 
benefits, or, otherwise, fulfills such conditions as the competent 
authority may require to join the Fund; and  

(vi)  save as may otherwise be provided by rules, no benefit of his 
previous service shall be admissible for any purpose in the Fund as 
a right. 

(2)  The appointment made in accordance with sub-rule(1) shall be 
treated as initial appointment and shall be made against a post reserved 
for initial appointment. 
(3)  Nothing contained in this rule shall be construed to confer any right 
on such a person on deputation to the Fund to claim absorption in the 
Fund.” 
(Emphasis added) 

20.  D.W.E.  had,  on 04.03.1998, issued  a no  objection certificate for  the 

petitioner‟s absorption in W.W.F. on regular basis. The Governing Body of 

W.W.F.  in  its  46th  meeting  held  on  19.10.1998,  decided  to  absorb  the 

petitioner  as  Assistant  Director  (BPS-17).  Over  a  period  of  19  years  the 

petitioner was promoted as Director General (BPS-20) in W.W.F.  

21.  Zahid  Ali  and  Waseem  Afzal  Warraich,  who  were  employees  of 

W.W.F., had filed contempt petition No.153/2016 and  Crl. Review  Petition 

No.171/2016 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court alleging inter alia that the 

petitioner‟s  appointment  in  W.W.F.  was  in  violation  of  the  1997  Rules  as 

well  as  the  judgment  passed  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  in  criminal 

petition No.89/2011. On 24.01.2017, the following order was passed by the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court:- 

“During the hearing we have noticed that some of the officers who are 
continuing in office, prima facie are neither eligible nor qualified to the 
posts against which they have been posted in Worker Welfare Board 

 
 
 
 
 
9 

W.P. No.575/2019 

(WWF) after absorption. We are also shocked to notice that the Secretary, 
WWF, namely, Saeed Ahmad Khan is on Ex-Pakistan Leave for the last 
several years. Let the original summary granting him Ex-Pakistan Leave 
be placed before us. The Chairman / Competent Authority shall be in 
attendance with justification as to how a leave of indefinite period can be 
granted to an officer. We have put to notice the Addl. Attorney General to 
procure the attendance of the Secretary, Overseas Pakistanis & Human 
Resource Development and the Secretary, Establishment Division in Court 
on the next date who shall appear after examining the record of the 
officers working in the WWF and justify their continuance in job after the 
judgment of this Court reported as Contempt Proceedings Against Chief 
Secretary, Sindh and others (2013 SCMR 1752) and Ali Azhar Khan Baloch 
and others VS Province of Sindh and others (2015 SCMR 456). Adjourned 
to come up on 8.02.2017.” 
(Emphasis added) 

22.  After the said order was passed, the Secretary, Ministry of Overseas 

Pakistanis  and  Human  Resource  Development  and  the  Secretary, 

Establishment  Division  submitted  a  joint  report  dated  24.02.2017  before 

the Hon'ble Supreme Court. This report shows that the record pertaining 

to  appointment  /  absorption  of  eight  employees  of  W.W.F.,  including  the 

petitioner,  had  been  examined.  About  the  petitioner,  the  following 

observations were made in the said report:- 

2  Tahir Kaleem Siddiqui  The officer was an employee of Directorate 
of  Workers  Education  in  BS-17  on 
“temporary  basis”  (Page-51).  He  was 
appointed on deputation basis in WWF on 
23-06-97. Later, he was absorbed against 
the post of Assistant Director (BS-17) in 
WWF  on  27-10-98.  His  absorption  was 
made with the approval of Governing Body 
in its 46th meeting held on 19-10-98 (Page-
53).  Following  observations  are 
submitted:- 

In  terms  of  Rule  25  his  appointment  / 
absorption  has  been  made  without 
recommendation of Selection Committee 
[Rule 25(1)(iv)]. 

The officer was not a regular employee in 
his  parent  department  as  he  was 
appointed there on temporary basis. 

No certificate / record of the fact, whether 
vacancy  for  initial  appointment  was 
available against which he was absorbed, 
is available [Rule 25(2)]. 

His  subsequent  promotions  to  Deputy 
Director, Director  and Director General 
(Acting Charge) have been made while he 
did  not  fulfill  the  required  length(s)  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

W.P. No.575/2019 

service [Rule 20]. He had less than 5 years, 
12 years and 17 years‟ service when he 
was promoted to Deputy Director / BS-18, 
Director / BS-19 and Director General / BS-
20  on  17.02.2003,  26.07.2008  and 
13.06.2012  respectively.  Moreover,  no 
post of Director General existed / exists in 
the Rules thus no procedure has been 
prescribed  for  appointment  against  the 
same.  

23. 

I am told that the proceedings before the Hon'ble Supreme Court are 

still  pending.  Be  that  as  it  may,  on  the  very  same  grounds  as  the  ones 

mentioned  about  the  petitioner  in  the  said  report  dated  24.02.2017,  a 

notice dated 26.10.2017 was issued  by W.W.F. to  the petitioner requiring 

him to show cause as to why his absorption as Assistant Director (BPS-17) 

in W.W.F. should not be withdrawn, and why he should not be repatriated 

to  his  parent  department.  The  proceedings  pursuant  to  the  said  show 

cause  notice  culminated  in  the  order  dated  13.11.2017  passed  by  the 

Secretary,  W.W.F.,  whereby  his  appointment  /  absorption  in  W.W.F.  was 

declared as illegal and void ab-initio and he was repatriated to his parent 

department. 

24.  One  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F. 

was  declared  unlawful  was  that  he  was  not  a  regular  employee  in  his 

parent  department,  i.e.,  D.W.E.  Indeed  there  is  nothing  on  the  record  to 

show that the contractual nature of the petitioner‟s employment in D.W.E. 

was  converted  to  regular  employment  at  any  stage.  Now,  before  the 

petitioner  was  sent  to  serve  as  a  deputationist 

in  W.W.F.,  the 

Establishment Division vide O.M dated 09.06.1997 had sought information 

about the petitioner from the Ministry of Labour, Manpower and Overseas 

Pakistanis.  Vide  letter  dated  11.06.1997,  the  said  Ministry  provided  the 

required 

information 

to 

the  Establishment  Division.  Although 

the 

information sent about the petitioner is not on the record but it must have 

included  information  that  in  D.W.E.  the  petitioner  had  been  serving  as  a 

contract  employee.  I  say  so  because  in  the  working  paper  prepared  for 

the  Governing  Body  of  W.W.F.  for  considering  the  petitioner  for 

absorption  in  its  46th  meeting,  it  was  explicitly  mentioned  that  the 

petitioner  was  a  contract  employee  in  D.W.E.  Therefore,  it  is  to  be 

 
 
 
 
11 

W.P. No.575/2019 

presumed that the Establishment Division, D.W.E. and W.W.F. were all well 

aware that the petitioner was a contract employee in D.W.E. when he was 

sent  on  deputation  basis  to  W.W.F.  and  when  he  was  considered  for 

absorption by the Governing Body of W.W.F. It is not the petitioner, who in 

1998 was merely a BPS-17 officer, that imposed himself on the Governing 

Body for getting absorbed in W.W.F.  

25.  The letter dated 31.10.1998 from W.W.F. shows that the petitioner‟s 

absorption  against  the  vacancy  of  Assistant  Director  (BS-17)  in  W.W.F. 

was  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Body‟s  decision  taken  in  its  46th  meeting 

held on 19.10.1998. The said letter also shows that the petitioner had been 

appointed  against  the  vacant  post  of  Assistant  Director  (BS-17).  Under 

Section  7(1)  of  the  1971  Ordinance,  the  management  and  administration 

of W.W.F.  is entrusted to the Governing Body which  is constituted by the 

Federal  Government.  Section  7(2)  provides  that  the  Chairman  of  the 

Governing  Body  shall  be  the  Secretary  of  the  Government  of  Pakistan  in 

the  Ministry  dealing  with  matters  relating  to  labour  welfare,  and  that  the 

eighteen other members of the Governing Body are to be appointed by the 

Federal Government. The members of the Governing Body of W.W.F., who 

were  appointed  by  the Federal  Government,  took  a collective decision  in 

their 46th meeting dated 19.10.1998 to absorb the petitioner in W.W.F. This 

body  could  not  have  been  ignorant  of  the  requirements  of  Rule  25  of  the 

1997 Rules or the contents of the working paper which clearly mentioned 

that  the  petitioner  was  a  contract  employee  in  his  parent  department.  In 

these  circumstances,  the  question  that  crops  up  in  the  mind  is  whether 

the  petitioner  alone  is  to  suffer  for  the  decision  taken  by  the  Governing 

Body almost  two decades  ago.  „Yes‟  as an  answer would be nothing less 

than a  travesty  of  justice.  If  the  requirements  of Rule 25  were  violated  in 

the  decision-making  process  to  absorb  the  petitioner  in  W.W.F.,  the 

responsibility  for  the  same  would  lie  on  each  of  the  members  of  the 

Governing  Body  who  took  that  decision.  The  record  does  not  indicate 

even a whimper against the members of the Governing Body who took the 

decision to absorb the petitioner in W.W.F. To repatriate the petitioner by 

setting aside his absorption after nineteen years suffers from irrationality 

 
 
 
12 

W.P. No.575/2019 

and  therefore  is  not  sustainable.  In  holding  so,  reliance  is  placed  on  the 

following case law:-  

(i) 

In  the  case  of  District  Coordination  Officer  VS  Rozi  Khan  (2009 

SCMR  663),  it  was  held  inter alia  that  where  any  irregularity  in 

making  an  appointment  is  committed  by  the  department  itself,  the 

appointee cannot be harmed, damaged or condemned subsequently 

when  it  occurs  to  the  department  that  it  had  itself  committed  an 

irregularity in making the appointment. 

(ii) 

In the case of Muhammad Shoaib VS Government of N.-W.F.P. (2005 

PLC  (C.S.)  1056),  the  appointment  of  a  Field  Assistant  in  the 

Agricultural  Department  of  the  Government  of  N.-W.F.P.  was 

terminated  on  the  ground  that  the  appointment  had  been  made  in 

violation  of  the  prescribed  rules.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

declared that the petitioner‟s termination from service was void and 

violative  of  the  principles  of  locus poenitentiae  and  estoppel.  The 

majority opinion of the Hon'ble Supreme Court was as follows:-  

“7.  Coming to the merits of the grounds of dismissal, it was 
deprecated by this Court in Secretary to Government of N.-W.F.P. 
Zakat/Social Welfare Department, Peshawar v. Sadullah Khan 1996 
SCMR 413 where a Full Bench cognizant of similar circumstances 
has observed that the department having itself appointed civil 
servant in violation of rules could not be allowed subsequently to 
turn around and take benefit of its own lapses in order to terminate 
the  services  of  a  civil  servant.  The  department  having  itself 
committed irregularity and having itself violated the prescribed 
procedure cannot punish the civil servants for its own misdeeds and 
after the lapse of a considerable time during which the civil servant 
has satisfactorily performed his duties.” 

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Akhtar  Sherani  VS  Punjab  Textbook 

Board  (2004  SCMR  1077),  several  persons  were  appointed  in  the 

Punjab  Textbook  Board  without  a  competitive  process  and  in 

violation  of  the  requirements  in  Punjab  Textbook  Board  Employees 

Service  Regulations,  1980.  The  show  cause  notices  issued  to  such 

employees  culminated  in  orders  holding  that  their  appointments 

were  illegal.  After  their  departmental  appeals  were  dismissed,  the 

employees filed writ petitions before the Hon'ble Lahore High Court 

which  were  allowed.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  set-aside  the 

judgment  of  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  but  the  review  petition 

 
 
 
 
13 

W.P. No.575/2019 

filed  by  the  employees  was  allowed  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

and  it  was  directed  that  the  employees  be  reinstated  in  service 

without  financial  back  benefits.  It  was  also  directed  that  the 

Chairman of the Punjab Textbook Board shall be free to examine the 

cases of the employees, if need be, to ascertain whether they were 

eligible to hold the posts and to dispose of the cases after affording 

them  an  opportunity  of a  hearing.  Paragraph  8 of  the said  report is 

reproduced herein below:- 

“It may be observed that for such reason beneficiary cannot be 
blamed alone because primarily the authority who had actually mis -
exercised his powers, for the reasons known to it, is bound to be 
held responsible for the same, instead of penalizing the petty 
employees like Chowkidar, Naib-Qasid, junior clerks etc. who have 
to earn livelihood to support their families and if after having served 
for a long period they are removed from service discriminately, 
such action would not promote the cause of action and it would give 
rise to a number of problems to them. In this regard at a number of 
occasions, it has been held by this Court that instead of removing 
the employees from service, action should have been taken against 
the authority who had mis-exercised its powers. Reliance in this 
behalf can be made to the judgment reported as Managing Director, 
SSGC Ltd. v. Ghulam Abbas PLD 2003 SC 724. Relevant paras 
therefrom are reproduced herein below:- 

 “As far as second argument is concerned, same is also- not 
acceptable because a perusal of appointment letter reproduced 
herein above indicates that the appointment was given to them with 
reference to their applications and subsequent tests/interviews 
which would mean that they were also recruited on merits. In view 
of such position statement of the learned counsel that respondents 
got their appointment due to political influence does not seem to be 
correct. Assuming that appointments of some of the respondents 
were contrary to Rules/Regulations then the authority who was in 
the helm of the affairs may have declined to honour the directions 
of political personalities. However, for any flaw or defect in the 
appointment as far as respondents are concerned, they cannot be 
blamed as it has been held in the case of Secretary to Government 
of  N.-W.F.P.  Zakat/Social  Welfare  Department,  Peshawar  and 
another v. Sadullah Khan 1996 SCMR 413. Relevant para therefrom 
reads as under thus:- 

 “6. 
It is disturbing to note that in this case petitioner No.2 had 
himself been guilty of making irregular appointment on what has 
been described `purely temporary basis'. The petitioners have now 
turned around and terminated their services due to irregularity and 
violation of rule 10(2) ibid. The premise, to say the least, is utterly 
untenable. The case of the petitioner was not that the respondent 
lacked  requisite  qualification.  The  petitioners  themselves 
appointed him on temporary basis in violation of the rules for 
reasons best known to them. Now they cannot be allowed to take 
benefit of their lapses in order to terminate the services of the 
respondent  merely  because  they  have  themselves  committed 
irregularity in violating the procedure governing the appointment. 
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, the learned Tribunal is 
not  shown  to  have  committed  any  illegality  irregularity  in 
reinstating the respondent.”””  

 
 
 
14 

W.P. No.575/2019 

(iv)  Observations  to  the  said  effect  were  also  made  in  the  case  of 

Collector  of  Customs  and  Central  Excise,  Peshawar  VS  Abdul 

Waheed  (2004  SCMR  303),  wherein  the  services  of  the  employees 

appointed  in  the  Central  Board  of  Revenue  were  terminated  on  the 

ground  that  the  appointments  had  been  made  in  violation  of  the 

prescribed  procedure.  The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  upheld  the 

judgment  of  the  Federal  Service  Tribunal  whereby  the  termination 

orders passed by the Central Board of Revenue were set-aside with 

the  direction  that  the  employees  would  be  deemed  to  have 

continued  in  service  with  effect  from  the  date  of  the  termination  of 

their  employment.  In  paragraph  6  of  the  said  report,  the  following 

observations were made:- 

 “The petitioners cannot penalize the persons/respondents, who had 
put in more than ten years' service with them considering that there 
was no allegation of misconduct against them and were only to be 
removed on account of change in Government on the ground that 
they  were  no  more  required  and  were  not  appointed  after 
observance  of  due  process  of  law.  The  petitioners/authorities 
competent should be held responsible and liable for the said lapse 
on their part. It could not be forgotten the persons/respondents who 
have put in more than ten years of their service and thereby have 
lost all their chances to get fresh appointment elsewhere as they 
stood disqualified being overage and in case they are to be removed 
now the same would amount to hitting them hard creating problems 
for the Society at large considering each of the respondent being a 
bread earner for his family.”  

(v) 

In  the  case  of  Aziz-ur-Rehman  Akbar  VS  Secretary,  Health 

Department,  Government  of  the  Punjab  (2013  PLC  (C.S.)  289),  the 

Division Bench of the Hon'ble Lahore High Court held as follows:- 

 “9.  Beneficiary of illegal appointment cannot be blamed alone 
because  primarily  the  authority,  who  had  actually  wrongfully 
exercised its powers, was bound to be held responsible for the 
same.  Instead  of  penalizing  the  employees  who  had  to  earn 
livelihood to support their families and if after having served for a 
long period they were removed from service discriminately, such 
action would not set good example rather it would give rise to a 
number of problems. Instead of removing the employees from 
service, action should have been taken against the authority who 
wrongly exercised its powers. Admittedly, no solid action has yet 
been taken by the government against the authority who employed 
the appellant against a vacancy which does not even exist and 
action has only been taken by the department against the appellant 
resulting into removal of his service which is against the principles 
of natural justice. Once an appointee is qualified to be appointed, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 

W.P. No.575/2019 

his service could not subsequently be terminated on the basis of 
lapses and irregularities committed by the department itself. Such 
irregularities committed by the department could be ignored only 
when the appointee lacks basic eligibilities.”  

(vi) 

In the case of Muhammad Sajjad VS Chief Secretary, Government of 

Punjab  (2013  PLC  (C.S.)  200),  the  Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  held 

that  “it  is  the  appointing  authority  who  in  case  of  an  illegal 

appointment is to be punished and not the petitioners who if punish 

will be deprived of their right to earn livelihood and will be disabled 

to perform their duties towards their dependents.” 

(vii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Zahid  Iqbal  VS  DEO  Mardan  (2006  PLC 

(C.S.) 1216), it was held as follows:- 

 “5.  The factum of illegal appointments allegedly obtained through 
illegal means of using political pressure etc. and the terminations 
based thereon, has remained a subject of close discussion by this 
Court which, for the first time, in Secretary to Government of N.-
W.F.P. Zakat Social Welfare Department, Peshawar and another v. 
Sadullah Khan 1996' SCMR 413 held the view that the Government 
cannot  be  allowed  to  take  advantage  of  its  own  lapses  and 
illegalities in terminating the service of the Civil Servants provided 
they were otherwise qualified to hold such posts. This view of the 
Full Bench of this Court was subsequently followed by numerous 
Full Benches of this Court. First in series was a Full Bench judgment 
in  Syed  Sikandar  Ali  Shah's  case  2002  SCMR  1124  where, 
otherwise,  qualified  civil  servants,  were  reinstated  despite 
irregularities and lapses, because, those were committed by the 
department itself. 
6. … 
7. Such principle, in nutshell and consistently declared by this Court 
is that once the appointees are qualified to be appointed, their 
services cannot subsequently be terminated on the basis of lapses 
and irregularities committed by the department itself. Such laxities 
and irregularities committed by the Government can be ignored by 
the Courts only when the appointees lacked the basic eligibilities, 
otherwise not. 
8.  The  aforesaid  view  if  applied  to  the  present  cases,  the 
petitioners, we  are  afraid,  cannot  draw  any  benefit  therefrom 
because at the time of their initial appointments, they lacked basic 
qualifications, requirements and eligibilities. They were appointed 
as PTC, CT, PET and TT Teachers in the department but they lacked 
the pre-qualifications and training courses, CT certificates and 
junior diploma in physical education as pre-requisites for the posts 
aforesaid. It is obvious that in the circumstances, they could not 
take advantage of the conditional view taken by this Court.” 

26.  Another  ground  on  which  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F.  has 

been  declared  illegal  was  that  there  were  no  recommendations  of  the 

Selection Committee for the petitioner‟s absorption before the Governing 

 
 
 
 
 
16 

W.P. No.575/2019 

Body of W.W.F. decided to absorb him. One of the conditions enumerated 

in Rule 25(1)(iv) of the 1997 Rules for the absorption of a deputationist in 

W.W.F. is that “he, in the opinion of the appointing authority, is suitable for 

such absorption and is recommended by the Selection Board or, as the 

case may be, by the appropriate Selection Committee constituted in 

accordance  with  Rule  12.”  Rule  12(2)  provides  that  there  shall  be 

constituted  one  or  more  Selection  Committees,  with  the  approval  of  the 

Secretary,  for  the  purpose  of  selection  of  persons  for  appointment  to 

posts  in  pay  scale-18  and  below.  Under  Rule  11(2),  the  authority 

competent to make appointment to posts in pay scale-18 and below is the 

Secretary  of  W.W.F.  There  is  nothing  on  the  record  to  show  that  at  the 

time  when  the  Governing  Body  decided  to  absorb  the  petitioner  a 

Selection  Committee  had  been  constituted  or  that  such  committee  was 

bypassed when the petitioner was absorbed.  

27. 

In  the  case  at  hand,  it  is  an  admitted  position  that  there  was  no 

permanent  employee  in  W.W.F.  in  1998  who  could  have  been  made  a 

member  of  the  Selection  Committee  to  consider  the  petitioner  for 

absorption.  This  would  be  ample  justification  to  the  petitioner‟s  case  for 

absorption  to  be  placed  before  the  Governing  Body  of  W.W.F.,  which  is 

superior to the Selection Committee.  

28.  Section  8(2)  of  the  1971  Ordinance  provides  that  the  Governing 

Body  may  appoint  such  employees  as  it  may  consider  necessary  for  the 

efficient  performance  of  the  functions  of  W.W.F.  However,  under  Rule 

25(1) of the 1997 Rules the absorption of a deputationist in W.W.F. is to be 

made if the competent authority so desires whereas under Rule 11(2), the 

authority competent to make appointment to the post of Assistant Director 

(BS-17)  is  the  Secretary  of  W.W.F.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  petitioner‟s 

case  for  absorption  was  considered  and  decided  by  the  Governing  Body 

which  is  superior  to  the  Secretary,  W.W.F.  in  the  hierarchy.  Is  the 

petitioner  to  be  shown  the  door  after  nineteen  long  years  of  service  in 

W.W.F.  because  the  Governing  Body  considered  and  approved  the 

petitioner‟s  absorption 

in  W.W.F.,  and  not  the  Secretary  on  the 

recommendation  of  a  non-existent  Selection  Committee?  As  mentioned 

above, Section 8(2) of the 1971 Ordinance empowers the Governing Body 

 
 
 
17 

W.P. No.575/2019 

to  appoint such employees as  it may consider  necessary for the efficient 

performance of the functions of W.W.F. It is well settled that in the event of 

an  inconsistency  between  a  provision  of  a  statute  and  rules,  which  is 

subordinate  legislation,  the  provision  of  the  statute  is  to  prevail.  This 

Court  is  not  declaring  Rules  25  and  11  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  ultra 

vires  Section  8.  But  in  cases  where  the  Governing  Body  makes  an 

appointment  in  W.W.F.,  which  it  is  empowered  to  make  under  Section  8, 

the  same  cannot  be  declared  unlawful  simply  because  the  authority 

competent  to  make  the  appointment  under  the  Rules  did  not  make  the 

appointment.  

29. 

I am of the view that the petitioner‟s absorption as Assistant Director 

(BS-17) 

in  W.W.F.  without  the  recommendation  of  any  Selection 

Committee is no fault of the petitioner. It was not for the petitioner to have 

constituted  the  Selection  Committee  but  the  senior  management  of 

W.W.F. Without the constitution of a Selection Committee, the petitioner‟s 

case  for  absorption  should  not  have  been  placed  before  the  Governing 

Body.  But  it  was.  And  this  was  done  by  the  management  of  W.W.F.  The 

omission  to  comply  with  the  requirement  of  Rule  25(1)(iv)  in  the  process 

for  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  is  entirely  attributable  to  the  management 

of W.W.F. and not the petitioner.  

30.  Another  reason  why  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  in  W.W.F.  was 

declared unlawful is that there was no vacancy when the absorption took 

place. This ground is belied by W.W.F.‟s very own letter dated 31.10.1998 

clearly stating that the petitioner‟s absorption was against the vacancy of 

Assistant Director (BS-17) in W.W.F. In the working paper prepared by the 

management  of  W.W.F.  for  the  Governing  Body‟s  46th  meeting,  it  was 

mentioned that there was a vacancy.  As regards the W.W.F‟s stance that 

the  petitioner‟s  promotions  in  W.W.F.  had  also  been  made  in  violation  of 

the  Rules,  this  matter  is  of  no  relevance  in  deciding  whether  the 

petitioner‟s  absorption  was  liable  to  be  recalled.  The  question  regarding 

the petitioner‟s promotions in W.W.F. may be decided in accordance with 

the applicable Rules, if need be.  

31. 

It is pertinent to bear in mind that after W.W.F. passed orders for the 

petitioner‟s  repatriation,  D.W.E.  was  not  willing  to  take  him  back  for  the 

 
 
 
18 

W.P. No.575/2019 

reason that the period for which the petitioner was employed in D.W.E. on 

contract  basis  had  expired.  Hence,  the  decision  taken  by  the  Secretary, 

W.W.F.  to  declare  the  petitioner‟s  absorption  unlawful  and  to  repatriate 

him to D.W.E. in effect amounts to making him jobless after nineteen years 

of regular service in W.W.F.   

32. 

In  view  of  the  above,  the  instant  petition  is  allowed;  the  impugned 

order  dated  13.11.2017  is  set-aside;  and  the  Secretary,  W.W.F.  shall 

afford  another  opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  petitioner  and  thereafter 

decide  the  matter  through  a  reasoned  order  bearing  in  mind  the 

observations made herein above. There shall be no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 
JUDGE 

ANNOUNCED IN AN OPEN COURT ON 05/12/2022 

Qamar Khan*   

APPROVED FOR REPORTING 

                                          (JUDGE) 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
