ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT,  ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL  DEPARTMENT 

Criminal Revision N o.83/2018 
Amal N awaz v. The State & another 

P.S.L.A. No.04/2019 
Amal Nawaz  v. The State & another 

P.S.L.A. No.20/2019 
Amal N awaz v. The State & others 

and 

Diary N o.3051/2019 
Amal Nawaz  VS  The State 

Petitioner  by: 

Malik Irfan Asif, Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Najeeb Ullah Khan, Advocate for Respondent 
No.2 
Mr. Hasnain  Haider  Thaheem, State Counsel. 
Ashraf, S.1./1.0., P.S. Golra Sharif, Islamabad. 

Date of Decision: 

21.07.2020. 

MOHSIN AKHTAR  KAYANI,  I:  Through  this  single judgment,  I  intend 

to decide the captioned  criminal revision petition  along with P.S.L.As.  arising out 

of case FIR No.248, dated  01.09.2011, under  Section 302, 109, 34 PPC, P.S. Golra 

Sharif, Islamabad. 

2. 

Through  the captioned  criminal revision  petition,  the petitioner  has called 

in  question  order  of  the  learned  Additional  Sessions Judge  (West), Islamabad, 

dated  12.10.2018, whereby  direction  for  carrying  out  of proceedings  in  private 

complaint,  rather  in criminal  case FIR No.248/2011,  has  been  passed.  Likewise, 

through  the  captioned  P.S.L.As.  the  petitioner/  applicant  has  assailed  orders  of 

the 

learned 

trial  Court,  dated  01.04.2019  and  26.06.2017,  whereby 

respondents/ accused  persons  have  been  acquitted  in  a  private  complaint  and 

above  referred  case  FIR  No.248/2011.  Similarly,  the  petitioner  also  filed  an 

application  under  Section 439 Cr.P.C.  r/w  Section 435 Cr.P.C. in  the  captioned 

Crl. Revision No.83/2018  seeking  stay  of proceedings  of the learned  trial Court, 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  I  2 

though the office has raised objection on the filing of said application and fixed 

the same before this Court as Diary case. 

3. 

Brief and  consolidated facts referred  in  the  captioned  criminal revision 

petition  as  well  as  in  the  P.S.L.As. are  that  on  the  complaint  filed  by  the 

petitioner the case FIR No.248/2011 has been registered against respondents i.e. 

Safdar Zaman, Mir Zaman  and  Aamir on  the  allegations of having  murdered 

petitioner's son namely Roshan Nawaz. Later on, the petitioner on knowing that 

six  (06)  other  accused  persons  namely  Muhammad  Isal, Gui,  Sheikh Farooq, 

Rizwan, Azad Khan and  Zahid Ullah were also involved in the commission of 

offence nominated  them  through  supplementary  statement, but  the  police has 

not recorded the version of petitioner. Accordingly, feeling dissatisfied with the 

investigation  being  carried  out  by  the  police,  the  petitioner  filed  private 

complaint against the aforesaid six (06)  accused persons, but  to no avail as the 

said accused persons were declared proclaimed offender. However, accused Mir 

Zaman and Aamir opted to face trial, whereby the learned trial Court tried them 

in the complaint, rather in the challan case, and acquitted them of the charge vide 

impugned  order  dated  20.06.2017. Similarly,  the  learned  trial  Court,  vide 

impugned  order  dated  12.10.2018, also  directed  to  proceed  against  the  other 

accused i.e. Safdar Zaman (Respondent No.2) in private complaint, rather in the 

challan case. Whereafter, the said accused person was acquitted of the charge in 

private  complaint and  in  case FIR No.248/2011 vide  the  impugned  judgment 

dated 01.04.2019. Hence, the captioned criminal revision petition and P.S.L.As. 

4. 

Learned counsel for petitioner/ applicant contends that  the learned trial 

Court  has  misinterpreted  the  law  and  pronouncement  of  the  apex  Court  in 

passing  the  impugned  orders/judgment;  that  the  learned  trial  Court  has  not 

appreciated  the  fact  that  Respondent  No.2  (Safdar  Zaman)  has  not  been 

nominated in private complaint, therefore, order for carrying out of proceedings 

in  criminal complaint against  said  respondent  is  illegal; that  the  learned  trial 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary  No.3051/19 

Page  I  3 

Court has wrongly exercised jurisdiction vested in it while passing the impugned 

order/judgment and  has  acted with  material" irregularities; that  the  impugned 

orders/judgment are  patently  illegal, factually incorrect and  suffer from legal 

perversity as they have been passed in a slipshod manner and  without  proper 

application of judicial mind, therefore, instant criminal revision petition as well 

as the P.S.L.As may kindly be accepted, impugned orders/judgment may be set  

aside and direction to the learned trial Court may be issued to proceed in challan 

case. 

5. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondents  opposed  the  filing  of 

captioned criminal revision petition and P.S.L.As on the grounds that the learned 

trial Court has rightly appreciated the record in line with the available evidence 

and  passed the  impugned  orders/judgment;  that  complaint/petitioner  is not a 

witness of last seen and as such, the alleged witnesses of last seen have not been 

produced in the witness box to testify against the respondents/ accused persons; 

that  any  confession during  investigation under  custody  before  police  is  not 

relevant under  the law and is inadmissible; that evidence brought on record by 

the complainant is full of contradictions and no chain has been established to link 

the  accused  persons  with  the  commission  of  offence,  therefore,  captioned 

criminal revision petition and P.S.L.As may be dismissed. 

6. 

7. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal of record reveals that criminal case FIR No.248, dated  01.09.2011, 

under Section 302/109/34 PPC, P.S.  Golra Sharif, Islamabad has been lodged on 

the  complaint of  the  petitioner  Amal Nawaz  against  his  real  nephew  Safdar 

Zaman and  his  friend  Aamir having  allegations therein  that  the  said  accused 

persons  visited  his  house  and  accompanied his  son  Roshan  Nawaz  on  his 

motorcycle bearing  registration  GAG-728, Honda  125, at  about  5  p.m.  in  the 

evening. The  petitioner/complainant  on  knowing  that  dead  body  of  his  son 

(Roshan Nawaz) is lying on the unmetalled road (,.:i....;  4-S)  near Dhok Darek Mori 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  I  4 

visited the spot along with Aqil ur Rehman and Muhammad Khan, where they 

found  the dead  body  of his son smeared in blood next to his motorcycle. The 

non-presence of his  nephew  Safdar Nawaz  and  his  friend  Aamir at  the  spot 

made the petitioner to believe that his son was murdered  by Safdar Zaman and 

his friend  Aamir by  making  fires shot. The motive behind  the  murder  is  the 

alleged abduction of Sajila Zaman (niece) by deceased Roshan Nawaz about nine 

months ago. The police visited the  site, received complaint and  registered the 

case FIR No.248/2011. 

8. 

CW-7 Dr. Farrukh Kamal/MLO conducted autopsy of the  dead body in 

hospital  and  referred  two  injuries i.e., entry  wound  of  7x3  c.m. star  shaped 

wound  1  c.m. above from left ear and  exit wound  of lxl  c.m.,  4 c.m. back and 

above from right ear on skull. CW-7 Dr. Farrukh Kamal /Ml.O  has opined that 

deceased died due to firearm injury, which caused rupture of scalp, membranes 

of the brain, brain  and  fractured scalp, which caused the death. In this regard, 

postmortem report  (Exh.CW-7 / A/1-6) along with  pictorial diagram have been 

submitted on record. 

9. 

The  Investigating  Officer of  this  case  i.e.  CW-11 Muhammad  Aslam 

visited 

the  place  of  occurrence  and 

recorded  oral 

statement  of 

petitioner/ complainant, which  was  reduced  into  writing  by  him  in  shape  of 

complaint  vide  Exh.CW-11/ A  and  transmitted  the  same  to  Police  Station 

through Muhammad Nawaz/Constable for registration of FIR. He also prepared 

the recovery memo Exh.CW-1/B of black color wallet Pl,  registration book of 

motorcycle  [GAG-728] P2  and  cash  amount  of  Rs.30 P3/1-3,  which  were 

recovered  from  the  dead  body.  The  Investigating  Officer has  prepared  the 

unscaled  site  plan  Exh.CW-11/C  and  secured  blood  through  cotton  vide 

recovery memo Exh.CW-1/C and has also taken into possession an empty of .30 

bore  pistol  P7  through  recovery  memo  Exh.CW-1/D,  motorcycle  [GAG-728] 

through Exh.CW-1/E and  recorded the statements of witnesses. The dead body 

Crl. Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary  No.3051/19 

Page  I  5 

was  handed  over  to  the  complainant  and  site  plan  was  prepared  through 

draftsman  on  08.09.2011. The  Investigating  Officer  also  transmitted  the 

bloodstained cotton and empty of .30 bore pistol to Forensic Science Laboratory, 

Lahore for chemical analysis and  got warrant  of arrest  issued for  the arrest  of 

accused persons, but  the warrants  remained un-served and  he after completion 

of  investigation  submitted  report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.  by  declaring 

respondents as accused after found them guilty. 

10. 

The accused Safdar Zaman, remained fugitive from law for almost seven 

years i.e. from the date of occurrence till 19.04.2018 when he applied for his pre 

arrest bail before learned Additional Sessions Judge, which was confirmed vide 

order dated  04.05.2018, however same was re~alled by this Court on 17.07.2018 

through Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No.404/BC/2018. 

11.  During  the  trial,  proceedings  under  Section 512 Cr.P.C. were  initiated 

against Safdar Zaman (Respondent No.2) on the basis of proclamations, referred 

as  Exh.PB, Exh.PC and  Exh.PD. Whereas,  the  petitioner  has  filed  a  private 

complaint on 19.03.2013 before the Illaqa Magistrate, which was sent up  to the 

learned  Sessions Judge  (West), Islamabad  on  20.03.2013 and  entrusted  to  the 

learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  (West),  Islamabad.  The  petitioner  has 

introduced six other accused persons in private complaint namely Muhammad 

Isal, Gui son of Kher Amat, Sheikh Farooq son of Khan Amir, Rizwan son of Gui, 

Asad Khan son of Noordad Khan, and Zaif Ullah son of Azad Khan, all resident 

of District Karak, KPK. The process was issued by the learned Trial Court, even 

non bailable warrants were issued but not a single accused person was arrested. 

The learned  Trial Court  has  summoned  the  prosecution  evidence in  absentia, 

however two  accused persons  i.e. Amir Iqbal (nominated accused in  FIR) and 

one Mir Zaman was arrested and charge was framed, whereas both the accused 

persons were  acquitted  of the  challan case as well as  of the  private  complaint 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary  No.3051/19 

Page  I  6 

case on 20.06.2017, same was  assailed by the  petitioner  through  the  captioned 

P.S.L.A. No.20/2019. 

12.  During  pendency  of above matter, Respondent No.2 Safdar Zaman was 

arrested  and  final  report  under  Section 173 Cr.P.C. has  been  filed  before the 

Court, however the complaint filed by the petitioner along with challan case has 

been taken up, whereafter 13 CWs were recorded in addition to the testimony of 

petitioner, who appeared as PW-1, whereafter Safdar Zaman  (Respondent No.2) 

recorded  his  statement  under  Section 342 Cr.P.C. and  the  learned  Trial Court 

acquitted  the  respondents,  vide  impugned  judgment  dated  01.04.2019 by  the 

learned  Sessions Judge  (West), Islamabad,  which  has  been  assailed  through 

captioned P.S.L.A. No.4 of 2019. 

13. 

Besides the above referred two P.S.L.As the petitioner has also assailed an 

interlocutory  order  dated  12.10.2018, whereby  he  contends  that  proceedings 

against  Safdar  Zaman  (Respondent No.2) shall  be  conducted  in  challan  case 

instead  of complaint  case, whereby  his  request  was  turned  down  vide  order 

dated 12.10.2018 by the learned Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad, which resulted 

into acquittal of Safdar Zaman in complaint case through the impugned order. 

As such, when the final judgment has also been passed in the complaint case and 

Safdar Zaman was  acquitted, the captioned Crl. Revision No.83/2018 becomes 

infructuous. 

14. 

The petitioner has been confronted regarding any illegality committed by 

the learned Trial Court in both the judgment/ order of acquittal, whereby Safdar 

Zaman (Respondent No.2) and  other co-accused persons have been acquitted in 

the  murder  of Roshan Nawaz  (deceased), whereupon  the  petitioner  contends 

that  he  has  produced  the  evidence  of  last  seen  and  recovery  witnesses  to 

establish the chain of evidence against the respondents/ accused persons. 

15. 

Perusal  of  evidence  reveals  that  CW-1  Aqil  ur  Rehman  joined  the 

investigation in this case and witnessed the personal belongings of the deceased 

Crl. Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19 & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  I  7 

i.e. wallet Pl, registration  book of motorcycle P2  and  cash P3. He also witnessed 

the recovery  of one empty  of .30 bore pistol, which was  taken  into possession  by 

the Investigating  Officer. 

16.  Muhammad  Nawaz  Gondal,  the  then  duty  officer  of  P.S.  Golra  Sharif 

appeared  as  CW-3, who  recorded  the  case  FIR No.248/2011  (Exh.CW-3/ A) on 

the instructions  of CW-11 Muhammad  Aslam/LO. 

17. 

CW-4 Muhammad  Yasir/Constable  is related  to transmission  of an empty 

of  .30  bore  pistol  and  bloodstained  cotton  to  the  office of Chemical  Examiner, 

Lahore and Forensic Science Laboratory, Lahore. 

18. 

CW-5 Alamgir  Khan/S.I.  prepared  the above referred  parcels and  handed 

over same to Muhammad  Yasir/Constable,  vide Road Certificate No.3535/11. 

19. 

CW-6  Muhammad  Amir/Constable  remain  associated  for  execution  of 

arrest  warrants,  referred  as CW-6/ A-C, who  confirmed  that  remaining  accused 

persons have shifted to Waziristan. 

20. 

CW-7 Dr.  Farrukh  Kamal/MLO  has  confirmed  the  cause  of  death  as  of 

firearm injury above the left ear. 

21. 

CW-8  Muhammad  Riaz  Noon/ ASI  received  a  parcel  said  to  have 

contained  .30 bore  pistol  to be kept  in Malkhana  for safe custody,  which  he later 

on  handed  over  to  Kifayat  Ullah/HC  for  onward  transmission  to  the  FSL, 

Lahore. 

22. 

CW-9 Amir Shahzad/Draftsman  prepared  site plan  of place of occurrence 

Exh.CW-9/ A and  handed  over it to the Investigating  Officer. 

23. 

CW-10  Niaz  Muhammad/  ASI  arrested  the  accused  Safdar  Zaman  on 

17.07.2018 when  his bail was recalled by this Court. 

24. 

The  petitioner/  complainant 

recorded  his  statement  as  PW-1  and 

acknowledged  the following facts. 

a)  I received information  that my  son Roshan Nawaz  was lying  in pool 
of blood near Dharaik Mohari.  By  reaching at  my  house I  inquired 
from  my  family  members  namely  Sajila Zaman,  Akbar  Nawaz  and 

I 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary  No.3051/19 

Page  I  8 

Sultan  Bibi  about  Roshan  Nawaz  whereupon  I  was  informed  that 
Roshan  Nawaz  had  left  to  house  with  accused  Safdar  Zaman  and 
Aamir  for  picnic  on motorcycle  of Roshan  Nawaz. 

b)  I  nominated  accused  Safdar  Zaman  present  in  the  court  and  Aamir 
as  main  perpetrator  whereas  while  accused persons  Gul  son of Khair 
Amad,  Rizwan  son  of  Gul,  Shehikh  Farooq  son  of  Khan  Aamer, 
Muhammad  Esal  son  of Kher Amad,  Zahid  Ullah  son  of Azad  Khan, 
Azad  Khan  son  of  Noordad  Khan  for  hatching  the  conspiracy  of 
committing  murder  of my  son  with  accused Mir  Zaman,  Aamir  and 
Safdar Zaman. 

c)  On  29.07.2018  I joined  investigation  with  Muhammad  Ashraf!S.I. 
in  his  room  who 
who  was  interrogating  accused  Safdar  Zaman 
during  investigation  that he could get  the pistol recovered  by leading 
the police party  upon  which  Safdar Zaman  was  taken upon  a private 
vehicle and he  took  the police  party  to village  Dharaik Mohari,  where 
he  made  the  vehicle  stop  and  by entering  into  a  shed  like  house  and 
pointing  out  the  place  where  he  statedly  kept  the  pistol  by removing 
the  blocks,  took  the  pistol  with  his  own  hands  and  handed  the  same 
over  to  Muhammad  Ashraf/S.I.  who  unloaded  the  pistol  PB  upon 
which  three  live bullets came out  P-9/1.-3. 

d)  On  30.07.2018  I  again  joined  the  investigation  with  Muhammad 
Ashraf!S.I.  who  was  interrogating  accused  Safdar  Zaman  in  his 
room  during  the  investigation  accused  Safdar  Zaman  present  in  the 
in  presence  of  Kifayat  Ullah  recorded  his  confessional 
court 
statement  which  was  secured  through  USB  P-10  which  was  taken 
into  possession  by the IO  through  recovery memo  Exh.PW-1/C. 
e)  The motive  of  occurrence  was  that  accused  Mir  Zaman  had  leveled 
allegation 
that  deceased  abducted  his  daughter  namely  Sajeela 
Zaman.  Although  the  matter  of fact  that she had  taken  shelter in  our 
house  and  due  to  this  reason,  the  accused  persons  had  committed 
murder  of my  son. 

25.  During  the  course  of cross-examination, petitioner/PW-1  acknowledged 

that  he has  not  mentioned  the names  of family members namely Sultana Bibi, 

Sajila Nawaz  and  Akbar  Nawaz, who  had  informed him  that  deceased left in 

company of Safdar Zaman  and  Aamir. He  also acknowledged that  he  has not 

incorporated the names of Safdar Zaman and  Aamir and  Mir Zaman in private 

complaint Exh.PW-1/D, but  those have been mentioned  in body  of complaint. 

Similarly, he also admitted that there is no eyewitness of occurrence, however he 

contends that his family members have last seen the deceased alive in company 

of accused persons. The house/ place of recovery had no boundary  wall, neither 

Crl. Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  I  9 

its rooms have  any  door/ gate nor  the  petitioner  is  able to  tell the  number  of 

rooms in said house of recovery. 

26. 

The  above  referred  petitioner  being  star  witness  of  this  case  has  been 

investigated  by  CW-11  Muhammad  Aslam/LO.  at  the  initial  stage,  who 

acknowledged that there is no eyewitness in the instant case nor the complainant 

has  made  any  complaint  against  him  due  to  his  non-satisfaction  of  the 

investigation. 

27. 

Similarly, the last Investigating Officer i.e. CW-13 Muhammad Ashraf/S.1. 

investigated Safdar Zaman/Respondent  No.2 and  contended that  on disclosure 

of said accused he along with CW-12 Kifayat Ullah got recovered the weapon of 

offence PS  having  inscription of "Cal 30 Bore Mauser  Made China by  Noring 

Co." along with three live bullets Exh.CW-9/1-3. He also stated that respondent 

Safdar Zaman recorded his confession, which was converted into USB (PlO) and 

secured Exh.PWl/C.  He  admitted  that  place of recovery was  abandoned  since 

2010 and  structure  of  house  was  owned  by  one  Khaliq Mehmood, who  was 

neither  inquired  nor  investigated.  The  plate  of  recovery  has  neither  any 

boundary wall, nor outer gate, as acknowledged by the Investigating Officer and 

same was easily accessible to everyone. 

28. 

The last witness of recovery is CW-12 Kifayat Ullah/HC,  who joined the 

investigation and witnessed the recovery. 

29.  While considering  the  entire  evidence of this  case, the  prosecution  has 

alleged that  one  Roshan Nawaz  (deceased) was  allegedly murdered  by Safdar 

Zaman  (respondent  No.2) and  his  co-accused Aamir  on  the  conspiracy  and 

instigation of other six accused persons (P.Os) on 01.09.2011, when the petitioner 

Amal Nawaz father of deceased had seen the dead body of deceased, which was 

lying in a pool of blood on a path  at Mouza Darek Mori, as per  inquest report 

Exh.PB one firearm injury having entry wound  at the upper side of left ear was 

visible and  exit wound  on the  other side. The petitioner lodged  the complaint 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19 & Diary  No.3051/19 

Page  I  10 

and  directly  nominated  Safdar  Zaman  and  his  friend  Aamir  in  the  alleged 

murder 

of  deceased 

through  Exh.CW-3/ A 

and  Exh.PA/2.  The 

petitioner/ complainant  has  narrated  the  motive  in  the  FIR  on  the  day  of 

occurrence, whereby he categorically stated that: 

"-'rhl.l.Ji...-)Gt-~vs(!~L;!lf Jf tJ/-;1iJn~1/-J,L9'y..}  f 'r:-Jl:Y-?'" 

30. 

Prima fade,  the  entire  case rests  upon  circumstantial evidence and  the 

evidence of last seen, as such, in case of latter scenario, it is necessary to justify 

the  proximity of  date  and  time  of  the  witnesses of  last  seen  through  cogent 

evidence  of  having  seen  the  deceased  alive  in  company  of  alleged  accused 

persons. Reliance is placed upon 2019 SCMR  1220 (Sadi Ahmad  VS  The State). 

As per  said  dictum, in  absence of such requirement  of law  the  conviction on 

capital  charge  could  not  be  made.  Evidently,  the  petitioner/ complainant 

acknowledged that he was informed by his family members namely Sultan Bibi, 

Sajila Zaman  and  Akbar Nawaz,  "that  deceased had  left  the  house  in  company  of 

accused Safdar Zaman  and Aamir",  but the petitioner has not referred these three 

witnesses in  the  FIR nor  referred  the  same in  his  private  complaint, even he 

referred these witnesses for the first time in his testimony recorded on 13.03.2019. 

On the  other  hand,  the  said  three  witnesses were  never  produced  before the 

Court to substantiate the chain of last seen. 

31. 

The other  important  element set up  by  the  petitioner as  well as by  the 

prosecution in this case is the recovery of pistol PS i.e. alleged weapon of offence 

used  by  Safdar Zaman  in  the  commission of murder  of deceased, which was 

recovered from an open place having no gate and in fact is an abandoned house, 

even otherwise, the recovery was made after seven long years, which itself is not 

justiciable as belated  recovery losses its evidentiary value  as also held  in 2017 

SCMR 1976 (Amanat  Ali VS  The State)  and 2014 SCMR 1349 (Malik  Muhammad 

Aslam  VS  The  State).  Furthermore,  the  Investigating  Officer  and  CW-13 

Muhammad  Ashraf /S.1. being the  witness of recovery acknowledged that  the 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  111 

place of recovery was accessible to everyone, which was owned  by one Khaliq 

Mehmood,  who  has  not  been  associated  in  the  investigation.  The  place  of 

recovery having  been  no  boundary  wall  or  outer  gate  made  it  accessible to 

everyone and such fact belies the recovery. Reliance is placed upon  the case law 

reported as 2017 SCMR  564 (Arshad  Khan  VS The State.) 

32.  Another  important  piece of evidence relating  to  the  pistol  PB  with  the 

recovered crime  empty  is  that  same  has  not  been  confirmed  by  the  forensic 

experts in their report Exh.PE, dated 28.09.2018, whereby the conclusion referred 

in the said report of Punjab Forensic Science Agency reads that: 

"Because  of  differences 
cartridge case could not have been fired  in  the item  Pl pistol." 

individual  characteristics 

in 

the  item  Cl 

As such, no useful purpose could be achieved through the said report of PSF A to 

connect Safdar Zaman/ accused with  the  crime empty  found  next  to  the  dead 

body on 01.09.2011 as the same has not been matched due  to differences in the 

individual characters. 

33. 

The  petitioner  put  much  emphasis  on  the  confessional  statement  of 

respondent Safdar Zaman recorded by the Investigating Officer through Exh.PlO 

(USB),  whereby  the  Investigating Officer acknowledged  that  he  recorded  the 

confessional statement on 30.07.2018 during interrogation of Safdar Zaman. The 

respondent side has raised objection in the Trial Court that portion of statement 

of accused is not admissible in evidence and said objection has been sustained by 

the learned  Trial Court  at  that  time, hence such piece of evidence has  already 

been discarded and  even not to be called as evidence under  the law, therefore, 

there is no need to further discuss the status of USB. 

34. 

Lastly, I  have  gone  through  the  motive  part  brought  on  record  by  the 

petitioner, but surprisingly he has not produced any evidence qua verification of 

his motive part,  even no  independent  witness has been produced  nor  the  said 

Sajila Zaman  was  produced  in  the  Trial  Court  to  corroborate  motive  for  the 

Crl. Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A. No.20/19  & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  I  12 

murder  of deceased. Surprisingly, the  petitioner/ complainant has  changed  his 

motive part while appearing in the court from the version recorded in the FIR. 

35. 

I  have  also  gone  through  the  statement  of Safdar  Zaman/Respondent 

No.2 recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C., who has denied the entire occurrence. 

36.  Keeping in view  the  above discussion, there  is no  denial to  proposition 

that  it  is  the  case of blind  murder,  which  rests  upon  circumstantial evidence, 

although  not  a  single  piece  of  evidence  available  on  record  connects Safdar 

Zaman or any other accused person with the alleged murder  of deceased Roshan 

Nawaz. The pistol P8 has not  been matched with crime empty  recovered from 

the place of occurrence near the dead body, even the witnesses of last seen were 

not produced by the petitioner in the trial nor even at the investigation stage. 

37. 

In view of above position, the impugned judgment/ orders of the acquittal 

of respondents are fully justified having no illegality therein. On the other hand, 

the legal question raised by the petitioner that it is his choice to prosecute Safdar 

Zaman through State case despite filing of his private complaint is not justiciable 

in the light of case reported  as PLD 1966 SC 708  (Nur  Elahi  VS  The State).  The 

petitioner/ complainant has taken a somersault after registration of his initial FIR, 

where he nominated  two  accused persons on the  information disclosed by his 

family members that  deceased had  gone to picnic with  accused Safdar Zaman 

and  Aamir,  but  later  on  he  nominated  six  more  accused  persons  in  private 

complaint without  referring  the  principal  accused. Such contradictory  stances 

create  a  huge  doubt  in  entire  case  and  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  rightly 

followed the spirit of Nur  Elahi supra  that complaint has to be taken up first and 

prosecution  witnesses  listed  in  police  challan  has  to  be  examined  as  court 

witnesses and as such, the learned Trial Court has rightly rejected the request of 

petitioner  for  prosecuting  Safdar  Zaman  in  challan  case  during  pendency  of 

complaint. Even otherwise, the learned  Trial Court  has  examined 13  CWs and 

also recorded  the version  of petitioner/complainant,  on the basis of which  the 

Crl.  Revision  No.83/18,  P.S.L.A.  No.04/19,  P.S.L.A.  No.20/19  & Diary No.3051/19 

Page  I  13 

challan  as  well  as  private  complaint  has  been  decided  through  a  common 

judgment.  The plea raised  by the petitioner  for separate  trial after dismissal of his 

complaint  is  not  justiciable  and  no  illegality  has  been  observed  in  the  instant 

case. 

38. 

In view of abovementioned  discussion, there is no cavil to proposition  that 

entire prosecution  case as well as case of petitioner  rests upon no evidence in the 

eyes  of  law  and  creates  doubt/ suspicion,  which  could  not  be  made  basis  of 

conviction,  as  such,  every  doubt  has  to  be  considered  in  favour  of the  accused 

person, therefore,  while relying upon  the golden rule as well as the maxim that  it 

is better  than  that  ten  guilty  persons  be acquitted,  rather  one innocent  person  be 

convicted,  as  also  held  in  case reported  as PLD 2002 SC 1048 (Ayub  Masih  VS 

The  State).  Similarly,  on  sayings  of  the  Holy  Prophet  (PBUH) that  mistake  of 

Qazi/Judge  in releasing  of a criminal  is better  than.  his mistake  of punishing  an 

innocent. Reliance is placed upon  PLD 1973 SC 418 (State  VS Mushtaq  Ahmad). 

39. 

In view  of above,  since no  illegality has  been  observed  in  the  impugned 

orders/judgment, it is not a fit case to grant  leave to appeal  to the petitioner  as it 

amounts  to  further  wastage  of  precious  time  of  the  Court,  therefore,  the 

captioned  P.S.L.A.  No.4/2019  and  P.S.L.A.  No.20/2019  are  hereby  DISMISSED, 

whereas  the  captioned  Criminal  Revision  No.83/2018  stands  DISMISSED  and 

Diary  No.3051/2019  has  become 

infructuous  and, 

therefore, 

is  hereby 

DISMISSED. 

KhalidZ. 

(MOHS™1lI{liTAR  KA YANI) 
JUDGE 

