JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT,
ISLAMABAD

WRIT PETITION NO.4682 OF 202I.

MST. ANAM  ABOOD AND ANOTHER.
VS
MUHAMMAD  SALMOON  ILYAS, AND OTHERS

Petitioners by

Mr. Hashim Azeem,  Advocate.

Respondents by

M. Zafar-ul-Hassan, Advocate.

Date of Hearing

29.07.2022.

SAMAN RAFAT IMTIAZ. J.:.

Through the instant writ petition
under  Article  199 of the Constitution  of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
1973 ("Constitutional Petition"),  the Petitioners  have assailed the

Judgment  and Decree dated  22.10.2021("Impugned  Judgment  and Decree
II")  passed  by the learned Additional  District  Judge (MCAC)-West,
Islamabad ("Appellate  Court"), whereby Petitioner's  appeal against

Judgment  and Decree  dated 29.06.2021 ("Impugned  Judgment and
Decree I") passed by the learned Judge, Family  Court, Islamabad-West
("Trial Court")  has been dismissed.

2. 
Brief facts as per the Memo of Petition  are that the Petitioner No. I
(Mst. Anam Abood) filed a Suit for Maintenance & Treatment  Expenses
against the Respondent No.1 before the learned Trial Court on 14.07.2017
and thereafter  another suit was filed on 12.02.2019  for Recovery of
Maintenance  Allowance for the Petitioner No.2,  Medical  Expenses,  ffid

Iddat  Expenses,  Gold Ornaments, Execution of Transfer  Deed of Vehicle  &

Rs. 150,000/-.

Vide the Impugned consolidated Judgment and Decree I, the
3. 
Petitioner  No.l was held entitled to receive Rs. 92,0001-  for medical and

delivery expenditures;  maintenance  at the rate of Rs. 8,0001- per month  as
Iddat expenses;  and also for the return of possession  of the vehicle in
question.  Whereas, the Petitioner No. 2 was held to entitled to receive
maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.5000/-  per month with 10% annual
increase  since her birth i.e. 01.03.2018 to 30.06.2021 and to receive

' 

*.P.No.4862/2ozr

maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.7500/-  per month with l0oZ  annual
increase from  01.07.2021 till her marriage or change of custody  while
remaining claim was turned down. The Petitioners  being partially
dissatisfied  with the Impugned Judgment  and Decree I filed appeal  the
before  the learned Appellate  Court which  was dismissed vide Impugned

Judgment  and Decree  II. Hence, the present petition.

4.  The learned  counsel for the Petitioners argued that the maintenance
allowance for Petitioner  No.2 from 01.07.2021  as provided  by the learned

Trial Courl and upheld  by the learned Appellate Court is no longer  sufficient

as the Petitioner No.2 is now school going and, therefore, her monthly
expenses  have substantially increased. With regard to Petitioner No.l he

submitted  that the period of Iddat has not been calculated  correctly.  He

further prayed  on behalf of the Petitioner for modification of the Impugned

Judgments  and Decrees I & II.

5.  On the other hand, the learned counsel for Respondent  controverted
the arguments  of the leamed counsel for the Petitioner  and supported  the

Impugned  Judgment and Decrees I & II as being in accordance  with law and

fully justified  and passed after proper appreciation  of facts and record.

6. 

I have heard the arguments  and perused the record.

7.  First and foremost, it must be borne in mind  that a High Court in its
writ jurisdiction does not substitute the concurrent  findings of fact

recorded by the Family  Court and upheld by the Appellate  Court with

its own findings solely on the ground that another view was possible  on

the same evidence. In this regard the legislature  has established  Family
Courts for expeditious  disposal of family cases regarding family
maintenance. Therefore,  this Court cannot give an opinion regarding
adequacy of maintenance  allowance when the Courts below have
reached  a determination after due consideration  of all the relevant

factors.

8.  A party approaching the High Court  under Article 199 of the
Constitution has to demonstrate  that there is a gross misreading  or non-

reading  of evidence  or jurisdictional  error or such legal infirmity that

3

W.P.  No.486212021

has caused  miscarriage of justice.  However, the Petitioners  have not

pointed out any such illegality,  defect or illegality in the Impugned

Judgments.

9.  As far as determination  of the Iddat period is concerned,  the
learned counsel for the Petitioners conceded that no such ground  or

prayer  has been made in the instant petition.  The only issue raised in

this regard is the quantum of maintenance for the Iddat  period of the

Petitioner  No. 2. However, whether  it is the determination  of the Iddat

period or sufficiency of the quantum  of maintenance for such period,

the learned  counsel for the Petitioners could not point out any non-

reading or misreading  of evidence, illegality or jurisdictional  defect  in

the concurrent findings of the lower courts. In the absence  of such

defects, the only issue that remains  regarding sufficiency of quantum
would be a factual  one which cannot be adjudicated  upon in the
exercise of Constitutional  jurisdiction.

10. As far as the PetitionerNo.2  is concerned,  an alternate,  adequate
remedy is available in terms of enhancement  of  maintenance
application which may be filed before the Family Court as held by the
Honorable Supreme Court in the case of Lt. Col. Nasir Malik VS

Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore,  2016 SCMR  I 821 .

I 1.  In view of the above, this Petition is accordingly dismissed

(S

AZ)

JUDGE

Adm.

