ORDER SHEET

ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD, 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.3460/2019 
Syed Adnan Amir 
VS 
Mst. Mubina Shah & 04 others 

and 

W.P. No.3424/2019 
Syed Adnan Amir 
VS 
Mst. Mubina Shah & 04 others 

Petitioner by: 

Mr. Muhammad Islam Sandhu and Malik Najma 
Khan, Advocates along with petitioner.  

Respondent No.1 by:  Mr. Shakir Javed, Advocate along with 
respondent No.1 and her son (Rayyan) 

Date of Decision: 

19.01.2022 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KAYANI,  J:  By  way  of  this  common  order,  this 

Court  intends  to  decide  the  captioned  writ  petitions  having  involved  similar 

facts and questions of law.  

2. 

Through  the  captioned  W.P.  No.3460/2019,  the  petitioner  (father  of 

respondents  No.2  &  3)  has  called  in  question  the  concurrent  findings  of  the 

Courts  below,  whereby  petitioner’s  application  filed  under  Section  25  of  the 

Guardians & Wards Act, 1890 has been dismissed.   

3. 

Similarly,  through  the  captioned  W.P.  No.3424/2019,  the  petitioner 

(father  /  husband)  has  assailed  the  concurrent  findings  of  the  Courts  below, 

whereby  suit  filed  by  respondents  No.1  to  3  for  recovery  of  maintenance 

allowance and dowry articles has been decreed.   

4. 

Brief and consolidated facts are that  Syed Adnan Amir  (petitioner) and 

Mst.  Mubina  Shah  (respondent  No.1)  tied  the  knot  on  26.01.2005,  from  this 

wedlock  they  have  been  blessed  with  two  children  namely  Rayyan  Shah  and 

Izma  Bukhari,  born  on  22.04.2006  and  09.07.2009,  respectively,  however  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.3460/2019 and W.P. No.3424/2019 

Page | 2 

matrimonial relationship became strained  with the passage of time, as a result 

the petitioner divorced respondent No.1. Later on, the petitioner filed a petition 

for  custody  of  the  minors,  which  was  dismissed  vide  judgment  and  decree 

dated 02.05.2018, as a result whereof, an appeal was filed, which was partially 

accepted vide impugned judgment and decree dated 22.07.2019 with visitation 

rights  only.  On  the  other  hand,  respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  for  maintenance, 

which  was  partially  decreed,  feeling  aggrieved  thereof,  both  the  parties 

preferred  their  respective  appeals,  as  such,  the  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner 

was dismissed, while the appeal of respondent No.1 was modified to the extent 

of maintenance of minors, which was enhanced, vide impugned judgment and 

decree dated 02.05.2018. Hence, instant writ petition.  

5. 

Learned counsel for petitioner contends that it is well settled law of the 

superior Courts that visitation right may also be awarded to father for two full 

days  in  every  month,  while  in  summer  and  winter  vacation  of  minors,  one 

month period be given to minors to spend with their father, but both the Courts 

below have ignored this settled law and passed the impugned judgments and 

decrees  in  a  slipshod  manner,  causing  miscarriage  of  justice  to  the  petitioner; 

that  father  being  natural  guardian  was  not  only  required  to  participate  in  the 

upbringing  of  the  minor  but  should  also  develop  love,  bondage  and  affinity 

with them; that the learned first Appellate Court  has not merely increased the 

maintenance  allowance,  but  also  awarded  past  maintenance  in  favour  of 

respondent No.1 without considering the law on subject as well as the status of 

petitioner. 

6. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.1  opposed  the  filing  of 

instant  writ  petitions  and  maintained  in  the  support  of  the  impugned 

judgments and decrees that  after the divorce, the petitioner contracted  second 

marriage,  therefore,  he  parted  himself  from  the  minors;  that  the  learned  first 

Appellate Court has rightly appreciated the facts of the case and increased the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3460/2019 and W.P. No.3424/2019 

Page | 3 

maintenance allowance in accordance with law, even otherwise, petitioner has 

been  granted  proper  visitation  rights  to  meet  with  the  minors  on  special 

occasions.  

7. 

8. 

Arguments heard, record perused.   

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  the  petitioner  Syed  Adnan  Ameer  and 

respondent  No.1  Mst.  Mubina  Shah  were  married  to  each  other  according  to 

Muslim Family Laws and Muslim family rites on 26.01.2005, who were blessed 

with  two  children  namely  Rayyan  Shah,  born  on  22.04.2006  (presently 

approximately  16  years  of  age  and  student  of  1st  year  pre-medical)  and  Izma 

Bukhari, born on 09.07.2009 (aged about 12 years approximately and student of 

Class  7),  who  are  in  custody  of  respondent  mother.  The  petitioner  has  orally 

divorced respondent No.1  due  to  acute  disparity on  24.02.2014  and  in  writing 

on 27.02.2014, whereafter the petitioner has filed a petition under Section 25 of 

the Guardian & Wards Act, 1890 for custody of minors, but later on he confined 

his case of custody to the extent of visitation of minors and did not press for the 

custody,  as  a  result  whereof  the  Guardian  Court  vide  judgment  and  decree 

dated 02.05.2018 extended the right of visitation to the petitioner (father) while 

considering  the  needs  and  requirement  as  well  as  the  conduct  of  both  the 

parties with reference to their children, but petitioner was not satisfied with this 

judgment and filed an appeal, in which the visitation rights have been extended 

with  certain  modifications,  but  the  petitioner  is  still  claiming  that  the  minors 

should have been handed over to him for overnight stay as well as for half of 

the summer and winter vacations. However,  when this aspect  was  confronted 

to the respondent mother, she categorically stated that she has no objection on 

any kind of visitation of minors with their father subject to their own choice and 

will as both the minors have now grown up, who fully understand the relations 

and are  capable of dealing with issues of visitation and dispute amongst  their 

parents.  At  this  juncture,  the  elder  son  of  the  petitioner,  who  is  student  of  1st 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3460/2019 and W.P. No.3424/2019 

Page | 4 

Year Pre Medical, while present in the Court has not shown any willingness to 

meet  his  father,  even  otherwise,  the  connected  writ  petition  No.3424/2019 

having been filed by the petitioner against the enhancement of maintenance as 

well  as  grant  of  certain  dowry  articles,  is  also  co-related  in this  case,  whereby 

the  admitted  position  which  emerges  on  record  is  shocking,  as  the  petitioner 

being the father has not paid a single penny to both the minors since 2017 only 

on  one  pretext  that  no  visitation  was  taken  place,  such  an  answer  from 

petitioner  father  is  considered  to  be  a  negative  gesture  and  denial  of  his 

responsibility in unequivocal terms, who at one end is claiming the visitation of 

the minors to establish a bond with them, but on the other hand he is not taking 

care of the day-to-day needs of the minors, even he challenges the maintenance 

of  Rs.10,000/-  per  month  for  each  minor,  which  was  enhanced  by  the  learned 

first  Appellate  Court  in  appeal  through  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree 

from Rs.5,000/- and Rs.6,000/-, respectively.  

9. 

I  have  gone  through  the  relevant  extract  of  the  evidence  brought  on 

record by both the parties  and observed  that petitioner is presently  serving  as 

Computer  Engineer  (BPS-18)  in  Associated  Press  of  Pakistan,  though  the 

petitioner  contends  that  his  monthly  salary  is  much  less  as  reflected  in 

Exh.P19/1,  which  shows  a  salary  of  Rs.50,284/-  per  month,  but  on  minute 

scanning of said admitted document it reveals that the said salary slip is for the 

month of February, 2015, yet we are deciding the fate of his status in January, 

2022, as such, the salary slip being an old one could not be considered for the 

purposes  of  the  petitioner’s  claim,  whose  salary  has  been  enhanced  at  this 

juncture. 

10.  Now reverting to the issue of certain dowry articles as contended by the 

petitioner,  it  appears  that  the  respondent  mother  submitted  the  list  of  dowry 

articles before the learned Trial Court and it is also admitted fact on record that 

she  is  a  working  woman  and  lecturer  in  OPF  Girls  College,  who  purchased 

 
 
 
W.P. No.3460/2019 and W.P. No.3424/2019 

Page | 5 

different  household  articles,  as  admitted  in  the  evidence,  even  she  has 

produced  the  receipts  of  different  household  articles,  including  the  furniture, 

which  were  confirmed  through  testimony  of  PW-4  and  PW-5,  per  se,  such 

aspect  could  not  be  denied  at  this  stage  as  all  these  factual  details  were  duly 

appreciated  by  both  the  Courts  below,  therefore,  at  this  stage  when  the 

petitioner  being  father  is  not  performing  his  legal  obligation  towards  the 

minors  in  terms  of  maintenance,  rather  engaging  the  respondent  (mother)  in 

these  proceedings  without  any  just  cause,  especially  when  he  admittedly 

entered into second marriage having a daughter, hence he should have paid the 

entire due maintenance to the minors immediately without any delay. 

11. 

The  petitioner  was  also  confronted  qua  the  dowry  articles,  whereby  he 

acknowledged  that  he  is  in  custody  of  those  dowry  articles,  which  could  be 

received  by  the  respondent  mother  any  time.  This  aspect  also  shows  his 

conduct, who has not put any serious effort to settle those issues in the past four 

years,  therefore,  no  interference  is  required  in  this  case  as  the  claims  of 

petitioner  are  contrary  to  record,  hence  both  the  writ  petitions  are 

hereby DISMISSED.  

(MOHSIN AKHTAR KAYANI) 
JUDGE 

Khalid Z. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
