1 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, ISLAMABAD 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

W.P.No.3402 of 2016  

Shafique Ahmed Khan etc.  

VS 

Learned Rent Controller, Islamabad (West), and others  

Date of Hearing:   
Petitioners by: 

13.10.2016 
Raja Aamir Abbas, and Muhammad 
Abdul  Wali Irfan, Advocates,  

Respondent No.2 by:  Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Raja, Advocate. 
__________________________________________________________________ 

MIANGUL  HASSAN  AURANGZEB,  J:- 

  Through  the 

instant writ petition, the petitioners, Shafique Ahmed Khan and 

his  wife,  Saima  Shafique, 

impugn  the 

judgment  dated 

05.09.2016,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Additional 

District  Judge  (West),  Islamabad,  whereby  the  petitioners' 

appeal  against  the  Order  dated  14.06.2016,  passed  by  the 

Court  of 

the 

learned  Rent  Controller, 

Islamabad,  was 

dismissed.  Vide  the  said  Order  dated  14.06.2016,  the  learned 

Rent  Controller,  had  allowed  respondent  No.2's  eviction 

petition  under  Section  17  of  the  Islamabad  Rent  Restriction 

Ordinance,  2001  ("IRRO")  and  directed  the  petitioners  to 

vacate  House  No.30,  Street  No.28,  Sector  F-10/1,  Islamabad 

("the rented premises") within a period of 45 days.  

2. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted  that 

petitioner No.1 had lived in the rented premises for most of his 

life;  that  the rented premises were  a joint family property and 

that  respondent  No.2  was  only  a  benamidar;  that  there  is  no 

relationship  of  tenant  and  landlord  between  the  petitioners 

and  respondent  No.2;  that  petitioner  No.1  was  living  in  the 

rented  premises  as  respondent  No.2's  son,  and  not  as  a 

tenant;  that  after  petitioner  No.1's  father  died  in  May  2011, 

petitioner  No.1  was  posted  in  Rawalpindi;  that  the  rented 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

premises  were  leased  by  petitioner  No.1  only  for  a  period  of 

two  years,  because  the  facility  of  self-hiring  was  available  to 

petitioner No.1; that the rent for the said period was duly paid 

to  respondent  No.2;  that  the  lease  agreement  does  not  bear 

respondent No.2's signature; that the  said lease agreement is 

doubtful.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  prayed  for  the 

concurrent orders of the learned Courts below to be set aside 

and  respondent  No.2's  eviction  petition  to  be  dismissed.  In 

making  his  submissions, 

the 

learned  counsel 

for 

the 

petitioners placed reliance on the law laid down in the cases of 

Muhammad Irshad VS Additional District Judge, Multan (2009 

YLR 2379), Muhammad Naeem VS Abdul Wahidi (1999 MLD 

1342), and Abdul Rasul VS Aziz Khatoon (1992 MLD 1997). 

3. 

On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No.2 

defended  the  orders  impugned  in  the  instant  writ  petition  by 

submitting  that  the  petitioners  in  their  written  replies  before 

the learned Rent Controller, had pleaded that respondent No.2 

was  not  the  real  owner  of  the  rented  premises,  and  that  she 

was  only  a  benami  owner;  that  it  was  also  pleaded  by  the 

petitioners  that  the  rented  premises  were  purchased  by 

respondent  No.2's  husband,  who wanted  the rented  premises 

to  devolve  on  petitioner  No.1  and  his  two  younger  brothers; 

that  the  petitioners  have  concealed  from  this  Court  several 

documents,  which  were  exhibited  and  were  a  part  of  the 

record of the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller; 

that  one  such  document  was  Exh.A-2,  which  was  the  rent 

agreement  dated  01.09.2011  between  respondent  No.2  and 

the President of Pakistan with respect to the rented premises; 

that  Exh.A-5  shows  that  on  01.09.2011,  the  rented  premises 

were  occupied  by  petitioner  No.1;  that  Exh.A-7  is  letter  dated 

23.01.2012,  conveying  the  approval  of  the  Quartermaster 

General's Branch  of the General Headquarters  regarding the 

hiring  of  the  rented  premises  from  01.09.2011  to  31.08.2013 

for an annual rental of Rs.225,120/-; that presently respondent 

No.2  is  the  undisputed  lawful  owner  of  the  rented  premises. 

Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  prayed  for  the  writ 

 
3 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

petition  to  be  dismissed.  In  making  his  submissions,  learned 

counsel  for  respondent  No.2  placed  reliance  on  the  law  laid 

down in the cases of Rasheeda Qudrat VS Muhammad Qudrat 

Ullah  (1998  MLD  171),  Muhammad  Siddique  VS  Shah 

Pasandkhan (1979 SCMR 619), Muneer Khan VS Uzma Ufaq 

(2011 CLC 846), and Liaquat Ali VS Additional Sessions Judge, 

Islamabad (PLD 2011 Islamabad 14).  

4. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for 

the contesting parties, and have perused the record with their 

able assistance.  

5. 

Respondent  No.2  (Mst.  Shamim  Anjum)  is  petitioner 

No.1's mother. The ownership of the rented premises vests in 

respondent No.2. Petitioner No.1 is serving as a Lt. Colonel in 

the Pakistan Army. Petitioner No.2 is petitioner No.1’s wife. 

6. 

The  record  shows  that  on  03.09.2015,  respondent  No.2 

filed an eviction petition under Section 17 of the IRRO, against 

the  petitioners,  seeking  their  eviction 

from  the  rented 

premises. The grounds taken in the said eviction petition were 

inter-alia  (i)  default  in  the  payment  of  rent,  (ii)  respondent 

No.2's  bonafide  need  of  the  rented  premises  for  her  own 

personal  use,  (iii)  subletting  of  the  rented  premises  by  the 

petitioners,  and  (iv)  expiry  of  the  lease  agreement.  The 

petitioners  contested  the  said  eviction  petition  by  filing  their 

respective replies. The position taken by petitioner No.1 in his 

reply  was 

that  while  he  was  posted  at 

the  General 

Headquarters, Rawalpindi, he had rented the rented premises 

for  the  period  2011-2013  from  respondent  No.2.  It  was  also 

pleaded  that  upon  the  expiry  of  the  lease  agreement,  the 

relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between  respondent  No.2 

and  the  petitioners  respectively,  came  to  an  end.  After  a  trial 

stretching  over  a  period  of  several  months,  the  learned  Rent 

Controller,  vide  order  dated  14.06.2016,  allowed  respondent 

No.2's  eviction  petition.  The  petitioners  challenged  the  said 

eviction  order  in  an  appeal  before  the  Court  of  the  learned 

Additional  District  Judge,  Islamabad.  As  mentioned  above, 

 
 
 
4 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

vide  appellate  order  dated  05.09.2016,  the  petitioners  appeal 

was  dismissed.  The  said  concurrent  orders  passed  by  the 

learned  Courts  below  have  been  impugned  by  the  petitioners 

in the instant writ petition.  

7. 

During  the  trial  before  the  learned  Rent  Controller,  the 

record  keeper  of  Military  Lands,  Rawalpindi  Cantonment, 

appeared  as  CW-1  and  produced  Exh.A/1  to  Exh.A/18.  The 

petitioners chose not to file any of these Exhibits alongwith the 

writ  petition.  Respondent  No.2  has  brought  these  Exhibits  on 

record  through  a  civil  miscellaneous  application.  Perusal  of 

these  Exhibits  shows  that  on  01.09.2011,  an  agreement  was 

executed  between  respondent  No.2  and  the  President  of 

Pakistan for the lease of the rented premises from 01.09.2011 

to 31.08.2013. The monthly rent was agreed to be Rs.18,760/-. 

Exhibit  A-4  is  an  affidavit  of  respondent  No.2  deposing inter-

alia that the rented premises will not be given on lease to any 

other  party  till  such  time  that  they  remained  with  the  Military 

Estate Office. Exhibit A-5 shows that the rented premises were 

occupied  by  petitioner No.1  on  01.09.2011.  Exhibit A-6  shows 

that  the  rented  premises  were  vacated  by  petitioner  No.1  on 

31.07.2013.  Exhibit  A-7  is  letter  dated  23.01.2012  from  the 

office of the Quartermaster General conveying the sanction for 

leasing  the rented  premises  for the  benefit  of petitioner  No.1. 

Exhibit  A-8  is  a  certificate  from  respondent  No.2  showing  her 

willingness  to  lease  her  house  to  the  Pakistan  Army  for  a 

period  of  two  years.  The  signature  of  petitioner  No.1  also 

appeared  on  this  document.  This  document  also  contains  an 

agreement  between  respondent  No.2  and  petitioner  No.1 

showing inter-alia  that  the  monthly  rent  of  Rs.30,000/-  for  the 

rented  premises  was  agreed  between  the  said  parties.  The 

difference in the agreed rental  and the sanction rental was to 

be  paid  by  petitioner  No.1.  Exhibit  A-9  are  the  receipts  of  the 

monthly rent paid to respondent No.2. The cumulative reading 

of  these  documents  established  the  relationship  of  landlord 

and  tenant  between  respondent  No.2  and  petitioner  No.1 

respectively. The petitioners ought not to have withheld these 

 
5 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

documents  and  should  have  filed  their  copies  alongwith  the 

writ petition.  

8. 

The 

record  keeper  of 

the  Estate  Management 

Directorate, Capital Development Authority appeared as CW-2 

in  the  proceedings  before  the  learned  Rent  Controller  and 

produced  Exhibits  A-19  to  A-23.  Exhibit  A-19  is  letter  dated 

13.11.1991  issued  by  the  Estate  Management  Directorate, 

Capital  Development  Authority  which  shows  that  the  rented 

premises  are  owned  by  respondent  No.2.  Exhibit  A-21  is 

respondent No.2’s application dated 08.05.2015 to the CDA for 

issuing  a  no  demand  certificate  for  the  transfer  of  the  rented 

premises  to  her  three  sons,  including  petitioner  No.1.  This 

application  was  subsequently  withdrawn  by  respondent  No.2 

vide  letter  dated  11.08.2015  (Exhibit  A-23).  Perusal  of  the 

documents  produced  by  CW-2  show  that  till  date  the 

ownership  in  the  rented  premises  vests  solely  in  respondent 

No.2.  

9. 

The petitioners’ stance that the rented premises are not 

actually  owned  by  respondent  No.2,  but  that  she  is  only  a 

benami  owner, 

is  not  borne  out  from  the  record.  The 

petitioners  have  not  even  instituted  a  suit  for  declaration  that 

the rented premises are owned only ostensibly, and not really 

by  respondent  No.2.  The  petitioners  reliance  on  a  deed  of 

declaration dated 08.08.1998 allegedly executed by petitioner 

No.1’s father that he wanted the rented premises to devolve on 

his sons, is also of no avail because  the rented premises were 

not owned by alleged executant.  

10. 

It may have been the case that petitioner No.1 had been 

living  in  the  rented  premises  with  his  parents  but  the  fact 

remains  that  petitioner  No.1  had  leased  the  rented  premises 

from  respondent  No.2.  The  factum  as  to  lease  of  the  rented 

premises  is  amply  demonstrated  by  the  documents  produced 

before  the  learned  Rent  Controller  by  CW-1.  The  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioners  in  his  arguments  submitted  that 

since  respondent  No.2  was  only  a  benamidar, there  was  no 

 
 
 
6 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

occasion to pay her any rent is, in fact, a candid admission of 

default in the payment of rent. As regards petitioner No.2, who 

is  petitioner  No.1’s  wife,  the  learned  Rent  Controller  had 

correctly  held  that  petitioner  No.2  would  not  have  an 

independent  right  to  continue  to  occupying  the  rented 

premises because a tenant includes his spouse and children in 

occupation of demised premises.  

11.  As  mentioned  above,  there  were  several  documents, 

which formed part of the record of the proceedings before the 

learned  Rent  Controller,  which  documents  the  petitioners 

chose  not  to  annex  with  their  writ  petition.  Some  of  these 

documents were of pivotal importance for the just adjudication 

of  this  case.  In  the  judgment  dated  03.10.2016,  passed  in 

W.P.No.1090/2015,  titled  "Khushnood  Ahmed  VS  Learned 

Additional District Judge, Islamabad" I have had the occasion 

to hold as follows:-  

"A litigant, who approaches a Court, is bound to produce all 
the  documents  which  are  relevant  to  the  litigation.  For 
instance, in a petition seeking a writ of certiorari, the entire 
record of the court or a tribunal below has to be filed. The 
practice of filing documents which favour the petitioner and 
avoiding to file those which go against him, should not just be 
deprecated but met with a penalty of summary dismissal of 
the petition. The superior courts in innumerable cases have 
refused to exercise discretionary power for issuance of a writ 
on the ground that the petitioner had not approached the 
Court  with  clean  hands  by  withholding  the  material 
facts/documents. Writ jurisdiction is equity jurisdiction, and he 
who seeks equity must come with clean hands." 

12.  Learned counsel for the petitioners during the course of 

his  arguments  submitted  that  he  was  under  instructions  to 

submit  that  he  would  have  no  objection  if  the  writ  petition  is 

dismissed  provided  respondent  No.2  undertakes  not  to 

transfer the rented premises in her life time. I am afraid such a 

restrictive  and  cruel  fetter  is  not  permissible  under  any 

cannon of law, justice, equity and jurisprudence, least of all at 

the  instance  of  a  son  on  a  mother.  I  cannot  help  but  observe 

that Islam has given an exalted position and status to a mother 

as can be appreciated from the following verses from the Holy 

 
 
 
7 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

Quran  and  Ahadith  of  the  Holy  Prophet  (may  peace  be  upon 

him):-  

“The Holy Quran: 

1.  We have enjoined on man kindness to his parents; in pain did 
his mother bear him, and in pain did she give him birth 
(46:15).57 

2.  Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship none but Him, and that 
ye be kind to parents. Whether one or both of them attain old 
age in thy life, say not to them a word of contempt, nor repel 
them,  but  address  them  in  terms  of  honor.  And  out  of 
kindness, lower to them the wing of humility, and say: ‘My 
Lord! Bestow on them Thy Mercy even as they cherished me 
in childhood’ (17:23-24), 

3.  We have enjoined on man and woman kindness to parents; 
but if they (either of them) strive (to force) thee to join with Me 
anything of which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not. 

4.  We have enjoined on man and woman (to be good) to his/her 
parents; show gratitude to Me and to thy parents; to Me is (thy 
final) Goal. If they (parents)strive to make thee join worship 
with Me things of which thou hast no knowledge, obey them 
not; yet bear them company in this life with justice (and 
consideration) and follow the way of those who turn to Me (in 
love) (31:14-15).  

The Ahadith of the Holy Prophet (may peace be upon him): 

1.  The Prophet Muhammad said, may Allah’s peace and blessings 
be upon him: Your Heaven lies under the feet of your mother 
(Ahmad, Nasai). 32 

2.  A man came to the Prophet and said, ‘O Messenger of God! Who 
among  the  people  is  the  most  worthy  of  my  good 
companionship? The Prophet said: Your mother. The man said, 
Then who? The Prophet said: Then your mother. The man 
further asked, ‘Then who? The Prophet said: Then your mother. 
He asked again, ‘Then who? The Prophet said: Then your father. 
(Bukhari, Muslim). 

3.  Abu Usaid Saidi said: We were once sitting with Rasulullah 
when a man from the tribe of Salman came and said to him: O 
Messenger of Allah! do my parents have rights over me even 
after they have died? And Rasulullah Said: yes. You must pray to 
Allah to bless them with His Forgiveness and Mercy, fulfill the 
promises they made to anyone, and respect their relations and 
their friends (Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah). 

4.  Abdullah ibn Amr narrated that the Messenger of Allah said: The 
major sins are to believe that Allah has partners, to disobey 
one’s parents, to commit murder, and to bear false witness 
(Bukhari, Muslim). 

5.  It is narrated by Asma bint Abu Bakr that during the treaty of 
Hudaibiyah, her mother, who was then pagan, came to see her 
from Makkah. Asma informed the Messenger of Allah of her 
arrival and also that she needed help. He said: Be good to your 
mother (Bukhari, Muslim).” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

W.P. No.3402/2016 

13. 

In view of the above, I do not find any reason to interfere 

with  the  concurrent  findings  of  the  learned  courts  below. 

Resultantly, this petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

           JUDGE 

Announced in open court on________________. 

Approved for reporting. 

Sultan* 

   JUDGE 

    JUDGE 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
