ORDER SHEET

IN  THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH COURT, 

ISLAMABAD 

Criminal  Revision  No. 54/2018 

Syed Safeer Hussain  Shah 

VS

Additional  District and Sessions Judge (West), Islamabad,  etc. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr. Muzammil  Din Ch., Advocate. 

Respondents  by: 

Mr. Hasnain  Haider  Thaheem, State Counsel. 
Mr. Faisal Nawaz,  Advocate for respondent  No.3. 

Date of Hearing: 

08.05.2020. 

MOHSIN  AKHTAR  KA YANI,  J.  Through  this  criminal  revision,  the 

petitioner  has assailed  the judgment  dated  17.04.2017, passed  by learned  Judicial 

Magistrate  Section 30 (West), Islamabad,  whereby  petitioner  was  convicted  TJ/S 

324/34  PPC  and  sentenced  to  R.I.  for  five  (05)  years  along  with  fine  of 

Rs.10,000/-  and  also  convicted  U/S  337-D PPC and  sentenced  to  R.I.  for  three 

(03)  years  with  fine  of  Rs.20,000/-  in  case  FIR No.166, dated  08.06.2012, U /S 

324/34/337-D/109  PPC,  P.S.  Golra  Sharif,  Islamabad.  Benefit of  Section 382-B 

Cr.P.C. has  also been  extended  to the petitioner.  The petitioner  has  also assailed 

the judgment  of appellate  Court  dated  10.05.2017, passed  by learned  Additional 

Sessions  Judge,  Islamabad,  whereby  conviction  has  been  maintained  and 

punishment  of fine of Rs.20,000/-as Daman was modified  in terms of Arsh which 

is one third  of Diyat. 

2. 

Brief  facts  referred  in  the  instant  criminal  revision  are  that  case  FIR 

No.166,  dated  08.06.2012, U/S  324/34/337-D/109  PPC,  P.S.  Golra  Sharif, 

Islamabad  was registered  on the complaint  of Syed Aulaad  Ali/respondent  No.3 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

2 

through  Ex.PA with  the  allegation  that  petitioner  had  some  altercation  and 

exchange of hot words with complainant's brother Ajaib Ali Shah four days prior 

to  the  occurrence, whereupon  Safeer Hussain  Shah  extended  life threats.  On 

08.06.2012, at  about  06:30 p.m., complainant's  brother  was  coming from Fazal 

Chowk  after  having  grocery and  when  he  reached  near  Imam  Bargah Street, 

Safeer Hussain Shah and  Shafaat Hussain Shah were ambushed in his way and 

raised lalkara upon which Safeer Hussain Shah fired upon complainant's brother 

with .30 bore pistol which landed on left side of abdomen whereafter his brother 

fell down. While hearing the sound of firearm, complainant immediately rushed 

towards  the  street  from  his  house  and  saw  Safeer Hussain  Shah  and  Shafaat 

Hussain Shah armed with pistol running from the scene. The complaint Exh.P A 

was filed, the same was converted into FIR Ex.P-2. The prosecution has produced 

nine  witnesses  to  prove  its  case  including  the  injured  PW,  whereafter 

petitioner/ accused  recorded  his  statement  U /S  342 Cr.P.C. Trial  Court  has 

convicted  the  petitioner  which  has  been  maintained  by  the  Appellate Court. 

Hence, the instant criminal revision petition. 

3. 

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that impugned judgments are 

based  upon  false  and  baseless facts, even  the  same  are  against  the  law; that 

prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable shadow of doubt; that 

contradictions in  the statement of 1.0 and  marginal witnesses of recovery have 

not been considered by the trial Court; that neither any independent  witness of 

the occurrence nor any witness of motive has been produced by the prosecution 

and  even  no  firearm  empty  was  recovered from  spot,  neither  the  weapon  of 

offence has been matched with fire empty or any FSL report has been produced 

in  this  regard,  therefore, conviction is illegal; that  the  trial  Court has  wrongly 

rejected the defence version without  giving any reason and judgment has been 

passed in violation of judicial principles. 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

3 

4. 

Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  complainant  as  well  as  learned  State 

Counsel  contend  that  prosecution  has  successfully proved  the  charges  and 

effective role has been attributed to the petitioner who has fired with his .30 bore 

pistol on  the  vital  part  of injured PW-2 Ajaib Shah; that  petitioner/ accused is 

known  to  the  injured  PW having  close relationship  and  as  such,  there  is  no 

dispute  qua  the  identity  of the  accused who  has rightly been convicted by the 

trial Court; that conviction was maintained by the appellate Court; that scope of 

criminal revision against the concurrent findings before this Court is very limited 

and petitioner has not highlighted any illegality in the appreciation of evidence 

by the trial Court  or appellate Court, therefore, instant criminal revision is not 

maintainable. 

5. 

6. 

Arguments heard, record perused. 

Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  complainant/PW-!  has  lodged  the 

complaint Ex.PA with the allegations that his brother Ajaib Shah was injured by 

the  petitioner  Syed Safeer Hussain  Shah with  .30  bore  pistol  on  08.06.2012 at 

about  06:30 p.m.  in  Imam  Bargah street  near  to  his  house,  he  has  seen  the 

petitioner alongwith co-accused Syed Shafaat Hussain who were running  away 

from  the  place  of  occurrence after  firing.  PW-1 has  narrated  the  motive  as 

exchange  of  hot  words  four  days  earlier  to  the  day  of  occurrence.  The 

complainant  has  been  cross-examined at  length  who  also  acknowledged  the 

previous dispute of the family with reference to FIR No.240/2011 in which firing 

was attributed  to  Ajaib Ali Shah. The complainant also acknowledged that  site 

plan  was prepared  on his instruction and  complaint Ex.PA was filed in Police 

Station. The complainant has close ties and relationship of the witnesses as well 

as co-accused due to same family. The complainant has entered into compromise 

with Shafaat Ali Shah co-accused of this case who was acquitted by the learned 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

4 

Trial Court.  He also acknowledged  that he has not referred  in Ex.PA that he had 

seen the accused persons  with his own eyes. 

7. 

Prosecution  has  produced  PW-2 Ajaib  Ali  Shah  injured  witness  of  this 

case, who  stated  that  on 08.06.2012, he was  coming  after  offering of funeral  dua 

and  after having  grocery from nearby  shop  towards  his house  when  Syed Safeer 

Hussain  Shah  petitioner/  accused  crossed  him  on  his way.  At about  06:30 p.m., 

behind  the  Imam  Bargah  street  petitioner  and  co-accused  were  standing  on the 

way  and  Shafaat  Hussain  Shah raised  lalkara  and  petitioner/  accused  fired  upon 

him which  landed  upon  left side  of his abdomen.  During  this  event,  his brother 

came  out  of  house  and  he  told  the  names  of  both  the  accused  whereafter  he 

became unconscious.  His  statement  Exh.PB was  recorded  on 14.06.2012 in PIMS 

Hospital.  He  acknowledged 

that  his  name  has  been  incorporated 

in  FIR 

No.240/2011 and  he has not in talking  terms with  his uncle Ghazanfar  Ali Shah, 

however,  he acknowledged  that: 

He  has  referred  this  event  in  his  statement  Ex.PB but  the  same  was  not  found 

written  in  the  said  statement  when  confronted.  He  also  acknowledged  that  he 

has  not  produced  any  witness  regarding  previous  exchange  of hot  words  with 

Shafaat  Hussain  Shah  in  this  case, however,  he  has  informed  Tasawar  Hussain 

Shah  and  his  brother  Aulaad  Hussain  Shah  about  the  previous  event.  PW-2 

entered  into  compromise  with  Shafaat  Hussain  in presence  of people  of village. 

He also acknowledged  that:- 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

5 

u1' ~~~} Ji.,fl_r; _.l..,i;(.:) 10I12(:.lk-" .JJLL1,LJ/1i)JI'-/- -V,;/i;}"_r;cC );i;r;  _;;.1_?. 

_J.ttJ1.~t .;;J11.tt.;d,!LL(:)1.ti;L(:)L.f )'1'-/-'-?. if. J/r(' if 

8. 

The prosecution has produced  PW-4/1.0  of this case who  stated that  he 

reached PIMS Hospital  after receiving the  information of incident where Syed 

Aulaad Ali complainant of case told him about the incident whereas injured was 

unconscious and was not in position to get recorded his statement and a request 

was  also  filed  through  Ex.PC to  CMO, but  the  CMO  has  not  allowed  the 

recording  of statement. The Investigating Officer has  also prepared  the  injury 

statement  Ex.PE  and  after  receiving  MLC  offence  U/S  337-D  PPC  was 

incorporated. He further confirmed that place of occurrence is a street and house 

of Amjad Hussain  Shah  is  on  both  ends  of street, however  following glaring 

discrepancies have been noted in his testimony: 

(a)  No firearm empty was recovered from place of occurrence; 

(b)  No blood stained earth was recovered; 

(c) 

not a single person was investigated near the place of occurrence; 

( d) 

Investigating  Officer  has  not  investigated  previous  dispute  or 

enmity of the parties including the injured; 

(e) 

not  even  investigated  the  matter  of  previous  criminal  case  of 

injured person including the dispute with Ghazanfar Ali Shah as he 

has not received any information by the prosecution witnesses; 

(f) 

1.0 confirmed that inquiry dated 21.06.2012 is part of challan which 

was initiated on the application of Shafaat in which he stated that 

no one has seen the occurrence; and, 

(g) 

PW-4/1.0 has not called any respectable person of the locality, nor 

any inquiry has been made in this case by him. 

9. 

Prosecution has produced PW-7 Dr. Furrukh Kamal, who prepared  MLC 

Ex.PM and  gave his opinion regarding the nature  of injury as 337-D PPC [aifah 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

6 

and  stated  that  no  blackening- was  present  on  the  injury  and  it  is  usually 

observed  that  diameter  of .30 bore firearm injury is 0.5 cm. He further  confirmed 

that when  injured  appeared  before him he was conscious. 

10. 

The  prosecution  has  produced  PW-9  Muhammad  Asif/ constable,  who 

alongwith  the  second  1.0 Turabul  Hassan,  ASI/PW-6 joined  the  investigation  in 

whose  presence  accused  Syed Safeer Hussain  Shah  disclosed  about  the weapon 

of offence Exh.Pl  and  same was  recovered  on his  pointation  from  steel almirah 

in  the  residential  room  of  his  house  containing  two  live  bullets.  He  also 

acknowledged  that  accused's  brother  was  present  in the  said house  and  1.0 has 

not  called  any  person  of  the  locality  to  become  witness  of  recovery,  nor  even 

Lumberdaar was called, however,  the room from where  recovery was effected was 

already  open.  The  other  recovery  witness  i.e.  second  1.0 /PW-6  stated  that  he 

arrested  the  accused  after  dismissal  of his  pre-arrest  bail  on  10.10.2012 and  on 

12.10.2012 accused got recovered  .30 bore pistol Ex.P-1 from his house  situated  in 

village Sangrayal  from steel almirah,  whereupon  another  FIR U/S 13/20/65  AO 

was  registered.  He  also  confirmed  that  complainant  informed  him  regarding 

dispute  which  made  the  basis  of  the  incident  <or-  tr. 1?'.  t::.-  -?'  J 1.5.nl~)  but  the 

complainant  has  not  produced  any  witness  of the  incident  during  investigation. 

PW-6/I.O  has  also  acknowledged  that  he  has  not  recovered  the  fire  empty, 

bloodstained  clothes, bloodstained  soil during  his investigation,  nor complainant 

has  ever  produced  any  evidence  qua  the  presence  of  accused  at  the  time  of 

incident.  The  LO conceded  that  he  has  not  investigated  the  matter  regarding 

presence  of accused  on  08.06.2012, however,  he  admitted  that  he was  informed 

that  accused was present  in his in-laws at Taxila at the time of incident,  the same 

was confirmed  by 3 / 4  persons.  No one has joined  the investigation  from village 

Sangrayal  during  recovery  proceedings.  I.0.  confirmed  that  he  has  no~ live 

~ 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

7 

bullets and  recovered  pistol  to FSL/laboratory  for the  purpose  of comparison  as 

to whether  the same was used in the occurrence or not. 

11. 

I have  gone through  the statement  of accused recorded  U /S 342 Cr.P.C. in 

which he has  denied  his involvement  in the alleged  occurrence  and  even denied 

the recovery  of weapon  of offence and  stated  that  all the witnesses  are interested 

witnesses  and  he  has  been  made  scapegoat  in  this  case. Whereas,  learned  trial 

Court  has believed  the  ocular  account  and  medical  evidence  as well  as recovery 

of weapon  of offence and  prosecuted  the petitioner  with  reference to Section 324 

PPC  read  with  Section  337-D PPC  separately,  which  was  maintained  by  the 

appellate  Court. 

12. 

I  have  meticulously  perused  the  entire  record  and  evidence  of this  case 

with  the alleged  motive, whereas  the motive raised  by PWs has not been proved, 

nor even justified through  any independent  mode  or manner.  The recovery of .30 

bore  pistol  is  inconsequential  as  the  same  was  not  verified  through  any 

independent  manner  i.e.  due  to  non-sending  of  .30  bore  pistol  and  firearm 

empties  to the  FSL, and  even no bloodstained  earth  was  secured  from  the  place 

of occurrence, therefore,  the place of occurrence has not been confirmed  through 

independent  witnesses  of the vicinity. It is trite law that  weapon  of offence if not 

confirmed  through  FSL report  for the  purpose  of its working  or matching  with 

the  crime  empties,  the  same  losses  its  value  and  it  could  not  be  relied  upon. 

Reliance is  placed  upon  2017 SCMR  1662 (Zahoor  Ahmad VS  The State),  2017 

SCMR  2002 (Zahri  Yousaf VS  The State),  2017 SCMR  2041 (Saif Ullah  VS  The 

State)  and 2019 SCMR 872 (Sajjan Solangi VS The State). 

13. 

It is not  denied  by the  prosecution  that  the  injured  PW recorded  his first 

statement  on 14.06.2012 with  delay of six days  of the alleged  occurrence, whereas 

the  Investigating  Officer of this  case confirmed  that  he  sought  permission  from 

CMO for recording  of statement  of injured but the CMO did not permit  the same, 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

8 

but  surprisingly  when  PW-7 Dr.Furrukh Kamal has  been confronted with  this 

aspect, he confirmed that:- 

,»/ A~.1.tLr'---c;'--/-...f~,"~.::;...~•":""'?'"-'J  ...tv1r,J  .nuiklv•'--/-":""'?'"  .:;;,if. 

-V .tLr(":"",_iP Li.t{  08:20 ~.f-kJ/L1r  Lf 

Hence,  the  stance  taken  by 

the  LO.  regarding  medical  condition  or 

unconsciousness of injured person PW-2 has not been justified from the medical 

evidence. 

14. 

I  have  also gone through  the MLR Ex.PN, which contained two injuries, 

injury No.(i) is entry wound  lxl  cm circular inverted margin blood stained left 

hypochondrium  and  injury  No.(ii) is  exit wound  1.5x1.5 cm irregular  averted 

margin blood stained right gluteal region. 

15. 

The complainant  has  not  seen the  actual occurrence with  his  own  eyes 

who is real brother  of injured. All these aspects create serious discrepancies in 

this case, especially the error committed by the trial Court to believe the recovery 

which is not justified on the basis of legal principles. 

16. 

I have gone through  the sentence awarded  to the petitioner U /S  324 PPC 

for attempt to commit murder, but the MLC as well as statement of doctor does 

not  reflect gravity  of offence to  that  extent nor  the  intention  has  been proved 

with reference to the motive, although there is no denial on record that firearm 

injury landed upon the abdomen region of PW-2, which falls under the definition 

of Section 337-D PPC Jaifah,  which  means "whoever  causes jurh  in  which  the 

injury  extends  to  the  body  cavity  of the  trunk,  is said  to  cause jaifah"  and  as 

such it is the  vital  organ and  punishment  for said  offence provided  in Section 

337-D PPC is qualified with  the  term  intention  of causing hurt  or  with  injury 

shall be liable to Arsh  which shall be 1/3rd of Diyat  and  may also be punished 

with  either description which may extend to ten years as  Ta'zir. However, this 

punishment was not confirmed at the touchstone of Section 337-N(2) PPC, which 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

9 

only permits the sentence in cases of hurt,  the  Court  may,  having  regard  to  the  kind 

of hurt  caused  by  him,  in addition  to payment  of arsh,  award  ta' zir  to  an  offender  who  is 

a  previous  convict,  habitual  or hardened,  desperate  or dangerous  criminal  (for  the offence 

committed  by  him  in  the  name  or  on  the  pretext  of  the  honor)."  The said provision 

contains the non-obstante clause which gives an overriding effect upon the other 

provision dealing with  the  hurt  contained in Chapter  16 of the  Pakistan Penal 

Code, 1860.  The provision of sub-Section 2  of Section 337-N PPC contemplates 

that  in all cases of hurt normal punishment  is to be awarded  to  an offender is 

payment  of  Arsh  or  Daman  and  the  optional  additional  punishment  of 

imprisonment provided for relevant offence can be awarded  to an offender only 

where  the  offender  is  a  previous  convict, habitual  or  hardened,  desperate  or 

dangerous  criminal or  the  offence has  been committed  in  the  name  or  on  the 

pretext of honor. Reliance is placed upon 2019 SCMR 516 (Abdul  Wahab  VS  The 

State). Whereas, the trial Court awarded the sentence under  Section 337-D PPC 

of three  (03)  years  to  the  petitioner  vide judgment  dated  17.04.2017, which  is 

contrary to the law. 

17. 

The meticulous comparison of entire record and evidence reveals that the 

complainant PW-1 Syed Aulaad Ali Shah has not seen the actual occurrence with 

his  own  eyes and  he  reached  at  the  place of occurrence after  the  incident on 

08.06.2012. Similarly,  injured  PW-2  Syed  Ajaib  Ali  Shah  i.e.  injured  PW 

acknowledged  that  he  became  unconscious and  his  first  ever  statement  was 

recorded after six (06) days of the alleged occurrence, whereas PW-7 Dr. Furrukh 

Kamal confirmed  that  injured  was  in  his  ((.).111~  J  J..JT),  when  he  inspected the 

injured in the  hospital, hence, the version recorded by the  injured viz-a-viz  the 

evidence  of  the  doctor  is  contradicted.  The  motive  has  not  been  justified 

independently  from  any  witness  however  the  disputes  of  the  family  were 

admitted  by the prosecution witnesses, which rendered  the motive as a double 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

10 

edged  weapon,  which  cuts  on  both  sides  and  there  is  possibility  for  false 

implication of the petitioner in this case. 

18. 

The Investigating Officers have conducted poor investigation in this case, 

as such, both the Investigating Officers are incompetent as no firearm empty was 

recovered from the place of occurrence nor bloodstained earth was secured, even 

statements  of  independent  witnesses  were  not  recorded  and  similarly,  the 

bloodstained clothes of injured were not taken into possession through which it 

could be justified that  the injured PW-2 has received any injury to confirm the 

corresponding holes, even the recovered weapon Exh.Pl was not sent to Forensic 

Science Laboratory as to whether the same was in working condition. All these 

aspects create a doubt in the prosecution case. 

19.  While considering the above background, I  have gone through the record 

with the able assistance of learned counsel for the parties as well as the State and 

has  taken  into  account  the  powers  U/S  439 Cr.P.C. regarding  the  legality of 

sentence awarded  to the petitioner and reached to an irresistible conclusion that 

both the Courts below have not appreciated the illegalities and  discrepancies in 

prosecution evidence, many doubts emerges on record whereas it is settled law 

that a single doubt is enough for acquittal of the accused person in such type of 

case as it creates a reasonable doubt  in a prudent  mind  about  guilt of accused, 

therefore, the accused would be entitled to benefit of the same not as a matter of 

grace and  concession, but  as  a  matter  of right.  Reliance is  placed  upon  1995 

SCMR 1345 (Tariq Peroez VS The State), 2009 SCMR 230 (Muhammad  Akram  VS 

The State)  and 2014 SCMR  749 (Muhammad  Zaman  VS The State). 

21. 

In view of above, the petitioner is entitled for benefit of doubt by applying 

rule  of caution and  care in such type  of cases where  interested witnesses have 

involved  the  petitioner  in  this  case,  whose  role  was  not  verified  from  any 

independent  source, even false implication could not be ruled  out at this stage, 

Crl.  Revision  No.54/2018 

11 

therefore,  the  instant  criminal  revision  petition  is  ALLOWED,  the  impugned 

judgments  dated  17.04.2017 and  10.05.2017, passed  by both  the Courts  below are 

hereby  SET ASIDE  and  petitioner  is ACQUITTED  of  the  charge  by  extending 

benefit of doubt.  He be released forthwith  if not required  in any other case. 

(MOHSI:N"1J('HT  AR  KAY ¥N°I) 
JUDGE 

Announced  in open Court  on: 18.05.2020. 

Zahid 

JUDGE 

