ORDER SHEET
ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT 
ISLAMABAD 

Crl.  Misc. No.844-B/2020 

MUHAMMAD  SIDDIQUE. 

VS
THE STATE  AND  ANOTHER. 

Petitioner  by: 

Mr. Haroon-ur-Rashid,  ASC. 

Complainant  by: 

Raja Rizwan Abbasi, Advocate for Complainant. 

State  by: 

M/s  Muhammad  Bilal Ibrahim  and  Mudassar  Latif, 
State  Counsel. 
30. 07.2020. 

Date  of Hearing: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Through  instant  petition,  the  petitioner 
LUBNA  SALEEM PERVEZ; J: 

Muhammad  Siddique  seeks  post  arrest  bail  in  case  FIR No.248/2020,  dated 

22.06.2020, 

for  offences  under 

section  365/392/452/506(11)/34 

PPC, 

registered  at  Police Station  Ramna,  Islamabad. 

2.  As  per  contents  of  FIR, facts  in  brief  are  that  the  Complainant  had 

business  relationship  with  Iqbal alias  Bala  Gujjar,  etc. who started  extending 

threats  to  the  petitioner  of  abducting  him.  It  is  mentioned  in  the  FIR that 

previously  the  accused  abducted 

the  complainant  and  demanded  Rs. 

50,000,000 /-  (rupees  five  crore)  as  ransom  but  he  managed  to  escape. 

However,  on  22.06.2020  accused  persons  kidnapped 

the  driver  of  the 

complainant  and  his  two  friends  namely  Anwar  Zeb  and  Tariq  Amin  by 

intercepting  them  in two vehicles (black colored Prado and  white colored Toyota 

GLI) at  G-10  roundabout,who  were  taken  to  some  PHA Flat.  Complainant's 

driver was  allegedly beaten  by  the  accused  persons  who  then  brought  the 

driver to  complainant  house  and  kept  on  asking  about  complainant  from his 

family members.  Accused  gave beating  to complainant's  children  and  extended 

threats  to  her  wife. Accused  left  the  complainant's  house  but  again,after  a 

while,retumed  along with his  driver and  above said  friends  of the  Complainant 

and  again  harassed  and  extended  threats 

to  his  family  members.  In  the 

meantime  the  police party  arrived and  arrested  the  accused  from the  spot. 

3. 

The Petitioner/ accused  earlier  applied for bail after  arrest  before Judicial 

Magistrate  Sec. 30  (West), Islamabad  which  was  dismissed,  vide order  dated 

02.op.2020.  Thereafter  his  similar  request  was  also  declined  by  the  learned 

Additional Sessions  Judge  (West), Islamabad,  vide  order  dated  13.07.2020; 

hence,  this  petition  for bail after arrest. 

2 

Crl.Misc.No.844~8/2020 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submitted 

that 

the  petitioner  is 

innocent  who  has  been  involved in  a  concocted  story  by  the  complainant 

despite  the  fact  that  he  was  not  specifically nominated  in  the  FIR nor  he was 

present  at  the  place  of  occurrence;  that  infact  the  complainant  owned an 

amount  of rupees  forty million to the  petitioner  and  instead  of paying the  said 

amount  involved the  petitioner  in  a  false case;  that  the  Complainant  himself is 

an  offenderand  is  nominated  in  several  FIRs  and  presently  is  behind  the 

bars;that  the  offences mentioned  in the  FIR are  not  attracted  at  all; that  there 

is  nothing  on  record  against  the  petitioner  as  neither  any  recovery has  been 

effected from the  petitioner  nor  there  is any  direct  or  indirect  witness  against 

the  petitioner;  that  identification  parade  has  not  been  conducted  which  is 

mandatory  in  cases  registered  against  unknown  accused;  that  case  of  the 

petitioner  is of further  inquiry  falling within  the  ambit  of Section 497(2) Cr.P.C; 

that  the  investigation  to the  extent  of petitioner  has  been  completed  and  he is 

no  more  required  by  the  police; that  challan  has  been  submitted  and  the 

charge  against  the  petitioner/  accused  has  been  framed;  that 

the  alleged 

offences do not  fall within  the  ambit  of prohibitory  clause  of section  497  Cr.PC. 

Learned  counsel  lastly  contended  that  since,petitioner  is  previously  non  

convict and  is behind  the  bars  since  his  arrest  and  is  ready  to furnish  surety 

bonds  to the  satisfaction  of the  court  if enlarged on bail. 

5. 

Learned  counsel  for complainant/Respondent  No.2, submitted  that  the 

principal  accused  nominated  in  the  FIR is  Iqbal  alias  Bala  Gujjar  who  is 

involved in numerous  cases  of abducting,  kidnapping  for ransom  and  has  been 

convicted  in  many  cases.  He  operates  his  criminal  activities  with  other 

offenders as  a  gang  and  the  present  accused/petitioner 

is  his  accomplice. He 

placed  on  record  a  Suo  Moto case  of Hon'ble Peshawar  High Court,  whereby, 

perpetual  warrant  of arrest  of said  Iqbal has  been  issued.  The learned  counsel 

referred  and  read  out  provisions  of sections  34, 452,  506(ii), 365  &  391  PPC, 

mentioned  in the  FIR as  invoked against  the  petitioner,  and  submitted  that  all 

the  ingredients  of  sections  are  satisfied  as  the  complainant's  driver  namely 

Arshad  and  his  two  friends  namely  Anwar  Zeb  and  Tariq  Ameen  were 

intercepted  on  the  road  with  the  intention  of kidnapping  and  were taken  to a 

flat  apparently  belonging  to  the  accused  petitioners  where  they  were  kept 

illegally. Learned  counsel  further  contended  that  wrong mentioning  of section 

in the  FIR would  be of no  benefit  to the  petitioner/  accused;  that  all the  three 

persons  who  were  intentionally  kidnapped  and  thrashed/beaten 

to  obtain 

"information about  the  whereabouts  of the  complainant  were then  brought  to 

3 

Crl.Misc.No.844-B/2020 

the house  of the  complainant  where  the  petitioner  harassed  and  assaulted  the 
,.. 
wife and  minor  daughter  of the  complainant;  that  one  Tariq  Ameen fled from 

the house  and  informed the  police on  15 and  thereafter  all the  accused  persons 

were  caught  red-handed  and  were  taken  to  the  police  station  where  the 

complainant  arrived  and  identified all  the  accused/  petitioners  as  they  were 

known  to  him; that  thereafter  the  complainant  registered  FIR against  all the 

accused.  He submitted  that  the  CCTV Footages  are  available  on  record  where 

intercepting  and  snatching  vehicle of the  complainant  by the  accused  is clearly 

visible which  also  makes  a  case  of robbery  and  dacoity. Statement  u/s  161 

Cr.PC  of  the  abductees  as  well as  the  wife of  the  complainant  have  been 

recorded  on  the  same  day  and  their  statement  u/s  164 Cr.PC is  also  on  the 

police record  and  sanctity  is  attached  to  the  statement  u/s  164 Cr.PC; that 

threatening  messages 

through  whatsapp 

by 

the 

accused/petitioner 

Muhammad  Siddique  before the  incident  is  also  on  record;  that  recovery of a 

pistol/weapon  has  been  effected  from  the  possession  of  co-accused 

Sh. Muhammad  Aun, vide recovery memo and  is the  part  of police record; that 

any  agreement  between  the  parties  would  not  grant  permission 

to  the 

accused/  petitioners  to resolve the  disputes  by extending  threats  and  showing 

muscles.  He, in  view of the  above submissions,  submitted  that  the  petitioners 

namely Muhammad  Siddique,  Rehman  Gul and  Shiekh Aun are  not entitled  for 

concession  of bail as  they are  involved in heinous  criminal  activities. 

6. 

Learned  State  counsel  along  with  the  1.0.  of  the  case,  furnished  the 

police record  and  while endorsing  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for 

Complainant  submitted 

that 

the  accused  petitioner  along  with  other  co  

accused  are  involved in  heinous  offences of abduction  for ransom  and  house 

trespass  and  sufficient  incriminating  material  is  available  against  him  on 

record  and  in  view of the  facts  and  circumstances,  the  petitioner/  accused  is 

not entitled  for concession  of bail. 

7.  Heard  arguments  of learned  Counsel  for the  petitioner,  learned  counsel 

for complainant  as  well as  learned  State  Counsel  and  have  also  perused  the 

police record  submitted  during  the  hearing  of the  case. 

8.  '  Perusal  of the  record  submitted  by the  Investigating  officer shows  that 

FIR'  was  registered  by  the  complainant  mainly  for  abduction  for  ransom, 

tress-passing 

the  house  of  the  complainant  as  well  as  beating 

the 

complainant's  driver,  friends  and  family members.  Apart  from that  it  has  also 

4 

Crl.Misc.No.844-B/2020 

*en  mentioned  in  the  opening  sentences  of the  FIR that  the  accused  earlier 

abducted  the  petitioner  for ransom  but  he managed  to escape  but  that  incident 

was  not  reported  earlier  by the  complainant  to the  police and  has  been  made 

part  of the  present  FIR. It  is  strange  to note  that  the  accused  is nominated  in 

the  qase of abduction  for ransom  and  trespassing,  whereas,  offence of robbery 

has  also  been  included  later  on  but  recovery of any  weapon  has  not  been 

effected from the  accused.  Apart  from that  it is also  surprising  that  allegations 

of abduction  of  complainant's  driver  and  friends  have  been  leveled against 

accused  but  it  is  also  mentioned  in  the  FIR that  the  accused  brought  the 

alleged abductees  to  the  house  of complainant  with  them.  Moreover, medical 

report  of the  complainant's  driver and  his  friends  or family members  who were 

allegedly beaten  by  the  accused,  has  also  not  been  conducted.The  said  facts 

create  serious  doubts  about  the  prosecution  story  and  it  is  settled  law that 

even for purposes  of bail, law is not  to be stretched  in favour of the  prosecution 

and  if any  benefit  of doubt  arises,  it  must  go to the  accused.  The cases  relied 

upon  are  "Amir VS The State"  (PLD 1972  SC 277),  "Shabbiran  Bibi  VS The 

State"  (2018  P  Cr. L  J  788}  and  "Syed Hassan  Ali  Shah  VS The State" 

(2019  P  Cr.  L  J  Note  159} 

then  it  has  been  held  in  case  reported  as 

"Zat.gham Ashraf  VS  The  State"  (2016  SCMR 2018}  that  "for getting  the 

relief of bail accused  only had  to show that  the  evidence/ material  collected by 

the  prosecution  and/  or  the  defence  plea  taken  by  him  crated  reasonable 

doubt/  suspicion  in  the  prosecution  case  then  he  was  entitled  to  avail  the 

benefits of it". 

9. 

During  his  arguments  learned  counsel  for the  complainant  submitted 

that  the  alleged accused/petitioners  after  their  arrest  from the  spot  were taken 

to the  Police Station  where the  complainant  later  arrived  and  identified them  as 

he  knew  them.  It  is  not  understandable  when  he  knew  all  the  accused  then 

why  he  did  not  nominate  Muhammad  Siddique  and  Rehman  Gul  while 

registering  FIR  and  specifying their  role  in  the  commission 

of  offence. 

Moreover, there  is nothing  available on  record  regarding  commission  of offence 

except  photographs  in  which  two  vehicle  can  been  seen  intercepting  one 

vigojeep  but  same 

required 

to  be  corroborated  with 

the  direct  and 

circumstantial  evidence and  its  veracity can  be determined  at  the  time of trial 

after  recording  of evidence  instead  at  the  time  of bail  as  deeper  appreciation 

of record  is not  permissible  at  bail  stage  rather  only  tentative  assessment  is 

to  be  made.Thus,  in  light  of said  observations,  case  of the  accused  becomes 

one of further  inquiry  under  Section  497(2) Cr.P.C. Reliance in  this  regard  is 

i 

plated on the  case  law reported  as  Khiyal  Saba  and  another  VS The  State 

and  another  (2020  SCMR 340}  and  Muhammad  JunaidurRehman  VS 

the  State  and  another  (2020  PCr.LJ  310).  Further,  challan  has  already 

---- 

---·· 

··-·-·-------- 

5 

Crl.Misc.No.844-B/2020 

•een 

submitted  and  charge  has  been 

framed,  whereas,  petitioner 

is 

incarcerated  since,  his  arrest  on  22.06.2020.  It  has  been  observed  by  the 

august  Supreme  Court  of Pakistan  in  the  case  of "Manzoor  and  4  others  v. 

the State"  (PLD 1972  SC 81) that:- 

"the ultimate  conviction and  incarceration of a guilty person  can  repair the 
wrong  caused  by  a  mistaken  relief of interim  bail granted 
to  him,  but  no 
satisfactory  reparation  can  be  offered  to  an  innocent  man  for  his 
incarceration at any  stage  of the case  albeit his  acquittal in the 
unjustified 
long run" 

Since,  the  challan  in  the  present  case  has  already  been  submitted  and  the 

charge  has  been  framed,  therefore,  there  is no likelihood of tempering  with the 

record  by  the  petitioner/  accused.  Further  there  is  no  apprehension  of  the 

petitioner/ accused  for abscondence. 

10.  For the  foregoing reasons,  I  am  of the  considered  view that  the  accused 

petitioner  is entitled  for concession  of bail. Reliance in this  regard  may also be 

usefully  made  to  the  following principles  laid  down by  the  Hon 'ble  Supreme 

Court  in the  case  of Tariq  Bashir  and  5  others  v.  The  State  (PLD 1995  SC 

34):- 

"The bail  will be  declined  only in  extra  ordinary  and  exceptional 

cases,  for example- 

(a) Where 

there 

is 

likelihood  of  abscondence  of  the 

accused; 

(b)  Where  there  is  apprehension  of the  accused  tampering 

with  the  prosecution  evidence; 

(c)  Where  there  is  danger  of the  offence being  repeated  if 

the  accused  is released  on  bail; and 
(d) Where  the  accused  is a previous  convict. 

11.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  petition  is  accepted  and 

petitioner  is admitted  to post  arrest  bail, subject  to his  furnishing  bail bonds  in 

the  sum  of  Rs.  3,00,000 /-  (Rupees Three  Lac) with  one  surety  in  the  like 

amount  to the  satisfaction  of learned  Trial Court. 

12.  All the  observations  made  hereinabove  are  tentative  in  nature  and  shall 

have no  bearing  on  the  final determination  of guilt  or  innocence  by the  trial 

Court. 

(LUBNA  SALEEM  PERVEZ) 
JUDGE 

