W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

1 

ORDER SHEET
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD 

CASE NO.  

: 

W.P. NO.1386-2018 

Muhammad Idrees 
VS    
Colonel Joseph Emmanuel etc. 

Petitioner by          : 
Respondents by      : 

Mirza Shahzad Akbar, Advocate   
Raja Khalid Mahmood Khan, DAG 
Malik Awais Haider, State Counsel 
Abrar Hashmi, D.G. (State Protocol), 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Khalid 
Mahmood, Inspector. 

CASE NO.  

: 

W.P. NO.1385-2018 

Adnan Iqbal 
VS    
Federation of Pakistan etc. 

Petitioner by         : 
Respondents by      : 

Date of hearing     : 

Petitioner in person   
Raja Khalid Mahmood Khan, DAG 
Malik Awais Haider, State Counsel 
Abrar Hashmi, D.G. (State Protocol), 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Khalid 
Mahmood, Inspector. 
07.05.2018. 

AAMER  FAROOQ  J.      This  judgment  shall  decide  instant 

petition as well as W.P. No.1385-2018, as common questions of law and 

facts are involved. 

2. 

The facts, leading to filing of above mentioned petitions, are that 

petitioner  in  W.P.  No.1386-2018,  is  the  father  of  Attique  Baig 

(deceased), who was killed by respondent No.1 in a car accident, which 

took place in Islamabad on 07.04.2018. Respondent No.1 is a citizen of 

United  States  of  America  and  is  posted  as  Air  Defence  Attaché  at 

Embassy of United States in Pakistan. On the complaint of petitioner in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

2 

W.P.  No.1386-2018,  FIR  was  registered  bearing  No.168  dated 

07.04.2018  under  sections  320,  337(G),  279,  427  PPC  at  P.S.  Kohsar, 

Islamabad.  According to the contents of FIR, respondent No.1 hit the 

petitioner’s  son  while  driving  Land  Cruiser  No.CD-64-48  (QP-058)  at 

Margalla Road, Islamabad at about 2:55 p.m. on 07.04.2018, whereas the 

petitioner’s  son  was  riding  Motorcycle  bearing  No.ARN/900-ICT. 

Attique Baig, the petitioner’s son, died on spot, while his cousin namely 

Raheel  Ahmad,  suffered  serious  injuries.  The  entire  accident  has  been 

recorded in Safe City Project Cameras and apparently, video footage of 

the  accident  is  also  available.  The  Traffic  Police  officials  as  well  as 

officials  of  Islamabad  Capital  Territory  Police,  reached  at  the  spot 

immediately.  The  police  officials,  including  respondent  No.2,  took 

respondent No.1 to the Police Station, however did not  formally arrest 

him.  Allegedly,  on  verification  from  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs, 

respondent No.1 was released.  

3. 

Admittedly,  neither  formal  statement  of  respondent  No.1  was 

reduced in writing nor a ‘breath test’ was conducted or blood or urine 

sample was obtained to determine, whether he was driving while drunk. 

Initially,  the  police  made  entry  in  Daily  Diary  (Entry  No.19)  recording 

the  accident  but  on 08.04.2018, a  formal  report  was  registered  i.e.  FIR 

No.168.  

4. 

Respondent  No.2  claims  that  matter  has  been  duly  investigated 

and as a result whereof, report under section 173 Cr.P.C. has been filed 

before  the  competent  forum.  Meanwhile,  respondent  No.4  made  a 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

3 

request  to  respondents  No.5  &  6  for  placing  the  name  of  respondent 

No.1 on Exit Control List (ECL). 

5.  During  the  course  of  proceedings,  learned  Deputy  Attorney 

General  submitted  that  since  respondent  No.1  is  a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’ 

therefore  due  caution  is  to  be  exercised  to  verify  the  ‘immunity’,  he 

enjoys from arrest/investigation and placement of his name on ECL.    

6. 

This  Court,  on  18.04.2018, directed  respondent No.5  to  proceed 

and decide the matter with regard to placement of name of respondent 

No.1 on ECL in accordance with law,  pursuant thereto on 24.04.2018, 

Qalandar  Khan,  SO,  Ministry  of  Interior,  appeared  in  person  and 

apprised  the  Court  that  request  for  placement  of  name  of  respondent 

No.1 on ECL is still pending meanwhile, he has been put on Black List.  

7. 

This  Court,  after  hearing  preliminary  arguments  on  24.04.2018, 

framed  six  different  questions  in  order  to  resolve  the  controversy 

involved in these petitions. For ease of convenience, said questions are 

reproduced below:- 

i.  Whether the immunity provided in Article 31 includes  the 

immunity from investigation? 

ii.  Since the immunity of diplomatic agent does not exempt him 
from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  sending  State,  whether  the 
investigation in the matter is to be conducted by the receiving 
State or the sending State? 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

In  order  to  investigate  an  accused  whether  request  is  to  be 
made  for  the  said  purpose  by  the  receiving  State  to  the 
sending State? 

In  case  the  investigation  is  conducted  by  the  sending  State 
whether it is their prerogative to commence prosecution of the 
accused before the competent courts of the sending State? 

In case the investigation  is conducted by the receiving State 
and during the investigation the accused is found prima facie 
responsible  whether  the  government  of  receiving  State  shall 
accordingly make a request for prosecution of the diplomatic 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

4 

agent  to  the  sending  State  and  in  case  of  refusal  by  the 
sending State the consequence? 

vi.  Whether  travel  restrictions  by  placing  the  name  of  any 
accused who is a diplomatic agent be imposed under Vienna 
Convention or laws of Pakistan? 

8. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  in  W.P.  No.1386/2018,  inter 

alia,  contended  that diplomatic  immunity,  from  criminal and  civil  suits, 

has  been  an  international  practice  and  has  been  reduced  in  Vienna 

Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961. It was contended that under 

the  Convention,  Diplomats  and  their  families,  have  ‘immunity’  in 

receiving  State’s  civil  and  administrative  jurisdiction;  that  principle  of 

diplomatic  immunity  cannot  signify  ‘impunity’.  Reliance  was  placed  on 

cases  reported  as  ‘Dickinson  VS  Del  Solar’  [1930]  1  K.B.  376’  and 

‘Empson  VS  Smith’  1  Q.B.  426  (1996).  It  was  further  submitted  that 

under  Article  31  of  the  Vienna  Convention,  the  Treaty  has  to  be 

incorporated in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to 

be  given  in  terms  thereof.  It  was  highlighted  that  the  purpose  of  the 

Treaty is provided in its preamble to enforce the efficient performance 

of  the  functions  of  the  Diplomatic  Missions  as  representing  states. 

Moreover,  by  virtue  of  Article  31  of  the  Convention,  a  ‘Diplomatic 

Agent’  enjoys  ‘immunity’  from  criminal  jurisdiction  of  a  State.  In  this 

behalf, jurisdiction over a fact, presupposes that a crime has taken place. 

It  was  contended  that  Author  Rain  Livojia  has  expressed  in  an  Article 

that the ‘criminal jurisdiction of states’ is not a fact but a legal assessment 

of facts.  

9. 

Learned  counsel  further submitted  that bar  provided  with  regard 

to  prosecution  under 

‘The  Diplomatic  Immunities  and  Consular 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

5 

Privileges  Act,  1972’  is  procedural  in  nature  and  not  substantive. 

Reliance  was  placed  on  case  reported  as  ‘A.N.  Qureshi  VS  Union  of 

Soviet  Socialist  Republic’  (PLD  1981  SC  377).  Learned  counsel  next 

contended  that  1972  Act  must  be  read  in  consonance  with  the 

Constitution  of  Pakistan,  especially  the  fundamental  rights  enshrined 

therein  by  virtue  of  which,  it  is  provided  that  fundamental  rights  of  a 

citizen, cannot be curtailed or restricted.  

10.  Learned  counsel  further  contended  that  since  the  ‘immunity’  is 

enjoyed  by  a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’  from  criminal  jurisdiction,  it does  not 

include  investigation  of  the  criminal  offence.  Since  the  bar  is  not 

absolute therefore the Agent can be prosecuted in the sending State. In 

this behalf, it was contended that it is the failure on part of respondent 

No.2  to  investigate  the  matter  properly  by  reducing  the  statement  of 

respondent  No.1  in  writing  and  obtaining  his  blood and  urine samples 

for verifying whether he was drunk at the time of accident. It was further 

contended  that  police  officials  investigated  the  matter  negligently. 

Learned  counsel  further  emphasized  that  investigation,  of  a  criminal 

offence  involving  a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’,  is  prerogative  of  the  receiving 

State and is not hit by the ‘immunity’ enjoyed by a ‘Diplomatic Agent’. 

It was further submitted that since the matter, ultimately, is to be tried 

either  in  the  receiving  State  or  the  sending  State  therefore  criminal 

offence has to be investigated and all, including respondent No.1, have 

to cooperative for this purpose. Learned counsel contended that there is 

no  express  prohibition  on  travel  restrictions,  either  internationally  or 

locally, qua Diplomats, hence they are to be treated in accordance with 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

6 

law.  It  was  contended  that  in  light  of  Section  2  of  Exit  from  Pakistan 

(Control)  Ordinance,  1981  read  with  Rule  2(c)  of  Exit  from  Pakistan 

(Control) Rules, 2010, the Federal Government is empowered to put any 

person, involved in a heinous offence, on Exit Control List. Reliance was 

placed on case reported as ‘Prime Minister’s Inspection Team, National 

Highway  Authority  VS  Zaheer  Mirza’  (2011  SCMR  371).  It  was  also 

contended  that  Federal  Government  needs  to  devise  a  Comprehensive 

Code  and  Standard  Operating  Procedure  (SOP)  for  enabling  police 

authorities to act in such like situations.  

11.  The petitioner, in W.P. No.1385-2018, while appearing in person, 

inter alia, contended that provisions of ‘The Diplomatic Immunities and 

Consular Privileges Act, 1972’ and ‘Vienna Convention’ are in violation 

of the fundamental rights as guaranteed in the Constitution of Pakistan. 

It was requested that direction be issued to the Federal Government to 

take  steps,  to  bring  these  provisions, 

in  consonance  with  the 

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Apart from above,  

the 

petitioner  adopted  the arguments  addressed  by  learned  counsel  for  the 

petitioner in W.P. No.1386-2018. 

12.  Learned  Deputy  Attorney  General,  inter  alia,  contended  that 

Vienna Convention, which was adopted by Pakistan and became of law 

of land under ‘The Diplomatic Immunities and Consular Privileges Act, 

1972’,  a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’  enjoys  certain  immunities  and  protection. 

Learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  took  the  Court  through  the 

provisions of Vienna Convention, whereby diplomatic immunity can be 

claimed and enjoyed accordingly. He placed reliance on case reported as 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

7 

‘Ghulam  Muhammad  VS  United  States  Agency  for  International 

Development  (US  Aid)  Mission,  Islamabad  &  Another’  (1986  SCMR 

907). 

13.  Respondent No.2, appearing in person, contended that statement 

of  respondent  No.1  was  reduced  in  writing  and  after  investigation, 

report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C.  has  been  filed  before  the  competent 

forum.  

14.  The arguments advanced by learned counsels for the parties have 

been  heard  and  the  documents  placed  on  record  examined  with  their 

able assistance.  

15.  Petitioner, in the instant petition, has sought the following relief:- 

“That  in  view  of  the  foregoing  law  and  facts,  it  is  humbly  prayed  that  the 
Court may kindly: 

i.  Direct Respondents No.2, 3 and 4 (SHO, IG and Chief Commissioner): 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

to  ensure  that  fair  and  transparent  investigation  is  conducted  with 
regard to the allegations contained in FIR No.168/2018 against the 
accused person; 
to arrest the accused person unless they are satisfied, for reasons to be 
recorded, that such arrest is not necessary to secure the ends of justice; 
complete the investigation of FIR No. 168/2018 at the earliest and 
submit Police Report under S. 173 Cr. PC (challan) before competent 
court at the earliest; 
conduct disciplinary proceedings against those  police officials who were 
responsible for the illegalities alleged in this Petition. 

ii.  Direct Respondents No. 5 and 6 (Federal Government and Secretary Interior) 
to ensure that Respondent No. 1, accused in FIR No. 168/2018, is put on 
the  Exit  Control  List  forthwith  and  remains  on  it  till  the  conclusion  of  the 
case against him. 

iii.  Direct  Respondent  No.  3  and  4  (IG  and  Chief  Commissioner)  to submit  a 
report  to  this  Hon’ble  Court  regarding  the  investigation  and  fate  of  similar 
incidents  in ICT  involving  the  death  of Pakistani  citizens  by  rash  driving  of 
foreign diplomats. 

iv.  Grant such relief as may be appropriate” 

Petitioner,  in  W.P.  No.1385-2018,  also  seeks  similar  relief  and  in 

addition, direction to the Federal Government for amending the law on 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

8 

the diplomatic immunity to bring it in harmony with the Constitution of 

the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

16.  Admittedly, Colonel Joseph Emmanuel, is working as Air Defence 

Attaché in U.S. Embassy in Pakistan hence is a  ‘Diplomatic Agent’ for 

the purpose of Article 1 of Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 

1961 (VCDR). Under Article 1 (e) of VCDR, a ‘Diplomatic Agent’ is the 

Head of a Mission or a Member of the Diplomatic Staff of the Mission. 

In  1961,  to  codify  the  immunities  and  privileges  to  be  enjoyed  by  a 

‘Diplomatic  Agent’,  VCDR  was  acceded  to  by    signatory  States,  The 

provisions  of  VCDR,  were  duly  made  law  of  Pakistan  through  ‘The 

Diplomatic  Immunities  and  Consular  Privileges  Act,  1972’.  In  this 

behalf, section 2(1) of the Act, reads as follows: - 

‘2.  Provisions of Conventions to have force of law.- 

(1) Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  any  other 
law  for  the  time  being  in  force,  the  provisions  of  the  Vienna 
Convention  on  Diplomatic  Relations,  1961,  set  out  in  the  First 
Schedule  and  the  Vienna  Convention  on  Consular  Relations, 
1963,  set  out  in  the  Second  Schedule  shall,  subject  to  the  other 
provisions of this Court, have the force of law in Pakistan”.  

The  bare  reading  of  the  above  Section  shows  that  Articles  of  VCDR, 

mentioned  in  the  first  Schedule  to  the  Act,  have  the  force  of  law  in 

Pakistan.  The  salient  Articles,  for  the  purposes  of  present  controversy, 

are as follows: - 

ARTICLES 29 
The person of a diplomatic agent shall be inviolable.  He shall not be liable 
to any form of arrest or detention. The receiving State shall treat him with 
due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to prevent any attack on 
his person, freedom or dignity. 

 
     
 
 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

9 

ARTICLE 30 
1.             The private residence of a diplomatic agent shall enjoy the same 
inviolability and protection as the premises of the mission. 
2.              His  papers,  correspondence  and,  except  as  provided      in 
paragraph 3 of Article 31, his property shall likewise enjoy inviolability. 

ARTICLE 31 
1.              A  diplomatic  agent  shall  enjoy  immunity  from  the  criminal 
jurisdiction  of  the  receiving State.  He  shall also  enjoy  immunity  from  its 
civil and administrative jurisdiction, except in the case of: 

(a)    a real action relating to private  immovable property situated in  the 
territory of the receiving State, unless he holds  it  on behalf of the sending 
State for the purposes of the mission; 

(b)     an  action  relating  to  succession  in  which  the  diplomatic  agent  is 
 involved  as executor, administrator, heir or legatee  as  a private person 
and not on behalf of the sending State; 

(c)    an action relating to any professional or commercial activity exercised 
by the diplomatic agent in the receiving State  outside his official functions. 

2.       A diplomatic agent is not obliged to give evidence as a witness. 

3.          No  measures  of  execution may be  taken  in  respect  of  a 
diplomatic agent except in the cases coming under  sub-paragraphs (a),(b) 
and  (c)  of  paragraph  1  of  this  Article,  and  provided  that  the   measures  
concerned  can be  taken  without  infringing  the inviolability of his person 
or of his residence. 

4.            The immunity of a diplomatic agent from the jurisdiction of the 
receiving  State  does  not  exempt  him  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  sending 
State. 

ARTICLE 32 
1.             The  immunity  from  jurisdiction  of  diplomatic  agents  and  of 
persons enjoying immunity under Article 37 may be waived by the sending 
State. 

2.            The waiver must always be express. 

3.            The  initiation  of  proceedings  by  a  diplomatic  agent  or  by  a 
person enjoying immunity from jurisdiction under Article 37 shall preclude 
him  from  invoking  immunity  from  jurisdiction  in  respect  of  any  counter-
claim, directly connected with the principal claim. 

4.             Waiver  of  immunity  from  jurisdiction  in  respect  of  civil  or 
administrative proceedings shall not be held to imply waiver of immunity in 

 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

10 

respect of the execution of the judgment, for which a separate waiver shall 
be necessary. 

ARTICLE 37 
1.            The members of the family of a diplomatic agent forming part of  
his  household  shall,  if they  are  not  nationals   of  the receiving State 
enjoy the privileges and immunities specified  in Articles 29 to 36. 

2.            Members  of  the administrative and   technical  staff  of  the 
mission,  together  with  members  of  their  families  formings  part  of  their 
respective  households,  shall,  if they  are  not  nationals   of  or   permanently  
resident    in    the    receiving    State,    enjoy    the  privileges  and  immunities 
specified in Articles 29 to 35,  except that  the immunity from civil and 
administrative jurisdiction  of the  receiving State specified in paragraph 1 
of the  Article  31 shall  not extend to acts performed outside the course  of  
their  duties.  They  shall  also  enjoy  the  privileges  specified  in  Article  36 
paragraph 1, in respect of articles imported at the time of first installation. 

3.            Members    of    the  service  staff  of  the   mission    who    are    not 
nationals  of  or  permanently  resident  in  the  receiving  State  shall  enjoy 
 immunity    in  respect  of acts performed  in    the    course    of  their   duties,  
exemption from dues and taxes on  the  emoluments they  receive  by reason 
of their employment  and  the  exemption contained in Article 33. 

4.             Private servants of members of the mission shall, if they are not 
nationals of or permanently resident in the receiving State, be exempt from 
dues  and  taxes  on  the  emoluments  they  receive  by  reason  of  their 
employment.  In  other  respects,  they  may  enjoy  privileges  and  immunities 
only  to  the  extent  admitted  by  the  receiving  State.  however,  the  receiving 
State must exercise  its jurisdiction  over  those  persons in such a  manner  
as  not  to interfere  unduly with the performance of the functions  of  the 
mission. 

ARTICLE 39 
1.          Every  person  entitled  to  privileges  and  immunities  shall  enjoy 
them  from  the moment he enters the territory of  the  receiving State  on 
 proceeding to take up his post or,  if already  in   its territory,  from the 
moment  when  his  appointment  is   notified    to  the    Ministry  for  Foreign 
Affairs or such other Ministry as  may be agreed. 

2.    
When    the   functions    of  a   person    enjoying    privileges  and 
immunities  have come to an end, such privileges   and  immunities shall 
normally cease at the moment when he leaves the country, or on  expirty of 
a reasonable in which to do so, but shall  subsist until  that time, even in 
case  of  armed  conflict.   However,  with  respect  to  acts  performed  by  such 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

11 

person  in  the  exercise  of  his  functions  as  a  member  of  the  mission, 
immunity shall continue to subsist. 

3.            In case of the death of a member of the mission, the members of  
his  family  shall  continue  to  enjoy  the  privileges  and immunities  to  
which  they are entitled until the  expiry  of  a reasonable period in which 
to leave the country. 

4.            In  the  event  of the  death  of  a  member  of the  mission,   not   a 
national of or permanently resident in the receiving State or  of a  member  
of  his  family forming part  of  his  household,  the receiving  State  shall  
permit the  withdrawal  of  the  movable property  of  the deceased, with the 
exception  of  any  property acquired in the country the export of which was 
prohibited  at  the  time    of    his  death.  Estate,  succession  and  inheritance 
duties shall not be levied on movable property the presence of which in the 
receiving  State  was  due  solely  to  the  presence  there  of  the  deceased  as  a 
member of the mission  or as a member of the family of a member of the 
mission. 

The  ‘immunity’,  provided  in  the  above  mentioned  Articles,  is  not 

absolute and can be modified or amended by the Federal Government 

under section 3 of the Act, which reads as follows:- 

“Restriction of Privileges and immunities.-  If  it  appears  to  the 
Federal  Government  that  the  privileges  and  immunities,  accorded  to  the 
mission  or  a  consular  post  of  Pakistan  in  the  territory  of  any  State,  or  to 
persons  connected  with  that  mission  or  consular  post,  are  less  than  those 
conferred by this Act on the mission or a Consular post of that State or on 
persons connected with that mission or consular post, the Federal Government 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, withdraw such of the privileges and 
immunities so conferred from the mission of that State or, as the case may be 
from all or any of the consular posts of that State, or, as from such persons 
connected therewith as it may deem fit”. 

17.  The  crux  of  the  above  provisions  is  that,  Articles  of  VCDR 

mentioned  in  Schedule-I  to  the  Act,  have  the  force  of  law  in  Pakistan. 

Under  section  3  of  the  Act,  the  privileges  and  the  immunities  can  be 

modified  and  even  withdrawn  by  the  Federal  Government.  A 

‘Diplomatic Agent’ is not to be arrested or detained and his ‘person’ is 

inviolable. He shall enjoy the ‘immunity’ from the criminal jurisdiction 

 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

12 

of  the  receiving  State  as  well  as  civil  and  administrative  jurisdiction 

thereof with three exceptions; the  ‘Diplomatic Agent’  is not obliged to 

give  evidence  however  the  ‘immunity’  of  a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’  is  in 

respect of jurisdiction of the receiving State, and does not exempt him 

from jurisdiction of the sending State, meaning thereby that if there is a 

civil claim against him or he is to be tried for a criminal offence in the 

receiving State, which is not possible due to his ‘immunity’, he can still 

be  tried  in  the  sending  State  i.e.  the  country,  on  whose  behalf,  he  is 

acting  as a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’. Moreover,  the  ‘immunity’  provided  to 

the ‘Diplomatic Agent’ from jurisdiction, may be waived by the sending 

State  however  waiver  must  be  express.  The  ‘immunity’  enjoyed  by  a 

‘Diplomatic  Agent’,  is  also  enjoyed  by  his  family.  In  this  regard,  the 

‘immunities and privileges’, are enjoyed by a person entitled to enjoy the 

same when he or she, enters the territory of the receiving State to take 

up his/her post and if already in its territory from the moment when his 

appointment  is  notified  to  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  or  any  such 

other  Ministry.  The  ‘immunities  or  privileges’  end  at  the  moment,  the 

person leaves the country.           

18.  There is no case law on the subject of ‘Diplomatic Immunities and 

Privileges’ in Pakistan, which determines the extent and nature of such 

immunities  and  privileges.  However,  in  case  law  reported  as  ‘A.N. 

Qureshi VS Union of Soviet Socialist Republic’ (PLD 1981 SC 377), the 

august  Apex  Court  observed  that  statutes  relating  to  Diplomatic 

Immunities and Privileges, are procedural statutes.  

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

13 

19. 

In order to determine the extent, scope and nature of Diplomatic 

Immunities and Privileges, benefit is drawn from case law propounded 

by the other jurisdictions, especially United Kingdom.   

20. 

In case reported as ‘Dickinson VS Del Solar’ [1930] 1 K.B. 376, 

Lord Hewart  C.J.  observed  that diplomatic  agents  are  not,  in  virtue  of 

their privileges as such, immune from legal liability for any wrongful acts. 

The  accurate  statement  is  that  they  are  not  liable  to  be  sued  in  the 

English  Courts  unless  they  submit  to  the  jurisdiction.  Diplomatic 

privilege  does  not  import  ‘immunity’  from  legal  liability,  but  only 

exemption  from  local  jurisdiction.  The  privilege  is  the  privilege  of  the 

Sovereign,  by  whom,  the  diplomatic  agent  is  accredited  and  it  may  be 

waived off with the sanction of the Sovereign or of the official superior 

of the Agent.  

21. 

In  case  reported  as  ‘Empson  VS  Smith’  1  Q.B.  426  (1996)’,  the 

Court of Appeal of the United Kingdom, held as follows:- 

“(1)  that,  as the  law  stood  at  the time  that  the  proceedings  were  begun, the 
defendant was covered by diplomatic immunity, and the proceedings could not 
be  lawfully  maintained  while  that  immunity  remained,  but  that  the  action 
subsisted until struck out by the judge and the stay imposed by the registrar 
could have been removed and the action allowed to proceed if the immunity had 
been lost either by a valid waiver or, in respect of acts done by the defendant in 
his  personal  capacity,  by  the  cessation  of  his  diplomatic  employment;  that  a 
change in the law similarly permitted the action to proceed, if not barred by the 
Limitation Act, 1939, if it removed the immunity previously enjoyed, which 
was probably the case here”      

22.  The  International  Court  of  Justice,  in  case  reported  as  ‘United 

States and Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran VS Iran (Judgment 

dated 24.05.1980), observed as follows:- 

“There is no more fundamental prerequisite for the conduct of relations between 
States […] than the inviolability of diplomatic envoys and embassies, so that 

 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

14 

throughout  history nations  of  all  creeds  and  cultures  have  observed  reciprocal 
obligations for that purpose […]. The institution of diplomacy, has proved to 
be  "an  instrument  essential  for  effective  cooperation  in  the  international 
community, and for enabling States, irrespective of their differing constitutional 
and  social  systems,  to  achieve  mutual  understanding  and  to  resolve  their 
differences by peaceful means.” 

23.  The name of any person can be placed on Exit Control List by the 

Federal  Government  under  section  2  of  Exit  from  Pakistan  (Control) 

Ordinance,  1981  read  with  rule  2(c)  of  Exit  from  Pakistan  (Control) 

Rules,  2010.  In  case  reported  as  ‘Prime  Minister’s  Inspection  Team, 

National  Highway  Authority  VS  Zaheer  Mirza’  (2011  SCMR  371),  the 

Hon’ble Supreme Court ordered that names of respondents, who were 

connected directly or indirectly with the collapse of Fly Over, were to be 

put  on  Exit  Control  List.  The  use  of  words  ‘any  person’  in  1981 

Ordinance means that a person, who is residing temporarily in Pakistan 

and is likely to leave and never come back to evade law of Pakistan, even 

his/her name can be put on Exit Control List. For ease of convenience, 

Section 2(1)(2)(3) of the Ordinance is reproduced below: - 

“2.  Power to prohibit exit from Pakistan.— (1)  The  Federal 
Government  may,  by  order,  prohibit  any  person  or  class  of  persons  from 
proceeding  from  Pakistan  to a  destination  outside  Pakistan,  notwithstanding 
the fact that such person is in possession of valid travel documents. 

 (2)  Before  making  an  order  under  sub-section  (1),  the  Federal 
Government shall not be necessary to afford an opportunity of showing cause to 
the person against the order.  

(3)  If,  while  making  an  order  under  sub-section  (1)  it  appear  to the 
Federal  Government  that  it  will  not  be  in  the  public  interest  to  specify  the 
ground on which the order is proposed to be made, it shall not be necessary for 
the Federal Government to specify such grounds” 

Likewise,  Rule  2  of  the  Exit  from  Pakistan  (Control)  Rules,  2010  is  as 

follows:- 

 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

15 

“2. 
Grounds  to  prohibit  persons  from  proceeding  from  Pakistan  to  a 
destination outside Pakistan:- (1) The Federal Government may, by an order 
in  writing  under  sub-section  (1)  of  section  2  of  the  Exit    From  Pakistan 
(Control)  Ordinance,  1981  (XLVI  of  1981),  prohibit  any  person  from 
proceeding  from  Pakistan  to  a  destination  outside  Pakistan  notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  any  person  is  in  possession  of  valid  travel  documents,  if  he  is 
involved in:-- 

a)  Corruption and misuse of power or authority causing loss to the 

government’s funds or property; 

b)  Economic crimes where large government’s funds have been 

embezzled or institutional frauds committed; 

c)  acts of terrorism or its conspiracy, heinous crimes and threatening 

national security; 

d)  case of key directors of a firm, in default of tax or liabilities of 

not less than ten million rupees; 

e)  case of two or more key or main directors of a firm, in default of 

f) 

loan or liabilities exceeding one hundred million rupees; 
  any case and his name forwarded by the registrar of a High 
Court, Supreme Court of Pakistan or Banking Court only; or 

g)  Drug trafficking. 

2. 

Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall apply to- 

a)  persons involved in private disputes where government interest is 
not at stake, except cases of fraud against foreign banks and 
reputable companies with significant foreign investments; 
b)   persons involved in crime like murder and dacoity etc., unless 

special grounds are furnished by the relevant home departments; 

c)  directors who represent foreign investment in business; 
d)  women or children undergoing Education who are appearing as 
directors merely due to their family relationship with major share 
holders; “ 

24.  Applying  the  above  law  to  the  present  facts  and  circumstances, 

Colonel  Joseph  Emmanuel 

is  a 

‘Diplomatic  Agent’  and  enjoys 

‘immunity’ from being arrested or detained. He also enjoys ‘immunity’ 

from  appearing  as  a  ‘witness’  or  tried  for  the  criminal  charges  levelled 

against  him  in  FIR  No.168  of  2018.  The  referred  ‘immunity’  only 

protects him to be tried in the receiving State i.e. Pakistan however, he 

can still be tried for the said offence, with which he has been imputed in 

the  sending  State  i.e. United  States  of  America.  In  order  to  be  tried  in 

Pakistan, the Government of United States of America or the Head of 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

16 

Mission  of  United  States  in  Pakistan  has  to  expressly  waive  off  the 

exemption.  The  words,  used  in  Article  31(1)  of  VCDR  that  the 

‘immunity’, is with respect to criminal jurisdiction of the receiving State. 

Generally,  this  means  that  he  cannot  be tried  for  a  criminal  offence  in 

Pakistan however it is not clear, whether this ‘immunity’ extends to the 

investigation of the offence. The word ‘jurisdiction’ as defined in Oxford 

Paper  Pack  Dictionary  in  4th  Edition,  is  ‘administration  of  justice’,  ‘the 

official power exercised within a particular affairs of activity, ‘the extent 

or territory over which, legal or other powers extend’. 

25. 

Investigation 

is  defined 

in  Section  4(l)  Code  of  Criminal 

Procedure, 1898, in the following terms:- 

“Investigation includes all proceedings under this Code for the collection 
of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a 
Magistrate) who is authorized by a Magistrate in this behalf” 

The  Honourable  Lahore  High  Court  in  case  reported  as  ‘Abdul  Latif 

VS Inspector  General  Police,  etc’  (1999  P.Cr.L.J.  1357),  elucidated 

the concept of investigation in the following words:- 

 Thus,  under  the  Code,  Investigation  consists  generally  the  following 
“19. 
steps;  (1)  Proceeding  to  the  spot,  (2)  Ascertainment  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances of the case, (3) Discovery and arrest of the suspected offender, (4) 
Collection of evidence relating to the commission of the office which may consists 
of (a) examination of various persons (including the accused) and the reduction 
of their statements into writing, if the officer thinks fit, (b) the search of places 
or seizure of things considered necessary for the investigation and to be produces 
at the trial, and (5) Formation of the opinion as to whether on the trial, and if 
so, taking the necessary steps for the same by the filing of a charge sheet section 
173. 

From the scheme of the Code it is apparent that while it is permissible 
for an Officer Incharge of a Police Station to depute some subordinate Officer 
to conduct  some  of  these  steps  in the  investigation,  the  responsibility  for  every 
one of these steps is that of Officer Incharge of the Police Station it having been 
clearly  provided  in  section  168  that  when  a  subordinate  officer  makes  an 
investigation  he  should  report  the  result  to  the  Officer  Incharge  of  the  Police 
Station.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  final  step  in  the  investigation,  viz.  the 

 
W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

17 

formation of the opinion as to whether or not there is a case to place the accused 
on trial is to be that of the Officer Incharge of the police station. There is no 
provision  permitting  delegation  thereof  but  only  a  provision  entitling  superior 
Officer to supervise or participate under section 551. 

The basic duty of the police is to keep law and order situation in the 
20. 
country in order. It is only possible if the offender is convicted and sentenced in 
a  shortest  possible  time.  This  purpose  can  be  achieved  when  the  investigating 
Agency/Police perform its duties diligently, fairly and justly” 

26. 

Since  the  ‘immunity’  from  trial  and  punishment  is  not  absolute 

and  is  only  with  respect  to  the  courts  of  receiving  State  and  a 

‘Diplomatic  Agent’  can  still  be  tried  for  the  offence  in  his  country 

therefore one would conclude that there is no ‘bar or immunity’ qua the 

investigation  of  a  criminal  offence, meaning  thereby  that  a  ‘Diplomatic 

Agent’ can be interviewed by the Investigating Agency in the receiving 

State,  however  the  ‘immunity’  exists  from  arrest  and  detention. 

Moreover,  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’  is  to  be  treated  with  dignity  and  these 

aspects have to be kept in view while conducting the investigation of the 

matter.   

27. 

In  the  present  case,  respondent  No.2  in  person,  reported  that 

investigation stands concluded and report under section 173 Cr.P.C. has 

been  filed  before  the  competent  authority.  It  is  felt  that  police,  in  the 

instant  matter,  acted  with  undue  haste  and  performed  its  functions 

negligently.  

28.  Naturally, the trial cannot commence because of the  ‘immunity’ 

enjoyed by respondent No.1. In this backdrop, the Federal Government 

can take up the issue with the Government of United States of America 

for waiver of ‘immunity’, in case, it wishes that respondent No.1 should 

be  tried  for  the  alleged  offence(s)  committed  in  Pakistan. Otherwise, a 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

18 

request  can  be  forwarded  to  the  Government  of  United  States  of 

America for trial of respondent No.1 for the offences mentioned in FIR 

No.168 of 2018 in United States of America. In case, the Government of 

United  States  of  America  refuses  to  try  respondent  No.1  or  proceed 

further,  the  matter  can  be  agitated  before  the  competent  forum  for 

enforcing  the  terms  of  the  Treaty  i.e.  VCDR  and  seeking  remedies 

provided under the law, if any.  

29.  The  use  of  words  ‘any  person’  in  Exit  from  Pakistan  (Control) 

Ordinance, 1981 and the Rules framed there-under, means that it is not 

confined  only  to  citizens/nationals  of  Pakistan  but  any  person,  who  is 

within Pakistan and his case falls within parameters laid down in Rule 2 

ibid. Under the Rules, for offences like murder etc., name of a person is 

not placed on Exit Control List unless special grounds are furnished by 

relevant home departments.  

30.  The provisions of the Act as well as the Treaty are silent over the 

issue of placement of name of a ‘Diplomatic Agent’ on Exit Control List 

or with regard to restriction on his movement. However, it is also to be 

kept  in  view  that  under  Article  29  of  VCDR,  a  ‘Diplomatic  Agent’ 

cannot be detained and his freedom or dignity is to be respected by the 

receiving State therefore restriction on his movement, should not be of 

the nature, which amounts to detention or otherwise curtails his freedom 

of movement.  

31.  The  petitioner  in  W.P.  No.1385-2018,  if  is  not  satisfied  with  the 

investigation  so  far  conducted  by  respondent  No.2,  may  move  an 

appropriate  application  under  the  law  seeking  appropriate  directions  in 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

19 

this behalf.  In the instant petition, direction is sought for placement of 

name  of  respondent  No.1  on  Exit  Control  List.  However,  since 

application  for  placement  of  his  name  on  Exit  Control  List  is  pending 

before respondent No.6, therefore it is just and proper that the same be 

decided by the Federal Government as provided in 1981 Ordinance and 

Rules framed there-under.  

32.  The  courts  generally  refrain  from  entering  the  domain  of 

Executive  and  take  decisions  on  its  behalf.  In  exercise  of  jurisdiction 

under Article 199 of the Constitution, the courts can examine the validity 

of  executive  decision  on  touchstone  of  accepted  parameters.  Though 

under the Rules of 2010, the Federal Government can place the name of 

any person on Exit Control List on the orders of a High Court, however, 

since  the  matter  is  already  pending  before  the  competent  authority  i.e. 

the  Federal  Government,  hence  it  just  and  proper  that  the  issue  of 

placement  of  name  of  respondent  No.1  be  decided  by  it.  Respondent 

No.6  is,  therefore,  directed  to  decide  the  application  for  placement  of 

name of respondent No.1 on ECL in accordance with law, especially in 

light of observations made hereinabove expeditiously preferably within a 

period of two weeks from the date of this order. The compliance of this 

order shall be intimated to Deputy Registrar (Judicial) of this Court. In 

case,  the  needful  is  not  done  as  directed,  or  the  petitioners  are,  in  any 

way, aggrieved of decision, they may seek appropriate remedy.  

33.  The request for issuance of direction to the Federal Government 

qua amendment of the Act, made in W.P. No.1385-2018, is turned down 

W.P. No.1386-2018 & 1385-2018 

20 

inasmuch  as  no  specific  provision  of  the  Act,  was  pointed  out,  which 

violates other laws of Pakistan or provisions of the Constitution. 

34. 

In  view  of  above,  instant  petition  and  W.P.  No.1385-2018  are 

disposed  off  in  terms  of  observations  and  directions  made  in  the 

preceding paragraphs.     

Announced in Open Court on 11.05.2018. 

Approved for reporting.  

Zawar 

(AAMER FAROOQ) 
 JUDGE   

 JUDGE   

Uploaded by: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
