ORDER SHEET

IN THE ISLAMABAD  HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD

DEPARTMENT

Writ Petition No. 676 of 2O12,
Shahid Mehmood
VS
Mst. Naureen Eiaz Etc:

S. No. of
order
proceedlnes

Date  of
orderl
proceedlngs

Order wfth signature  of Judgp  and that of partles  or counsel
where necessary.

25-06-2012.  Barrister  Mustafa  Aftab Sherpao  8l Mr. Hamid  Ahmad,

Advocate  for petitioner,
Mr. Nadeem Hussain  Mughal,  Advocate for respondent
No.1.

The facts, relevant  Er necessary  for disposal  of this
petition,  are that  the petitioner  (Shahid  Mehmood) married  with

respondent (Mst. Naureen  tjaz) on 5-l l-2006  but the tie did not

continue  and ultimately divorce  took place on 10-0J-2008,
followed  by a suit by the respondent for recovery of
maintenance  allowance,  dowry  articles 8t dower  which was
decreed  in her favour vide Judgment  EI Decree  dated
08.O7.2010,  in terms mentioned  hereunder:-

"For  what has been  discussed  on the afore

mentioned  lsues, the suit of the plaintiff  to the eftent of
recovery  of maintenance  allowance at the rat€  of Rs.
5,000/-  per month  for the perlod of lddat only  ts
decreed ln her favour and agalnst  the defendant  The
plalntiff ls abo  found  entitled  to recovery dowry articles
as per llst annexed with the plaint or prlce  thereof Rs.
5,1+,9@l-.  However,  the suit of the plalntiff  to the
elctent  of recovery  of dower amount of Rs.2,00,0@/-  ls

hereby dlsmlsed. Parties  are left to bear  thelr own costs.,,

2- 
The petitioner  feeling  aggrieved  by that Judgment  Er
Decree, preferred  an appeal but the same met with  faiture  vide
Judgment dated  18.01.201 l.  Thereafter  respondent  filed
Execution  Petition wherein,  learned Executing  Court  by order
dated  23-9-201 1 directed  the petitioner  to produce lO-Tola
lewellery  mentioned in the list in the Court or to deposit  the
amount equal to its current  market value. The  petitioner
challenged  said order  before  the learned  ADJ  through an  appeat

which  was dismissed vide order  dated  09-02-ZOlZ.  Hence, the
present  constitutional  petition  challenging  the legalities  of orders
dated 23.09.2O11  and 09.02.201  I mainly  on the  ground that

2

Writ Petition  No. 676 of 2012,  U

p

both  the orders  are violative of the principle  laid down  by the
superiors courts in cases:  Mst" Mehbooba  VS Abdul  Jalll
(1996  SCMR  1063) and  "Shamshad  Bibl  venrus Dlstrld rudge
Multan  (PLD 201I  Lahore 79O),  lt has  also  been  contended
that the learned  Executing Court  passed the order with  undue
haste and without  application of judicial mind, which  requires

interference  by this Court  as the learned Executing  Court cannot

go beyond the  decree,  whose  execution  is being  made.
3- 
Conversely,  learned  counsel for respondent  suppofted
the impugned orders. lt was his stance that the  learned
Executing  Courr  had rightly  observed that the iudgment debtor
should return the gold or to pay its present  price  keeping  in view

market value  and  this order would not be taken an order beyond

the scope of the decree  because  the principle  of fading utility

would  not apply to the gold ornaments,  therefore,  the petition

deserves  dismissal.
4- 
material  available  on file besides the case law relied by learned

I have considered the arguments  and  gone  through  the

counsel  for the  petitioner.
5- 
First of all, we have to see as to what  was the
respondent  claim in her  suit? She demanded  dowry articles  as

per list Ex, P-7  which includes ten tola gold ornaments  valuing
Rs. 1,20,000/-.  Her  claim was  accepted  in total  and  she was
held entitled  to recover  dowry afticles including  ten tola gold
ornaments valuing Rs. 1,20,000/-  as per list annexed  with the
plaint or price  thereof (Total) Rs. 5.1 4,9@l-.  lt means  that
total claim  of the plaintiff  in the  shape of dowry  articles  was

accepted by the learned Judge Family  Court.  The  appeal  of the
petitioner  against  that  Judgment Er Decree  was  dismissed  and
thereafter the respondent  filed Execution  Petition  with the
following  claim mentioned  at Sr. No. I l:-
4vJ2-i

l,L

L

E.l.DtoPtl
,r'!<*w, twol: *D

ilbo
6@0l-

,ll

bt btvil|tt
lt ,t"( tr

€,44- 

t

n. i  to<!U,

6- 
During  the proceeding;s,  learned Executing Court
directed  the petitioner to deliver  ten tola gold  ornaments to the

respondent  in the Court or to pay is price as per  existing  market
value.  This order, in my view,  has been  passed  in excess  of

iurisdiction  as the same  was beyond the scope 8[ mandate  of the
decree for which  the respondent  had filed the Execution
Petition.  She herself  claimed its alternate  price  as Rs.1,20,000/-

and the decree  was also passed  to this effect, therefore, in case

3

writ Petition  No. 676  0f 20'12,

-ro

q

of its non  recovery,  she is entitled  to recover Rs.  1,201000/-,

the value which  she  herself  claimed  in her suit and contained  in

Lht (Ex.P7).
7- 
the impugned  order is, therefore,  uniustified,  in excess of the

The  direction of the learned  Executing Court  through

claim  of the respondent  and in fact  beyond the scope of the

decree.
8- 
Now  I advert to the case law referred  to by the  learned
counsel for the petitioner.  ln case 1996 SCMR 1065,  the
Hon'ble Apex Court wherein  after discussing  Order  )O( Rule l0
CMI Procedure Code  and the case law "L. Tllok Chand son of
L. Mul  Chand  v. L. Damodar  Das son of L. Daso Ram  (AlR
(32)  1945 Peshawar  5), it has held that in case of non  recovery
of gold ornaments,  the plaintiff  will be entitled to its market
value on the date of institution  of the suit. ln case PLD 20l l
Lahore 79O lt was  held that alternate value  of gold would be the

value which was at the time of institution  of suit and Executing

Court would determine the value at the time  of institution  of

The principle provided by the case  law referred  above,

suit.
9- 
would  be that in case of non recovery of gold  ornaments,  the
plaintiff shall  be entitled  to recover iS price according  to the

market value  prevalent at the time of filing of the  suit and not as
per current  market  value. Even otherwise,  execution  beyond

ln view of above discussion, I accept  this petition  and

claim er decree  cannot be made.
10- 
set-aside  both the orders dated  23.09,2011 s. O9,O2.2O12,
passed by learned  AD] el learned Executing  Court, being
beyond  the scope  of decree. The tearned Executing  Court is

directed to proceed  with the Execution  Petition strictly within
the stricture of decree Et observations made hereinabove.

Parties  are  left to bear  their own  costs.

(MUnxu

KHAN  KAS!)

]UDGE

M.Suhall
2l*jfiq2Ol2,

APPROVED  FOR  REPORTING

