Form No: HCJD lC-l2L
JUDGMENT  SHEET.

IN THE ISLAMABN' HIGH COURT.
ISLAMABAD.

Civil Revision No. O3 of 2O2O

Nisar Ahmed Afzal

VS

Shaukat Ullah Khan Bangash

Petitioners By

Sardar Shabbir  Hussain,  Advocate.

Respondents  By

Mr.  Ali
Advocate.

Nawaz  Kharal,

Date of Decision

t9.02.2020

PERVDZ. J..

Through  instant  Civil
LTTBNA
Revision  Petition, Petitioner has assailed  order dated 23.tL.2019,
passed by learned Additional District Judge  (West), Islamabad,
application  filed under Sections 148 & 151 CPC, for
.tebV,,b(s 
extension  of time for filing of list of witnesses  on behalf of present
Respondentl  Plaintiff under Order  XVI Rule 1 & 2 CPC, has been

ailowed.

2. The facts in brief are that Respondent  filed civil suit No. 227 of
2}ll  on O4.LO.2OLL, before this Court for recovery of Rs.
t7,7O,OO,OOO/-  along with interest and liquidated  damages  against
Petitioner which was decreed  by this Court, vide Judgment dated
O9.O5.2O14,  and the application for leave to appear and defend
filed by the Petitioner was dismissed. Petitioner  assailed  the said
judgment through Intra Court Appeal No. 377 l2OL4,  which was
accepted vide order dated O7.O3.2OL7 and while accepting the
Petitioner's  application for leave to appear and defend the suit,
 matter was remanded  back to the Learned Single Judge for
decision.  However,  later on in view of the amendment  regarding
enhancement  of pecuniary  jurisdiction  of this Court, made in the
Islamabad High Court Act, 2OlO, suit was transmitted  to the
District Court.

2

Clvll Rcvbioa  lto. 3 of  2O2O

3. After commencement  of proceedings  before Additional  District
Judge-X, Islamabad, in the suit afresh,  the issues were framed on
04.O5.2O18  and parties were directed to file list of witnesses within
seven days in terms  of Rule 1 of Order )O/I CPC. Learned Counsel
for Respondent filed application u/s  151 read with 148 on
08.12.2O18  for extension  of time for submission of list of witnesses
on the ground that the same was filed by him on 10.O5.2018  but
was later on unavailable in the court's file. The Learned Judge
allowed  the application,  vide order dated 23.11.2OL9,  observing
that "ttte application under consideration  stands allowed in tlrc
larger  interest  of justice and to auoid miscanriage of justice  subject  to
cost in the sum o/ Rs. 5,000/ -" and adjourned  the hearing to
27.11.2019.  Hence, present revision petition challenging  order
dated 23.L1.2019.

4. Learned  Counsel for  the Petitioner  submitted that  the
application  u/s 151 read with 148 CPC was filed on 08.I2.2OI8,
eight months after the framing  of issues on 04.05.2018,  whereas,
list of witnesses  was ordered  to be filed within  seven days of the
framing  of issue. Learned Counsel further submitted  that under
Order )il/I Rule I CPC and since the word "shall"  has been used in
the provision,  it is mandatory  that list of witnesses  is required  to
be filed with seven  days. Learned  Counsel  further submitted that
no sufficient  cause has been shown by the Respondent/Plaintiff  for
extension of time for submission  of list  of witnesses  after
prescribed  period, whereas, copy of the alleged  list of witnesses
received  by  Ahlmad was  also  not  retained  by  the
Respondent/plaintiff. Learned Counsel placed reliance on the case
titled Muhammad Anutar & others aersus Mst lluas Beoum &
others reported as (PLD 2O13SC 2551 and submitted  that
impugned  order dated 23.I1.2019  is  illegal, passed in  a
mechanical way without any lawful  reasoning, hence,  liable to be

set-aside.

5. The arguments of the [,earned Counsel for Petitioner  have been
vigorously  opposed by the Learned  Counsel  for Respondent  while
contending  that list of witnesses was liled within the stipulated
period of seven  days from the framing of issues. Learned  Counsel

3

Clvll  Rcvtrloa IIo.  3 of 2O2O

referred order sheet dated 10.09.2018  showing attendance  of
Counsel of both the parties as well as attendance  of two witnesses
for the Plaintiff (present  respondent)  and argued that presence of
witnesses is only possible when the compliance  of Order XVI Rule I
CPC is made and contended  that Learned Counsel for Petitioner
was also present on lO.O9.2Ol9,  however, he has made no
objection on the appearance of the witnesses.  Learned  Counsel
further submitted  that when it came to Respondent's  knowledge
that the list of witnesses was not found in the court's file although
filed on 10.05.2019  he liled application u/s 151 read with Section
148 CPC requesting  extension of time to submit the list of same
witnesses. Learned  Counsel argued that Rule I of Order XVI was
substituted, vide Law Reforms Ordinance,  1972, whereby seven
days was provided for submission  of list of witnesses, so that no
party would be taken to surprise by the witness to be produced
during the proceedings, as it was before this amendment,  when no
time limit was provided. Learned Counsel contended  that sub-rule
2 of Order  XVI permits the party to furnish the list of witnesses
with the leave of the Court on showing  good cause. It was further
argued that recording  of evidence has not yet been commenced,
therefore,  flo prejudice has been caused to the Petitioner by
allowing  the application  to the Respondent  vide order dated
23.1L.2019. Learned Counsel contended that even otherwise  there
is a room provided  to a delinquent party who either fails to file the
list of witnesses at all or omits a name of the witness  in case he
has filed the said list to make up its default  and delinquency and
asked for the indulgence  of the Court to summon and produce  the
witnesses,  but only after showing good cause.  Learned Counsel  in
support of his contentions  referred the case law reported  as
Muhammad Anutar &  others aersus ilIst.
Iluqs Beoum &
others (PLD 2073 SC 255). Ho,kim Hablbul Haq VS Aztz Grtl
h l*oal  Helrs VS
12013 SCMR  2OOl.
Mst. Badar-un-l\ltssa  and others IPLD 2073 Stndh 47n. Mst.

ilIst. Halra  Bequm

VS Addltlonal Distrlct

others  (PLD 2077 Lahore 741. Umar Hauat VS Addltfional
Dlstrlct Judoe (2OO4  SCMR 7364.  Ghulam No,bl  VS,
Addtttonal Dlstrlct Jud,qe.  Ralanour  and others 12004 clc
65o.l,, Naeem Akhtar VS Additlonal Dtstrtct
dnd, others

4

Clvll Rcvtrloa lto. 3 of 20llo

777

J.H,

VS Azlz

986

ld.sla Bank Ltd. VSMdttoo"d. Tertlle

7382r.  A
Sutat 1798f  SCMR 75o,l,. frIian
VS Aziz
Ahmad E:tc.  11 980 SCI|IR 55n. and Ghula;m  Murtaza VS
Muhammad
6. Arguments heard,  record perused.

and 3 others  PLD 7980 Lahore  49$.

Hafiz

7. Present case in view of its facts and circumstances;  involves
interpretation of Order XVI Rule 1 of CPC which reads as under.

oRrrB,fi tnn

1. SUMMOItrNCI  ANL AtrENDAI,{CD  OF WITttASStS

(1) Not later than  seuen days afier the settlement  of bsues, the
parties  shall  present  in Court a certificate  of readiness  to
produce euidence  alongwith a lbt of witnesses  whom theg
propose  to call either  to giue euidence  or to produce doqtments.

(2) A partg sholl  not be permitted  to call witnesses  other  than those
contained  in the said list, except  with  tlrc permission of ttrc Court
and afier shauting  good cause  for the omission of permission,  it
stnll record reasons for so doing.

(3) On application  to the Court  or such offtcer  as it appoints  in this
behalf, the parties maA obtain summons for persons  whose
attendance is required  in Court: Prouided that no summolls  shall
be issued  for seruice on a person under rule 8 unless an
apptbation in that behalf  is made not later than  fourteen dags
prior to tlrc date ftxed for the heaing  of the suit ond  tLrc
necessary expenses  for ttrc summoning of such person  are
deposited.".

8. While submitting the arguments  regarding  interpretation of the
above provision, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of both the
parties  have relied on the same judgment of Honble  Supreme  Court
reported  as frIuhammo;d  Anutar & others uersus Mst. Ilgras Begum
&  others  IPLD 2073 SC 2551. wherein the Apex Court has
interpreted sub-rule (1) & (2) of Rule 1 of Order  XVI. The relevant
part on which the learned  Counsel are relying is reproduced is
below:-
Part of para relied upon by Counsel for the Petitioner:

"The clear language of  Rule on  1(1), undisputedlg
stipulates  that the parties to a lis are reEtired to furnish
the list of witnesses,  whom theg propose to call either to
giue euidence or to produce tlrc doatmentq  tttithin seuen
days of the framing  o/ essues;  meaning  therebg that tlw
process and tle autlwrttg of the Court in terms of Order
XW (1), to call and summon the uitness which bA a Parta,
has been made subject to, rather conditional to the list of
witnesses which  the partg is mandated  to file in terms

5

clvtl  Rcvltioa  lto. 3 of 20llo

tlereof; in other words,  tlw power and tlw machinery of
tlw court for summoning  / calling  of tfw witnesses  tlaough
the proess o/ t?e Court and laut, as is enuisaged  bg a
certain subsequent  releuant  rules of Order XW, C-P.C., can
onlg be inuoked if such a list has been  prouided and not
otlerwise.  From sub-rule (2), tlw afore stated  intention of
tlrc legi.slature is fortified and augmented,  as tle a speciftc
prohibition has been placed, preuenting  a partg to call tlw
witness  and, as per High Court Amendmerut-Lalrcre  dated
2-10-2001,  euen to produce witnesses  ot?rcr than those
whose names are mentioned  in tlrc list required to be filed
under sub-ntle (1). Undoubtedly,  thi^s es a  mandatory
prouision of law os it  entails seious consequences of
precluding a parTg from calling,  through aid of law (Court),
or euen to produe  tle  uitnesses if tleir names do not
appear in the reEisite list.

Part of para relied upon by Counsel for the Petitioner:

"Hou)euer, in tlrc same sub-rule (2), a room has been
prouided to a delinquent  partU, uho either fail"s to file the
list of witnesses at all or omits a name of the witness(es)
tlerein (if failed)  to make up its default and delinquencA
and ask for tle indulgenre of the Court to summon  and
produce tlle witness(es), but onlg after meeting  and
fulfilting t?E command of law, [sub'nile (2)] i.e. "after
slwwing  good  cause  (emphasis  supplied) for t?w omission
of the said witnesses from the list"; besides,  the autlwitg
and the power of the Court, in this behalf has been
regulated,  in  that "and if  tl,e Court grants such
permission, it  shall record reasons for doing(emphasis
supplied)"

9.  In view of the above interpretation of Honble Apex Court, as per
sub-rule  (1) of Rule 1, Order XVI, CPC submission of list of witnesses
within seven days from the date of framing of issues  is a mandatory
requirement. The legislature, however, in terms of sub-rule  (21 of
Rule 1, Order XVI, CPC has also granted  discretion  to the Court to
permit  the delinquent party, on showing good cause, to file the list of
witnesses,  who either has failed to file the list or omitted to list any
witness, thus has provided  a chance to meet the ends  of justice and
to provide substantial justice. It has been held in a judgment passed
by a learned Single Bench of High Court of Sindh, Karachi,  in case
titled Sued Datzt Maz,hdr VS SGS
reported as
(PLD 2708 Khi 324 that provisions  of Civil Procedure  Code 1908
are to be construed liberally  as far as possible and technical
objections  should not be allowed to defeat substantial justice and

6

Clvll Rovlrloa Ifo.  3 of 20IlO

further held that Rules framed in the Civil Procedure  Code are for
advancement  of justice  and should not as far as possible be allowed,
to operate  so as to defeat ends of justice.

10. Record shows that case was remanded back, vide order dated
07.O3.2OL7 in ICA No. 377 l2OL4, by this Honble Court for trial by
observing that "in order to justifA the presumption,  tlw plaintilf  i"s
under obligation to submit the original  clrcque and dishonor slzps
before the trial Court as a piece of euidence,  u,thich is otheruise
considered as a  pimary euidence and without ptacing these
docttments  on record the decree cannot  be passed". Therefore, the
L,earned  Additional  District Judge while exercising discretion under
Crrder XVI, Rule l(2) CPC read with section  148 CPC allowed  the
application, considering the facts and circumstances  of the case in
order to provide fair trial, in the larger interest  and to avoid
miscarriage  of justice.

11.  For what has been discussed above, I am of the considered
view that impugned judgment dated 23.11.2019,  passed by the
Learned  Additionat District Judge,  Islamabad,  does not suffer from
any illegality or infirmity calling for any interference, hence, instant
revision  petition is accordingly  dismissed.

M. Junaid  Usmm

(LUBNA  SALEEM PERVEZI
JUDGE

